Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
22nd Australasian Finance and Banking Conference 2009 
 
 
 
A MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE APPROACH TO THE 
FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET IN VIETNAM  
 
 
 
Tran-Phuc Nguyen and Duc-Tho Nguyen 
 
Griffith University 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Vietnam’s foreign exchange (forex) market has remained relatively poorly 
developed despite more than two decades of general economic reform. 
This paper adopts a market microstructure approach to the investigation of 
possible reasons underlying this situation.  The analysis suggests that the 
authorities have tended to place special emphasis on maintaining stability 
in the nominal VND/USD exchange rate, and have relied on a number of 
administrative 
measures 
to 
support 
such 
stability. 
In 
turn, 
stability/stickiness of the VND/USD rate has acted as a retardant in the 
development of the country’s forex market.  In particular, the role of 
commercial exchange rate quotes as accurate price signals has been 
materially reduced. 
 
 
Key words:  Foreign exchange market; market microstructure; Vietnam; 
VND/USD exchange rate. 
 
 
 
 
Submitted: 24 August 2009 
 
Conference: 16-18 December 2009 
Sydney, Australia 
 
 
 
 
Corresponding Author:   Tran.Nguyen@grifffith.edu.au  
 
 
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
1 INTRODUCTION  
 
Following the decisive launch of an economic reform process in the second half of the 
1980s, Vietnam has experienced extensive and fundamental changes in business 
practices and economic institutions.  Yet, in many ways, its foreign exchange (forex) 
market has remained far less active and sophisticated than forex markets in many 
other countries.  Indications of a relatively low level of market development include 
low turnover, a limited range of financial products and services, poor liquidity, and a 
weakening in the role of exchange rates as price signals.  Why have these weaknesses 
persisted?  Obtaining answers to this question is a natural first step in gaining insights 
into the related question of how to facilitate an improvement in the situation.    
 
This paper will adopt a market microstructure approach to the first question.  More 
specifically, to gain a better understanding of the market’s characteristics and 
functioning, we shall examine the ways in which it is organized and administered. In 
turn, to understand how the latter have come to take their current forms, it will be 
useful to examine, among other things, how the conduct of the country’s exchange 
rate policy has influenced the establishment and governing of its forex market.   
 
The paper seeks to make contributions in two main regards.  First, it will help to 
address the relative dearth of systematic information and analysis regarding the forex 
market in Vietnam.   
 
The existing literature in English on this particular topic is rather limited. The 
literature in Vietnamese is considerably more voluminous.  Yet, apart from several 
reflective contributions, to date much of the relevant information in this literature has 
come in the form of short articles in trade journals and general-interest periodicals 
that provide anecdotes or deal with highly specific aspects or features of the market.  
Additional information has come from dissertations or research papers completed by 
undergraduate students, whose primary focus was typically the forex operations of a 
particular commercial bank.  Reconciling and synthesizing such piecemeal and 
potentially conflicting information is a non-trivial task. 
 
Given the above, the present paper will seek to provide, within fairly tight space 
constraints, a self-contained account of the historical development of this market, as 
well as a systematic survey of its structural and operational characteristics, with an 
emphasis on the more recent years.  If it goes some way toward achieving this 
purpose, the paper will be of documentary interest to scholars and analysts who 
regularly study Vietnamese affairs.   
 
In addition, it is hoped that the paper will be of interest to researchers and policy 
analysts whose primary focus is on the workings of forex markets in general.  Thus, 
the second purpose of the paper is to explore the use of the market microstructure 
approach in gaining a better understanding of the root-causes of this particular forex 
market’s poor functioning.   
 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some 
background information, including a brief account of the process of forming and 
developing an organized forex market in Vietnam.  Section 3 then presents a survey 
 
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1460604
of the market’s operational characteristics, while Section 4 analyses the role played by 
exchange rate policy in shaping the administrative framework that has contributed 
much to these operational outcomes. Finally, Section 5 provides a summary of the 
main points raised in the paper and offers some observations about possible future 
developments. 
 
2 BACKGROUND 
2.1 Major changes in the exchange rate regime  
 
The economic reform process in Vietnam, often known as Doi Moi (renovation), has 
been extensively studied by many authors.  For a very small sample of the literature of 
direct relevance to the present purposes, see Fforde and de Vylder (1996), Nguyen 
Duc-Tho and Bandara (1994), Nguyen Tri Hung (1999), Vo Tri Thanh et al. (2000), 
Pham Do Chi and Le Viet Duc (2003), Vo Dai Luoc (2004), and Pham Xuan Nam 
(2007).   
 
In brief, the pressures for change and reform which had been building up for a number 
of years came to a head in 1986. In response, the authorities undertook a series of 
comprehensive measures to shift the economy from a bureaucratic, central planning 
model to a more market-oriented, decentralized system. Nevertheless, in many ways it 
was not until around 1989 that the measures undertaken can really be regarded as 
comprehensive and decisive (Vo Dai Luoc 2004).   
 
Since then, Vietnam’s economic performance has been generally quite impressive, 
with an annual rate of real GDP growth of around 7 to 8 percent, moderate inflation,1 
substantial falls in the incidence of poverty, and rapid growth in international trade 
and foreign investment (see Nguyen Tran Phuc 2009).  There remain a number of 
structural weaknesses, however, and these can arguably be traced to the noncompletion of the policy agenda during the mid-1990s and to the repercussions of the 
1997-1998 Asian Financial Crisis (Pham Do Chi and Le Viet Duc 2003).         
 
 
 
In line with the broader economic reform process, Vietnam’s exchange rate regime 
has gone through major changes.  Before 1989, there had been a complicated system 
of multiple fixed official exchange rates:  a rate for foreign trade transactions, another 
for non-trade transactions, a so-called internal settlement rate for the purpose of 
compensating export enterprises for their losses, and a separate rate for remittances 
received from overseas (Vo Tri Thanh et al. 2000; Nguyen Van Tien 2006).   
 
In March 1989, the multiple exchange rates were unified into a single official rate, set 
and announced by the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) (IMF 1996).  Commercial banks 
were allowed to determine their buying and selling rates within a band of +/-5% 
around the announced official rate, with a maximum bid-ask spread of 0.5%.  The 
official rate was subject to adjustments from time to time by the SBV.  
 
In late 1991, with the opening of two forex trading floors (in Ho Chi Minh City and 
Hanoi), the official rate became determined on a daily basis (IMF 1996).  In setting 
this rate, the SBV would be guided to some extent by the previous day’s closing rates 
on the two trading floors.  Commercial banks continued to be allowed to quote within 
 
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

a band around the announced official exchange rate; the size of this band varied over 
time (for details, see Sub-section 4.2 below).  In October 1994, the trading floors were 
replaced by a more comprehensive and sophisticated interbank forex market, but there 
were no significant changes in the underlying exchange rate setting mechanism. 
 
Officially, February 1999 marked the beginning of a new approach to the setting of 
the announced exchange rate.  From this date, rather than setting an official rate that 
would be based partially on the previous average interbank rate, the SBV would 
simply announce that interbank rate without adjustment.2  Commercial banks 
continued to be allowed to determine their own selling and buying rates within a 
stipulated band.  In February 1999, the band’s upper bound was fixed at +0.1% (there 
was no lower bound at the time); subsequently it was adjusted a number of times (see 
Sub-section 4.2 below).   
 
The current exchange rate regime has been described by the authorities as a managed 
float.  In principle, under a managed float, the exchange rate is determined by market 
forces, and the government’s influence on this rate is effected only through its own 
purchases and sales in the forex market (Moosa 2004).  In the case of Vietnam, the 
justification for the term “float” being in the above description is that the SBV no 
longer sets the official ER, but simply “notifies” the average interbank rate 
determined on the preceding business day through the interaction between supply and 
demand in the market.  The regime is “managed” in that the exchange rate can move 
only within a stipulated band, the SBV remains a major participant in the market, and 
various forms of administrative exchange controls and rationing are maintained. As 
we shall see below, in practice the system has tended to rely so heavily on the 
“managed” part that perhaps the term “adjustable peg” might be a more appropriate 
description – at least, in a de facto sense. 
 
Figure 1 illustrates historical movements in the annual average of the market 
VND/USD exchange rate since 1985.  It can be seen clearly from the figure that there 
has been a rising trend in this exchange rate, indicating depreciation of the 
Vietnamese dong (VND).  Further, there have been two sub-periods (from 1985 to 
1991, and from 1997 to 2004) when substantial depreciations of the VND were 
observed, and two sub-periods (from 1991 to 1997, and from 2003 to 2007) when the 
VND/USD rate was kept relatively stable.     
 
PLEASE INSERT FIGURE 1 AROUND HERE 
 
2.2 Formation and development of the forex market 
Before 1992 
The development of Vietnam’s forex market has reflected the evolutionary changes in 
its economic system and exchange rate regime.   Before Doi Moi, under the central 
planning system, market principles were downplayed or ignored and there was no 
need for a sophisticated, highly organized forex market.  Foreign currency proceeds 
were gathered by the state for allocating to various uses according to a pre-determined 
plan (Le Huy Trong 2004).  Businesses that generated revenues in foreign currency 
could hold a certain proportion for their activities as per their respective plans of 
 
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

receipts and expenditures;  the remainder was to be sold to banks.  Businesses and 
individuals with approved requirements could buy forex from banks.   
 
Different exchange rates were determined by the authorities for different kinds of 
transactions, to serve the purposes of the state plans.  Before 1989, these official 
exchange rates generally overvalued the VND by very large margins.  In 1987 and 
1988, for example, the parallel (black) market exchange rate for the USD against the 
VND was about five to six times the official rate for trade purposes.   
 
As the economy began to move in earnest on its transition path during the late-1980s, 
a number of key developments took place in the banking and forex trading arenas.  In 
March 1988, the previous one-tier banking system was split into a new, two-tier 
system, comprising the SBV, which functions as a central bank, and a system of 
specialized commercial banks.3 This was followed, in October 1988 and March 1989, 
by legislation and regulations regarding foreign exchange controls and, therefore, 
governing commercial banks’ activities, including forex trading.4   
 
Despite these first steps in setting up a legal framework for an organized forex market 
and for the introduction of elements of competition into the relevant systems, forex 
trading remained rudimentary and, until around 1992, was dominated by the need to 
establish a closer-to-equilibrium exchange rate.  Long periods of overvaluation of the 
domestic currency had resulted in persistent excess demand for foreign currency.   By 
1989, the authorities were no longer able to control the flows of forex and manage this 
excess demand (Le Van Te and  Nguyen Quoc Khanh 2000):5  they were then forced 
to conduct a series of large and frequent devaluations during the period 1989-1991.6 
These devaluations succeeded in reducing the gap between the parallel market rate 
and the official exchange rate to about 10-15 percent or smaller.  
 
The 1992-1994 Period  
 
A key milestone in the development of Vietnam’s forex market was the formation in 
1992 of two forex trading floors, one in Ho Chi Minh City and the other in Hanoi.   
These were organized centers where the SBV, commercial banks and businesses (such 
as export-import companies) could gather on a regular basis to conduct forex 
transactions through auctioning. They served to lower transaction costs and to provide 
an indication of the relative strengths of market supply and demand. 
 
The trading-floors system soon exhibited a number of limitations, however.  These 
included the requirement of face-to-face dealing, time-consuming paperwork, and 
high intermediation costs.  In particular, the payment mechanism was inadequate, thus 
tending to discourage commercial banks from selling forex to businesses on the 
trading floors (Nguyen Van Tien 2006).  Instead, commercial banks would sell forex 
in bulk to the SBV before the start of a transaction session; the SBV would resell such 
bought forex in smaller quantities to buyers during the session.   
 
This practice made the SBV an intermediary between commercial banks and endusers, thus accentuating the SBV’s role as the dominant participant in the system, 
with the capacity to decisively influence the exchange rate during any trading session 
(Vo Tri Thanh 2000).  Neither of these outcomes was consistent with the professed 
 
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

purposes of the establishment of the two-tier banking system and the introduction of 
elements of the market system in the forex trading arena. 
 
 
Under the circumstances, it is not surprising that the forex trading floors captured only 
a tiny portion of the total demand and supply of foreign currency in the economy.  
During the three or so years of their operation, the total trading volume was recorded 
at 606.5 million US dollars (Truong Van Phuoc 2006, p. 83).  This represented less 
than three percent of the total export-import turnover during the corresponding period, 
as the latter amounted to about 22 billion dollars for the three years 1992 to 1994 
combined (GSO 2006).   
 
The Period Since 1994 
 
The most important milestone in the forex market’s development was the 
replacement, in October 1994, of the two forex trading floors by an interbank forex 
market.  Whereas each of the trading floors was open for face-to-face auctioning 
twice or three times per week previously, the interbank market operates five days per 
week, and dealers from commercial banks can now transact with one another via 
telecommunication means and electronic trading systems.  The interbank market also 
accommodates trading in foreign currencies other than the USD as well as trading in 
forex derivatives; for details, see Nguyen Tran Phuc (2009, Appendix B). 
 
In structural terms, Vietnam’s forex market now operates as a two-tier market, 
consisting of an interbank market segment and a client/retail market segment with 
different objectives. The interbank market segment accommodates the intermediate 
trading activities of banks, while end-users such as corporate and individual 
customers deal with commercial banks in the retail market segment.  The new system 
allows the SBV to withdraw from direct forex transactions with business end-users on 
a routine, operational basis. Instead, it can now concentrate on monitoring the 
interbank market and intervening as the seller or buyer of last resort for policy 
purposes only.   
3 MARKET’S CHARACTERISTICS 
 
The forex market in Vietnam displays a number of characteristics commonly 
associated with developing-country forex markets (Canales-Kriljenko 2004), 
including: 
 
• Small volume of transactions; 
• Limited role of interbank trading; 
• High degree of market concentration; and 
• Dominant role of spot transactions and transactions involving local counterparties 
only. 
 
Further, it shares with the forex market in China a rather distinctive feature, namely 
the imposition of a band of permissible variations around the official exchange rate.  
As we shall see below, however, the way this mechanism operates in Vietnam has 
resulted in frequent bouts of severe market illiquidity and non-market means of 
rationing, which do not appear to apply to the China market.  
 
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

3.1 Market size 
Daily total turnover on the forex market in Vietnam increased seven-fold from around 
$20 million in 1995 to around $150 million in 2006.7  Despite such growth, the 
market has remained very small in comparison with forex markets elsewhere.  As 
Table 1 shows, in major developed countries, such as the USA and Japan, or key 
forex trading centers -- such as the UK, Singapore, Hong Kong and Australia -- daily 
turnover on the forex market tends to range from tens to hundreds of billion US 
dollars (USD, or $).  The corresponding figures for large trading nations (such as 
China and South Korea) are around $10 billion or higher.  Emerging markets (such as 
Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia) also record billions of USD in forex turnover on a 
daily basis.   
 
INSERT TABLE 1 AROUND HERE 
 
Data that are strictly comparable to these international figures are difficult to obtain 
for Vietnam.  The Bank of International Settlements (BIS) does not include the 
country in its triennial surveys, and the SBV does not release comparable data on a 
regular, consistent basis.  Accordingly, the figures shown for Vietnam in Table 1 have 
been compiled from a variety of sources.  While the presented data are not strictly 
comparable, they do provide a clear indication that forex market turnover in Vietnam 
is merely a fraction (around 10 percent or less) of turnover in, say, Indonesia, the 
Philippines or Malaysia.   
 
In order to gain a better appreciation of the size of a forex market, it may be useful to 
compare it to the relevant country’s volume of international trade.  As Table 2 shows, 
in 2007 forex market turnover in the UK was almost 150 times the size of the 
corresponding international (two-way) trade volume.  In other developed countries, 
the ratio ranged from about 10 (for Korea) to about 30 and 70 (for the US and 
Australia, respectively).  The corresponding figures for emerging-market countries 
ranged from about 1.5 for China to more than 6 (for the Philippines).  By contrast, 
Vietnam’s ratio was less than one, suggesting that a sizable share of international 
trade was carried out without requiring formal currency exchange.   
 
INSERT TABLE 2 AROUND HERE 
 
The decline in this ratio between 2004 and 2006, as shown in the last row of Table 2, 
occurred after the effective lifting (in 2003) of the forex-surrender rule which had 
made it compulsory for recipients of forex proceeds to convert a stipulated proportion 
of these funds into the local currency.8  Together with the fact that domestic 
businesses are allowed to maintain bank deposits in foreign currency, the reduction of 
the required surrender portion to zero means that it is now more feasible for 
businesses to retain export earnings in foreign currency for use in subsequent import 
purchases, thus bypassing the forex market. The tendency for forex market turnover to 
fail to keep up with growth in international trade in recent years can be seen clearly in 
Figure 2, where the top (bold) curve represents international trade and the middle 
curve represents total turnover in the forex market.   
 
INSERT FIGURE 2 AROUND HERE 
 
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

3.2 Market structure 
 
Interbank vs. client-bank trading 
 
Following the establishment of Vietnam’s interbank forex market in late-1994, 
interbank transactions increased sharply -- from about $1 million per day of trading 
under the previous trading-floor arrangement, to about $3 million (IMF 1996; Truong 
Van Phuoc 2006).  Despite such growth in absolute size, the interbank segment of the 
market has remained far smaller than the client-bank segment.  In Figure 2 the 
interbank segment is shown as the gap between the middle curve (total forex market 
turnover) and the lower (broken) curve, representing the client-bank segment.  From 
this figure it is evident that the client-bank segment has dominated the overall market.     
 
The limited role of the interbank segment in the Vietnam market is in marked contrast 
with the situation elsewhere.  In the global forex market, the interbank segment 
(including transactions carried out by nonbank financial institutions) accounts for 80 
percent or  more of total market trading volume (Moosa 2004; BIS 2007).  As shown 
in Table 3, the interbank segment occupies a similar role in a number of emerging 
markets, representing about 55-95 percent of total trading.  By contrast, the 
corresponding figure for Vietnam has been less than 15 percent.  
 
INSERT TABLE 3 AROUND HERE 
 
This implies that, as far as forex transactions are concerned, commercial banks in 
Vietnam have generally concentrated on buying from and selling to their own 
customers rather than dealing with other banks.  Thus, they tend to rely on internal 
resources in carrying out their forex trading activities and only turn to the interbank 
market when necessary in order to square or re-establish their desired position.  While 
the small size of the interbank market segment may limit its usefulness as a means of 
immediate price discovery, it tends to make it easier for the central bank to obtain 
indications of the order flow in the overall forex market – e.g., which market 
participants were the initiators of selling or buying orders  (Canales-Kriljenko 2004).   
 
Market concentration and dominant role of the central bank 
Not only does the interbank market segment play a limited role; interbank transactions 
are also heavily concentrated among a small number of banks, with the SBV in 
particular dominating the scene to a very large degree.  Available data indicate that 
transactions involving the SBV accounted for 29, 65, 68 and 60 percent, respectively, 
of total interbank forex turnover in the four years 1999 to 2002 (SBV 1999, 2000, 
2001, 2002).  The corresponding figure for 2004 was perhaps as high as 85 percent.9  
It can be inferred from all this that actual trading among commercial banks on the 
interbank market, with SBV activities excluded, has been very limited indeed.  
 
In principle, any commercial bank can apply to be licensed by the SBV to participate 
in the interbank market; and the number of participants did increase from 23 in 1994 
to 58 in 1999 (Vo Tri Thanh et al., 2000), to 59 in 2004 and 65 in 2007 (SBV 2004, 
2005, 2006, 2007).10  Yet the number of banks that have participated actively in the 
market has remained relatively small.  They include the four large state-owned 
commercial banks, foreign bank branches and some joint-stock commercial banks 
 
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

(SBV 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003). Of the other participants, many are small or newly 
established joint-stock commercial banks and are content simply to take a passive role 
as price-takers in the market.  
 
Among the active participants, the Bank for Foreign Trade of Vietnam (Vietcombank) 
has generally assumed the position of the leading commercial bank in the forex 
market. This was the first state-owned commercial bank 11 that was licensed to offer 
services in foreign exchange and international payment; over time, it has been able to 
retain some of the advantages arising from this special position.  According to Vo Tri 
Thanh et al., (2000, p. 71), during the period 1994-1999 this bank was the dominant 
private-sector player in the interbank market, with a market share of up to 90 
percent,12 and operated to a large extent under close ‘guidance’ from the SBV.   
 
Vietcombank’s market share has been reduced in more recent years – e.g., its share of 
the total volume of local forex transactions (i.e., excluding cross-border transactions) 
has been reported as being around 30 to 40 percent (VCB 2002; Nguyen-Dac-Hung 
2003; VCB 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006).  This trend reflected the rise in competition 
from other commercial banks such as the Bank for Investment and Development of 
Vietnam (BIDV), Vietnam Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (Agribank), 
and Vietnam Export and Import Bank (Eximbank).  Also noteworthy has been the 
emergence of foreign bank branches as key players in the market segment involving 
cross-border transactions – they tend to enjoy strengths in trading skills and 
technology, and extensive networks of correspondent banking relationships. 
 
Spot vs. derivative transactions 
 
Participants in Vietnam’s forex market began conducting forward transactions in 
1998.  In their first year of operation, which was dominated by the effects of the Asian 
Financial Crisis, forward transactions accounted for around 10.6 percent of total forex 
market turnover.  This proportion then dropped to 2.8 percent in the following year 
(1999).  Forex swaps began to be conducted in 2001, and since then the combined 
value of swaps and outright forwards has been around five to six percent of total 
turnover; see Table 4.   
 
INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE 
 
Such market shares for swaps and forwards are very small by international standards.  
For example, BIS data indicate that at the global level, spot transactions tend to 
account for only around one-third of the total market, while swaps represent around 
one-half and outright forwards around 10 percent (BIS 2005, p. 5, 2007, p. 4).  
Further, as shown in Table 5, these two types of derivative transactions typically 
represent more than 50 percent of total forex market turnover in Asian emerging 
economies -- a notable exception is China, where this share appeared to be less than 
10 percent until quite recently.  Thus, while swaps and forwards tend to dominate spot 
transactions globally and in other Asian emerging economies, the situation is reversed 
for Vietnam and for China.   
 
INSERT TABLE 5 AROUND HERE 
 
 
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Currency options were first introduced by Eximbank into Vietnam’s forex market in 
2003.13  However, trading in this form of derivative products has never really taken 
off and at the time of writing trading volume is in effect negligible (Nguyen Trong 
Tai 2006).  
   
3.3 Official exchange rate and allowable trading band 
 
In common with China but contrast with most other Asian emerging economies, 
Vietnam implements an exchange rate regime that involves a band of allowable 
trading around the official exchange rate.  Commercial banks are not allowed to quote 
exchange rates that are higher than the upper bound or below the lower bound.  As 
can be seen in Figure 3, the trading band has been quite narrow since the 
establishment of the forex trading floors in late 1991, with the exception of the 
periods around the 1997-1998 Asian Financial Crisis and the 2007-2008 World 
Financial Crisis. 
 
INSERT FIGURE 3 AROUND HERE 
 
Figure 4 displays trends in the daily official VND/USD exchange rate, the upper 
bound, the lower bound, and the commercial bank ask rate as quoted by Vietcombank 
between July 2004 and December 2006.  For simplicity, the bid rate is not shown, as 
the bid-ask spread was negligible during most of this period (this will be discussed 
further below).  The figure shows clearly that the ask rate was at or near the upper 
bound throughout most of the period shown. 
 
INSERT FIGURE 4 AROUND HERE 
 
Figure 5 depicts the corresponding trends for a more recent period – January 2007 to 
June 2009.  It can be seen from this figure that there were again multiple periods 
when the ask rate was at or near the upper bound.  In addition, there were also a 
number of times, such as the first half of 2007 or the period from October 2007 to 
March 2008, when commercial banks quoted the exchange rate at or near the lower 
bound. 
 
INSERT FIGURE 5 AROUND HERE 
 
Overall, in comparing daily data for the period from Jan 2002 to June 2009, we found 
that commercial bank quotations of the exchange rate were at or near the bounds for 
more than 86 percent of the time. More specifically, Vietcombank’s ask rate was 
within 0.01 percent of the upper bound on 76.3 percent of the days observed, and its 
bid rate was within 0.01 percent of the lower bound for 9.8 percent of the daily 
observations.  These provide an indication of the extent to which the pricing 
mechanism in Vietnam’s forex market has been constrained, rather than being 
allowed to operate freely.  In this market, prices (i.e., exchange rates) have been 
extensively administered by a combination of price ceilings and floors that are 
variable and mostly binding.   
 
As far as we can ascertain, a similar situation does not exist in China.  The data 
available to us indicate that typically commercial exchange rate quotations in China 
 
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

are well within the allowable trading band itself, rather than being at either the upper 
or the lower bound.  This can be seen clearly in Figure 6 which displays trends in 
similar daily quotations and bounds for the CNY/USD exchange rates.  For this 
figure, we have selected a period which saw both rises and falls in the exchange rate, 
although the overall trend was clearly downward (i.e., a strengthening of the Chinese 
currency). Figures obtained for other periods also show a consistent pattern of 
commercial bank quotations being well within the bounds, even when the exchange 
rate was rising.   
 
INSERT FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE 
 
3.4 Bid-ask spread 
 
The bid-ask spreads associated with exchange rate quotations provided by commercial 
banks in Vietnam have been very narrow by international standards.  Table 6 shows 
the average spread (as a percentage of the mid rate) between Vietcombank’s ask and 
bid rates on the retail market during the period 2002-2008. From 2002 to 2005, the 
bid-ask spread was effectively zero.  Since late-2006, as the allowable trading band 
was progressively enlarged, the spread also began to widen.  Nevertheless, as of 2008 
and the time of writing, the typical spread was still less than 0.10 of 1 percent.  It can 
be expected that the corresponding spreads in the interbank market would have been 
similarly small, or even smaller.   
 
INSERT TABLE 6 AROUND HERE 
 
One might be tempted to infer from such narrow bid-ask spreads that forex 
transaction costs are low in Vietnam, indicating a market with good liquidity, in the 
sense that foreign currency ‘can be swiftly and with insignificant costs transformed 
into’ local currency and vice versa (BIS 1999).  As Sarr and Lybeck (2002) have 
pointed out, however, the quoted bid-ask spread by itself is often unreliable as a 
measure of a particular forex market’s true liquidity, because it may also reflect the 
flexibility/stickiness of the exchange rate.  
 
It is true that, as shown in Table 7, countries with well-established forex markets such 
as Canada, Australia and Singapore tend to have lower bid-ask spreads, in comparison 
with countries with emerging markets, such as South Africa, Mexico or Indonesia.  
However, it is also true that the increase in South Korea’s spreads after 1998 was due 
largely to the fact that greater flexibility in the exchange rate induced forex dealers to 
build a greater risk premium into the bid-ask spread.  Similarly, while   Malaysia 
experienced a substantial reduction in bid-ask spreads after 1998, Sarr and Lybeck 
(2002) argue that this was due mainly to the return to an exchange rate peg, and that 
there was in fact a deterioration in market liquidity in Malaysia, because the bid-ask 
spreads became much more volatile for some time.  Further, although the average bidask spread in China was reported to be zero as of October 11, 2001, this was 
associated with a forex market that was considered shallow and narrow.  At the time, 
the country operated a de facto pegged exchange rate, supported by a compulsory 
foreign currency purchase and sales system, and an inconvertible local currency under 
the capital account (Zhang & Liang 2006).  In the same vein, it will be shown below 
 
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

that the reported bid-ask spread is a misleading measure of true transaction costs in 
Vietnam’s forex market.  
 
INSERT TABLE 7 AROUND HERE 
3.5 Episodes of illiquidity 
 
In the literature, a market is usually described as ‘liquid’ if it features ‘a high level of 
trading activities’ (Harvey & Morgenson 2002) such that ‘a large volume of trades 
can be immediately executed with minimum effect on price’ (Muranaga & Shimizu 
1999).  In that sense, the forex market in Vietnam has been characterized by frequent 
bouts of extreme illiquidity.  As used below, this term is meant to describe the 
situation where many participants find it difficult, if not impossible, to complete 
transactions (either sales or purchases) at the market-quoted price.  As we shall see, 
this situation has arisen in Vietnam due mainly to a lack of suitable and willing 
counterparties at the legally permissible price.  
 
Consider, for example, Figures 4 and 5.  During much of the period depicted in Figure 
4 and during the middle of 2008 (Figure 5), the official exchange rate was subject 
continuously to upward pressure (the VND was depreciating), and the commercial 
quotations were always at or near the upper bound.  As most participants expected the 
exchange rate to continue its upward trajectory, it was very difficult to find any 
participants willing to sell large quantities of USD at the maximum allowable spot 
rate.  At any given time, it would be more advantageous for those with long positions 
in USD to wait and sell USD in the future rather than on the spot.   
 
An indication of the resultant excess demand was that the exchange rate in the parallel 
market would be quoted at a much higher level than in the official market; see Figure 
7, where the curve representing the parallel market rate is the one that fluctuates most 
widely – and often far above the upper bound.  At times, such excess demand for 
USD prompted the SBV to intervene in order to relieve some of the pressure.  It also 
led to the development and widespread use of a range of techniques and ad hoc 
mechanisms to ration the limited quantity of USD available; these will be examined in 
detail in the next section. 
 
Examples of the reverse situation can be found in the above figures as well.  For 
example, during the period from October 2007 to March 2008, the official exchange 
rate was falling (the VND was appreciating), the commercial quotes were already at 
or near the lower bound, most market participants anticipated further declines and few 
were willing to buy USD at the minimum allowable spot rate.   
 
3.6 Inconsistencies and anomalies 
 
Given the extent to which pricing has been administered and the inherent complexity 
of modern forex transactions, it is not surprising that the market exhibits a number of 
inconsistencies and anomalies.  In principle, these inconsistencies appear to be 
opportunities for arbitrage or for other profitable trading activities.  In practice, some 
have been used to circumvent the bounds limiting exchange rate movements – at least, 
until the authorities explicitly forbade such use.   
 
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

 
For example, while the bilateral VND/USD exchange rate has been subject to official 
scrutiny and closely administered, banks have generally been allowed freedom in 
quoting exchange rates involving the VND and a third currency, or exchange rates 
that do not involve the VND.  Similarly, while spot trading of the USD has been 
closely supervised, forward trading has been less closely administered, giving rise at 
times to opportunities for participants to trade quantities of USD at effectively higher 
exchange rates than the permissible upper bound.  A third area of anomaly has been 
the trading of currency options:  here again, it has not been feasible for the authorities 
to anticipate and regulate all aspects of trading, and as a result, there have been 
opportunities for market participants to use currency options to trade USD quantities 
at effectively higher spot rates than ostensibly allowed. 
3.7 Parallel market 
 
The parallel (black) forex market has always been a part of contemporary business 
life in Vietnam: its existence predated the 1980s economic reform process.  While, in 
a strict sense, transactions in this market have always been illegal, the degree to which 
the authorities have tolerated them has varied over time.  During most of the period 
being studied (1986-2009) there has been a premium on the parallel-market value of 
the USD compared with the corresponding commercial rate in the legal market.   
 
As Figure 8 illustrates, as part of the economic reform process, the official exchange 
rate and the parallel-market rate quickly converged during the second half of 1980s.  
By the end of 1991, the parallel-market premium had fallen to around 5 percent or 
less; see Figure 9.  In recent years, it appears that official sensitivity may have 
increased with regard to the publication of data relating to these unapproved trading 
activities, and it has become much more difficult to obtain the relevant data.  
Available data suggest that this premium has rarely exceeded 10 percent except 
during special times such as financial crises.   
 
INSERT FIGURE 8 AROUND HERE 
 
INSERT FIGURE 9 AROUND HERE 
 
 
4 IMPLICATIONS OF EXCHANGE RATE POLICY FOR 
FOREX MARKET DEVELOPMENT    
 
As Xin (2004) argues, the nature of a country’s exchange rate policy is often reflected 
in the rules and regulations that govern the operations of its forex market. This is why 
the conduct of exchange rate policy has been seen as being responsible for structural 
and operational deficiencies in the forex market of many developing countries 
(Canales-Kriljenko 2004).  In this section of the paper, we shall examine more closely 
how the implementation of Vietnam’s exchange rate regime has affected the 
development of its forex market. 
 
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

4.1 Official preference for a stable VND/USD rate 
 
In the literature, the preference by some monetary authorities for a fixed exchange 
rate regime is often explained in terms of a stabilizing “nominal anchor”, especially in 
the context of high inflation, rapid growth in monetary and credit aggregates, and 
large government budget deficits.  Under such conditions, an exchange rate peg 
relative to a major foreign currency could serve as a suitable anchor, especially in 
countries where the domestic government lacks a track record in policy making that 
would establish its credibility with market participants. 
 
It is not surprising that Vietnam has adopted the USD a key nominal anchor.  Some of 
its most important trading partners, such as China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Thailand 
and Malaysia, have generally preferred a stable exchange rate relative to the USD.  
Vietnam’s own experience in reducing inflation during the first half of the 1990s also 
served to underscore the benefits that an effective peg to the USD could bring.  There 
may also be a variety of non-economic (e.g., political or strategic) reasons for the 
authorities to prefer a stable VND/USD exchange rate. 
 
Such official preference can be confirmed in at least two ways.  First, examination of 
public statements by senior officials reveals that from time to time there have been 
indications of this preference. For example, during the period 2004-2005, the 
Governor of the SBV was quoted as announcing that the VND would not be allowed 
to depreciate by more than 1 percent per annum (Camen 2006).  More recently, an 
official of the SBV also made it clear that volatility in the VND/USD rate was 
expected to be kept to no more than 2 percent per annum (Minh Duc 2008). 
 
Second, one can attempt to address directly the question of how stable, or conversely 
how variable or volatile, the nominal VND/USD exchange rate has been.  A simple 
measure of variability in a data series is its coefficient of variation (CV), defined as 
ratio of the standard deviation to the mean.  To highlight the volatility, or 
unpredictability, of the data, an alternative measure may also be used, namely the root 
mean square percentage error (RMPSE): 
  
∑
=
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
×
=
T
t
t
t
t
E
E
E
T
RMSPE
1
2
ˆ
1
100
 
where Et represents the actual exchange rate in period t, and Êt the predicted exchange 
rate based on some suitable forecasting mechanism.  A simple yet useful forecasting 
mechanism is the random walk model, where the actual Et-1 value observed in period 
t-1 is used as the forecast value  Êt  for period t (Dwyer, Nguyen & Rajapakse 1996).   
 
Nguyen Tran Phuc and Nguyen Duc-Tho (2009) compute the CV and RMPSE of the 
nominal VND/USD rate and nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) for Vietnam, as 
well comparable exchange rates for a number of other countries; the data relate to the 
end of the relevant months. Table 8 reproduces their RMPSE results (the CV results 
are quite similar).  It can be seen that, except for the years of the Asian Financial 
Crisis (Jan. 1997 – Dec. 1998), the VND/USD rate was kept very stable compared 
with other bilateral exchange rates.  While the RMSPE of the VND/USD rate was in 
 
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

the range of 0.2-0.7 percent for most of the sub-periods considered, the JPY/USD and 
USD/GBP rates recorded RMSPE of around 2 percent or higher, and the THB/USD 
around 1 percent or higher.  It is interesting, however, to note that the RMSPE for the 
CNY/USD has been comparable to (and at times even lower than) that for the 
VND/USD.  Thus, the volatility of the VND relative to the USD has been much lower 
than that of the currencies of the UK, Japan, or Thailand, but has not been very far out 
of line with that of China’s currency. 
 
INSERT TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE 
 
How should the exchange rate regime that has produced such low volatility be 
described?  The authorities have tended to characterize it as a managed float.  
However, the fact that commercial VND/USD quotes have been at their upper or 
lower bounds more than 85% of the time suggests that it may be more appropriate to 
describe the system, at least in de facto terms, as an “adjustable peg” system.  The 
reality is that, on any given day, it is highly likely that the maximum allowable 
exchange rate dictated by regulations will also turn out to be the rate quoted by 
commercial banks. 
 
The fact that the bilateral VND/USD rate has been relatively stable does not 
necessarily imply that the VND itself has been stable.  On the contrary, the RMSPE 
figures reported in Table 8 indicate that Vietnam’s NEER has been about as volatile 
as the NEER of the US or of China.  This result is consistent with the fact that, at least 
for some of the time, both China and Vietnam have used the USD as a nominal 
anchor:  as the overall value of the latter moved up and down, so would the value of 
China’s and Vietnam’s currencies.   
 
4.2 Mechanisms to support stability in the VND/USD rate 
 
The determination of the official VND/USD exchange rate and the setting of the 
allowable trading band around it have been used as devices to slow down, if not 
eliminate, short-term changes in the exchange rate, even when it was clear there was 
market pressure for either a depreciation or appreciation of the domestic currency.  
When the resultant commercial exchange rates failed to clear the market, as they very 
frequently did, the authorities tended to rely on official intervention to meet part of 
the imbalance between demand and supply, and market participants had to resort to ad 
hoc means to deal with the remaining excess demand or supply.     
 
Official exchange rate 
 
As noted earlier, since 1999, the average VND/USD exchange rate on the interbank 
market on each banking day has been determined by the SBV and announced as the 
official exchange rate for the next banking day. However, this determination process 
is not transparent and may allow the SBV some leeway.  In general, it can be expected 
that the bid-ask spreads in the interbank market would be smaller than in the bankclient market. Thus, the average interbank rate should be somewhere between the ask 
rate and the bid rate quoted in the bank-client market.  Yet in practice, the official 
exchange rate has frequently been set below the bid rate quoted in the client market on 
the previous day.  
 
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

 
Further, the reported average interbank rate has often appeared rather sticky or even 
rigid, despite evidence of rapid developments in the market. For example, when there 
was upward pressure on the exchange rate (i.e., the VND was depreciating) and 
commercial banks consistently quoted their trading rates at the upper bound of the 
allowed band, in principle the band should have moved up each trading day.  Thus, 
the average interbank rate should have increased daily by an amount equal to one-half 
of the width of the band.  Historical data show, however, that it tended to increase 
slowly and sometimes did not increase at all; see, for example, Figure 5.   
 
Allowable trading band 
 
The range of allowable variations in trading quotes around the official exchange rate, 
as shown in Figure 3, has been quite narrow except for the periods around the 19971998 Asian Financial Crisis and the 2007-2008 Global Financial Crisis.  For 
reference, Table 9 presents a list of dates on which the band’s size was altered by the 
SBV, and the parameters involved on each occasion.  It would appear that increases in 
the width of the allowable trading band have been used mainly to respond to strong 
pressure for the VND to depreciate.  In particular, the repeated broadenings of the 
band in 1997 and 2008-2009 allowed the VND/USD exchange rate to be adjusted 
upward in response to major external shocks.  When the immediate urgency had 
passed, however, the band tended to be narrowed again.  
 
INSERT TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE 
 
Administrative Rationing, Official Intervention and Moral Suasion 
  
 
In view of the administered pricing conducted through the determination of both the 
official exchange rate and the allowable trading band, it is only natural that there were 
frequent instances of non-clearance of the market.  By default, the SBV often found it 
necessary to intervene in order to manage such market imbalances.  This explains, to a 
large extent, why the SBV has continued to play a major role in the interbank forex 
market.   
 
During much of the period under study, the VND was under pressure to depreciate, 
and there was an excess demand for USD at the commercially quoted exchange rates, 
which were already pushed to their upper limit.  Accordingly, the SBV had to sell 
quantities of USD.  To maintain the national stock of forex reserves at desired levels, 
however, the SBV tended to meet only part of the prevailing excess demand, and to 
use administrative arrangements to ration some of the available forex among potential 
buyers.  
 
In particular, only those commercial banks with short positions exceeding a certain 
size could approach the SBV to buy foreign currency at the quoted exchange rates. 
Moreover, the system allowed priority to be given to the importation of  essential 
goods (such as petroleum, fertilizer and medicine), and to commercial banks that 
serve customers engaging in these priority activities (Tran Nga 2008).  This means 
that other customers must turn to the parallel black market or other ad hoc channels 
(see below) to address their unmet demand for USD -- or just wait.  
 
 
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

A key difference between the ways China and Vietnam have implemented their 
respective exchange rate regimes is that the former has generally experienced large 
current account surpluses which exert pressure on the domestic currency to 
appreciate, while the latter has had to deal mainly with current account deficits putting 
pressure on the local currency to depreciate.  In China, the authorities’ accumulation 
of foreign assets has largely prevented any major build-up of excess supply of foreign 
currency.  In Vietnam, by contrast, the need to conserve (or to augment) official 
reserves has limited the extent to which the SBV could meet the substantial and 
persistent excess demand for foreign currency. 
 
There were, of course, some periods when Vietnam also experienced pressure for the 
domestic currency to appreciate.  For example, due to a surge in capital inflows in 
late-2007 and early-2008, the SBV faced the dilemma of whether or not to intervene 
in the forex market to prevent the VND/USD exchange rate from falling.  The Bank’s 
handling of this episode suggests that, in comparison with China, Vietnam’s monetary 
authorities may have been less inclined to intervene fully in the forex market even 
when the domestic currency was subject to appreciating pressure. 
 
Discussions in the domestic Vietnamese literature acknowledge that the SBV was 
confronted at the time with a number of conflicting macroeconomic objectives (see, 
for example, Huynh-The-Du 2007; Vo-Tri-Thanh & Pham-Tri-Quang 2008).  On the 
one hand, if the exchange rate were allowed to be more flexible, an appreciation of 
the VND would ensue and this was considered harmful to the country’s external 
competitiveness. On the other, if the SBV were to maintain the prevailing exchange 
rate by buying foreign currency, this could add to the growth in money and credit, 
with potentially inflationary consequences.   
 
In the event, the SBV chose to adopt a compromise, halfway approach.  The 
VND/USD exchange rate was allowed to fall, but not too sharply (see Figure 5).  At 
the same time, with commercial exchange rate quotes straining at the lower bound, 
the excess supply of foreign currency was considerable and many participants were 
unable to convert USD proceeds into VND (see Figure 7, especially for the period 
around March 2008).       
 
A question that does not appear to have been addressed adequately in the domestic 
literature is what would have been the effects of a more vigorous intervention (i.e., 
one that would have fully absorbed the market excess supply) which was also fully 
sterilized.  In principle, sterilized intervention should have little impact on the money 
supply, as the authorities would simply mop up any injections of VND into the system 
(in payment for foreign currency purchases) through appropriate open-market sales of 
government securities.  
 
A prominent, but perhaps ultimately unhelpful, feature of official action in this arena 
has been the use of what might be described as ‘moral suasion’ or ‘talking up the 
VND’.  Senior officials would at times issue statements to reassure the public that the 
exchange rate regime was well managed, that the country had ample foreign reserves, 
and that the official exchange rate adequately reflected market supply and demand 
(Quang-Phuong 2008; Song-Linh 2008; Dinh-Hai 2009; SBV 2009).  
 
 
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

The implication being drawn was that any excess demand in particular that might 
arise for foreign currency would be due mainly to market participants being unduly 
influenced by temporary developments, false rumors or erroneous perceptions (DinhHai 2009; Hung-Phong 2009; SBV 2009).  When it turned out, however, that the 
relevant excess demand persisted and the exchange rate had to be allowed to move in 
the direction anticipated by market participants, public confidence in subsequent 
reassuring statements would naturally suffer. 
 
For example, during the period April-June 2008, there was persistent upward pressure 
on the VND/USD exchange rate and the parallel-market rate increased rapidly; see 
Figure 7.  The authorities publicly interpreted these excess demand symptoms as the 
end-result of a perception issue – a psychological factor (Song-Linh 2008; SBV 
2009).  Before too long, however, the official exchange rate had to be adjusted 
upward by 2 percent (on 11 June 2008) and the allowable trading band was doubled, 
from +/- 1 to +/- 2 percent (on 27 June 2008).     
    
Ad hoc commercial transactions to manage excess demand for foreign currency 
 
When all else fails and excess demand for foreign currency persists, market 
participants may be forced to resort to the parallel market to meet their foreign 
currency requirements.14  To serve their clients, commercial banks have also 
developed a range of techniques and means to circumvent the regulations governing 
the maximum exchange rate that they can quote.   
 
First, some banks simply required customers to pay an additional charge, fee, or 
commission equal to a certain percentage of the contract value.  
 
Second, some banks would charge buyers of USDs only the legally allowed ask rate, 
but would also require them to accept loans in VND at higher-than-normal interest 
rates.  Similarly, they would buy USDs from exporters and other customers at the 
allowable rate but would also accept VND deposits from them at higher-than-normal 
interest rates (Lan Huong 2003).  
 
Third, banks could arrange for USD-VND transactions to be completed through a 
third currency, such as the euro (EUR) (Lan Huong 2003; Hai Ly 2008; Nguyen Tan 
2008).  As noted above, while market participants are not allowed to trade the USD at 
rates outside the stipulated band, trading involving other currencies is subject to less 
strict regulation. Nguyen Tran Phuc (2009) provides details concerning a hypothetical 
series of transactions which would effectively allow participants to trade USD for 
VND at a higher rate than the upper bound of the allowable trading band.  This 
method became highly popular, until the SBV explicitly banned it (Hai-Ly 2008). 
 
It is possible to obtain an indication of the extent to which market participants 
regarded the VND as being overvalued (and the USD as undervalued) from the 
discrepancies between Vietnamese banks’ quotations of the VND/EUR cross rate and 
the corresponding rate implied by the USD/EUR rate quoted on international market 
and the commercial quote in Vietnam of the VND/USD rate.  An alternative measure 
is the parallel-market premium over the approved commercial exchange rate, but data 
for this direct measure are not always available in the public domain.  It turns out that 
there has been a high degree of correlation between these two measures of the VND’s 
 
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

overvaluation.  For example, during the period January 2008 to June 2009, where 
estimates for both measures were available and both exceeded 5 percent, there were 
remarkable similarities between them, in terms of both level and movements (see 
Figure 10); the relevant simple correlation coefficient was 0.80.15  Anecdotal 
evidence provided by forex dealers to the authors suggests that commercial banks 
frequently used the parallel-market premium as a guide in calculating their own 
quotes of the VND/EUR cross rate.     
 
INSERT FIGURE 10 HERE 
 
Fourth, short-term forward contracts could be drawn to allow customers to buy USDs 
at a rate higher than the maximum allowed in the spot market (Hai Ly 2007);16  in 
some instances, the contracts could even be backdated to allow immediate delivery.  
The authorities issued a number of guidelines to limit usage of this financial product 
as a circumventing device, but it is difficult to prevent such usage altogether without 
being overly prescriptive about how forward contracts may be used by banks for 
legitimate commercial purposes. An indication of the extent to which this device has 
been used to get around regulations is that forward contracts have been used primarily 
by commercial banks to sell rather than buy USDs.  In recent years, forward sales 
represented about 75-85 percent of total turnover on forward trading (Nguyen Tran 
Phuc 2009).17  
 
Fifth, since the introduction of currency options in 2003, American-style options 
could be used to allow bank customers to obtain USDs by paying the premium and 
immediately exercising the option (Luu Minh Ngoc 2008; Nguyen Tran Phuc 2009). 
 
Sixth, in some instances banks might assist corporate clients to legitimize purchases 
of USDs which they had acquired previously at a higher-than-allowed rate via the 
parallel market.  In these cases, the client could not use such funds in normal banking 
transactions because they did not have appropriate documentation for them, and 
because the funds were in cash rather than electronic/transfer form.  Accordingly, the 
client would sell the USDs in cash to the bank at the quoted bid rate (for cash) and 
buy them back at the quoted ask rate for transfers (Pham Quoc Trung 2008; Nguyen 
Tran Phuc 2009). 
 
It is evident that these activities to circumvent the regulations and go outside the 
allowable trading band are not costless.  More generally, binding upper and lower 
bounds involve considerable deadweight losses in terms of reductions in overall 
economic efficiency.   In the next sub-section we turn to a closer examination of these 
and other implications of the forex market arrangements which have been developed 
to support the adopted exchange rate regime. 
 
4.3 Implications for forex market functioning and development 
 
High predictability and low volatility of the official exchange rate 
 
The official VND/USD exchange rate has followed a gradual upward trend with very 
little volatility except for the periods of the Asian Financial Crisis and the recent 
World Financial Crisis.  This gives rise to a high degree of predictability and an 
 
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

expectation among market participants that the SBV will frequently intervene to limit 
volatility in the official rate.  
 
Lack of interest in derivatives 
 
The low volatility of the exchange rate, coupled with the one-way nature of most 
daily movements, means that businesses generally perceive little foreign exchange 
risk.  As a result, there is little incentive for market participants to develop greater 
sophistication in terms of ability to form views regarding the future paths of the 
exchange rate, or to manage exchange rate risks.   
 
This also means that, during normal times, there is little need for derivative products 
as a means of risk management (as distinct from devices to circumvent legal limits on 
commercial exchange rates).  Further, when exchange rates did become more volatile 
(for example, during the recent World Financial Crisis) and hedging devices would 
have been very useful means to manage exchange rate risks, commercial banks often 
found that they were unable to provide meaningful quotes because the administered 
spot prices were not a good basis on which to calculate such quotations. 
 
Low market turnover, minor role for interbank transactions  
 
This, in turn, explains why the bulk of forex transactions have been spot transactions 
between banks and their clients, rather than interbank swaps and forwards which tend 
to dominate forex markets internationally.  It also explains the low turnover of the 
interbank forex market segment and, by implication, of the entire forex market.     
 
Dominant role of the SBV 
 
Because the authorities administer the price in this market (by setting the official 
exchange rate as well as the allowable trading band) they have to bear some 
responsibility for responding to instances of non-clearance of the market.  In 
particular, when there is an excess demand for USDs, and most commercial banks are 
all already in short positions, market participants would simply wait for the SBV to 
intervene.  Thus, the SBV’s dominant role continues. 
 
Illiquidity risk   
 
Because of the VND’s long-term depreciating trend relative to the USD, it is not 
possible for the SBV to fully meet the excess demand for USDs on a sustainable 
basis.  Partial or zero intervention, however, implies prolonged excess demand and 
market illiquidity:  when the commercially quoted exchange rate is already at its 
highest allowable level, supply simply dries up, as banks and other market 
participants have little incentive to sell.   
 
In spite of the circumventing techniques outlined above, there are inevitably 
businesses and individuals who are simply unable to obtain USDs for normal, 
legitimate purposes.  In effect, the risk of exchange rate changes has been transformed 
into a risk of illiquidity, in that it may become impossible for a bank customer to buy 
foreign currency at the quoted rates or even at higher rates.   
 
 
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Continuing demand for transactions in the parallel market and increased incentives 
for dollarization.   
 
Even though the parallel market is illegal, the long-running excess demand for USDs 
ensures its continued existence. Anecdotal evidence provided to the authors suggests 
that some bank customers have begun to search for and deal with each other directly, 
often with the assistance of commercial banks. Similarly, the system tends to 
encourage businesses that generate revenues in foreign currency to retain such 
proceeds for their own future use, or as a hedge against future depreciations of the 
domestic currency, rather than selling them.  Thus, illiquidity risk and lack of an 
active currency swap market combine to reinforce incentives for dollarization.   
 
Inefficiencies associated with administered prices 
 
Much of what has been described above fits closely the classic textbook analysis of 
price ceilings and excess demand.  From such analysis, it is well-known that activities 
designed to circumvent administered prices involve resources which could have been 
utilized in other activities – activities that are potentially more productive from 
society’s point of view.  Moreover, price ceilings involve deadweight losses to overall 
wellbeing by reducing the quantity traded to below the optimal level.   
 
At a practical level, it can be seen clearly that in Vietnam’s forex market, the presence 
of a binding upper bound to allowable exchange rates has resulted in added 
complications and costs to businesses.  Further, by reducing the domestic-currency 
revenues of export-related businesses, this upper bound disadvantages them in their 
daily competition for resources, to the detriment of the economy’s external balance in 
the longer term.   
 
Non-transparency and inaccurate price signals 
 
Prolonged periods of excess demand and illiquidity have rendered the market opaque, 
in that many transactions are carried out not at the reported price but at higher prices, 
and information about the latter prices is highly incomplete.  An implication of this is 
that exchange rate data that are available from official sources (including the SBV and 
IMF) do not fully reflect market realities. 
 
Another example of the opaque nature of price signals in this market is the extremely 
narrow bid-ask spreads.  It is clear that, despite their small size, these spreads do not 
translate into low transaction costs.  Instead, they are essentially a by-product of a peg 
regime.  Faced with a persistent excess demand for USDs, commercial banks 
generally try to attract supplies by increasing the bid rate, up to the level of the upper 
bound itself.  At the same time, the ask rate is not allowed to exceed the upper bound. 
As a result, the gap between ask and bid rates often becomes squeezed to zero or nearzero.   (By contrast, when the exchange rate is not under strong upward pressure, such 
as during several days at the end of March 2008 and the period August-October 2008, 
the bid-ask spreads may become as large as 0.5-0.7% percent; see Figures 7 and 11).   
 
INSERT FIGURE 11 ABOUT HERE 
 
 
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

In any case, for bank customers, the true bid-ask spread is typically far larger than 
indicated by the spread between commercial ask and bid quotes.  Sellers of USDs 
must typically accept the commercial bid rate.  (Sellers of USD cash that has been 
obtained via the parallel market must accept an even lower bid rate.)  By contrast, 
many buyers of USDs must effectively pay at a rate that is materially higher than the 
commercial ask rate.  The effective bid-ask spread at times increased to more than 10 
percent (Nguyen Tan 2008, p. 12).   
 
 
Administrative measures playing catch up with the market  
 
The recent decision in June 2008 by the SBV to ban the use of third currencies in 
circumventing the upper bound on the VND/USD exchange rate and similar moves to 
tighten up the regulations of forward contracts are actions that can be predicted via 
application of the classic analysis of administered pricing.  Such analysis also predicts 
that, just as the administrative framework is continually shored up with new and more 
intrusive regulations, market participants will always come up with new and more 
ingenious ways of beating the system.18   
 
Ultimately, the objectives being pursued by means of the de facto adjustable exchange 
rate peg will be undermined, in that market outcomes are not really what they may 
appear to be.  Business firms that are supposed to benefit from access to relatively 
cheap foreign currency end up paying effectively much higher prices.  Moreoever, 
any moves toward deeper official involvement in normal market operations in the 
short term would be contrary to the country’s longer-term goal of allowing market 
forces to play a greater role in economic life. 
  
5 CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have adopted a microstructure approach to the analysis of the forex 
market in Vietnam.  In essence, this approach sees pricing and other behaviors in a 
market as being heavily influenced by its microstructure, i.e., how it is organized and 
administered.  In turn, we argue, the ways in which Vietnam’s forex market is 
organized and administered have been shaped to a significant extent by how the 
country conducted its exchange rate policy.  Thus, the key to understanding this forex 
market, especially its operational deficiencies, is the recognition that de facto the 
exchange rate regime has essentially been an adjustable peg:  on about 85 percent of 
the trading days, the commercial quotes have been within 0.01 percent of either the 
upper or the lower bound of the trading band.  
 
Historical movements of the bilateral VND/USD rate indicate that the authorities have 
exhibited a general preference for stability in this exchange rate.  It is not clear 
whether this has been due to a desire to control inflation or some other (economic or 
non-economic) reasons.  In any case, to support this apparent preference, the SBV has 
had to rely on a number of administrative measures.  In particular, both the process of 
determining exactly what the official exchange rate is on any given day and changes 
in the width of the allowable trading band around it have been used as devices to slow 
down, if not to eliminate, short-term changes in the VND/USD rate.        
 
 
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

As there has been a general, long-term tendency for this rate to rise (i.e., for the VND 
to depreciate) during much of the study period, the above practice has resulted in a 
persistent but variable gap between the official exchange rate and the true equilibrium 
rate.  The resultant excess demand for foreign currency means that many businesses 
have been subject to illiquidity risk – i.e., the risk that they may not be able to buy 
foreign currency, even at rates above the commercial quote. 
 
Like water finding channels to the sea, circumventing techniques have been 
developed by some market participants to trade above the upper bound of the 
allowable band.  Such circumventing activities increase transaction costs, stimulate 
the parallel market, and encourage dollarization.   The artificially low price of foreign 
currency also represents a penalty on export-related businesses. 
 
For researchers and policy analysts, it is of interest to note that the published 
exchange rate data are not an accurate indication of true market realities, because they 
do not provide an accurate guide to the price signals (including hidden costs) that 
market participants actually receive.  Thus, analyses that assume price-quantity 
relationships proceed as normal, without adjustments for inherent shortcomings in the 
price (exchange rate) data, may prove inadequate. 
 
This also implies that, whatever the authorities’ economic objectives may be in 
pursuing a stable VND/USD exchange rate, such objectives are being slowly 
undermined.  To the extent that the price of the USD (in terms of VNDs) affects 
market participants’ behaviors, it is the true price (including any hidden costs) that 
really matters, not the price implied by the official exchange rate.  Market forces are 
bypassing and moving beyond the framework of the current regulation.  
 
The current administrative setup implies that, at any point in time, future movements 
in the official exchange rate are highly predictable.  This in turn has meant that there 
is little incentive for sophistication in dealing with exchange risk, and accordingly in 
enhancing related skills and capabilities in the forex market.   
 
Thus, there may have been something of a Catch-22 situation here.  On the one hand, 
the authorities have often cited the absence of a robust and developed forex market as 
a reason for not being able to proceed more quickly to a flexible exchange regime.  
Yet from the above analysis, is clear that in the past, stability of the VND/USD rate 
has acted as a retardant on the development of this market.  
 
Realistically, it can be expected that in terms of national priorities, the objective of 
developing and enhancing the forex market is likely to rank below the objective of, 
say, exchange rate stability for inflation control.  Further, it is possible that both of 
these economic objectives might be ranked below some other objectives – for 
example, one dictated by political or strategic considerations.  Whilst the political 
economy of such choices lies outside the scope of the current analysis, it may have a 
direct bearing on the question of when, and to what extent, greater flexibility might be 
allowed in the key VND/USD exchange rate on an on-going basis.19  In any event, 
unless and until such a permanent increase in exchange rate flexibility occurs, any 
improvements in the functioning and efficiency of the forex market in Vietnam will 
probably be quite limited. 
  
 
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

REFERENCES   
BIS (1996), (1999), Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives 
Market Activity (for the relevant year), Bank for International Payment, Basle. 
BIS (2002), (2005), (2007), Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and 
Derivatives Market Activity (for the relevant year), Bank of International 
Settlement, Basle. 
Camen, U. (2006), Monetary Policy in Vietnam: The Case of a Transition Country, 
BIS working paper, No. 31, Bank for International Settlement, Basel. 
Canales-Kriljenko, J. I. (2004), Foreign Exchange Market Organization in Selected 
Developing and Transition Economies: Evidence from a Survey, Working 
Paper, No. WP/04/4, International Monetary Fund, Washington. 
Dinh-Hai (2009), Dialogue between Banks and Businesses in Ho Chi Minh City: To 
Clear the Phenomenon of Holding Foreign Exchange by Businesses (in 
Vietnamese: Doi thoai ngan hang va doanh nghiep tai TP. Ho Chi Minh: Giai 
toa tinh trang gam giu ngoai te trong doanh nghiep), State Bank of Vietnam, 
viewed 10 June 2009 2009, 
http://www.sbv.gov.vn/vn/home/tinHDNH.jsp?tin=4708. 
Dwyer, L., Nguyen, D. T. & Rajapakse, S. (1996), 'The Volatility of Australia's 
Exchange Rate: A Synthesis', Economic Analysis and Policy, Vol. 26, No. 1, 
pp. 25-44. 
Fforde, A. & Vylder, S. D. (1996), From Plan to Market: The Economic Transition in 
Vietnam, Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado. 
GSO (2006), Statistical Yearbook of  Vietnam 2006, Statistics Publisher, Hanoi. 
Hai-Ly (2007), 'A Congestion in the US Dollar Flows (in Vietnamese: U mau ngoai 
te)', The Saigon Times, 20 December 2007, pp. 12-3. 
—— (2008), 'Underwater Waves in Foreign Exchange Market (in Vietnamese: Song 
Ngam Ngoai Te)', The Saigon Times, no. 17-2008, 17 April 2008, pp. 10-1. 
Harvey, C. R. & Morgenson, G. (2002), Dictionary of Money and Investing, Henry 
Holt & Company, Incorporated, New York. 
Hung-Phong (2009), Missing Business Opportunities due to Foreign Exchange Issue 
(in Vietnamese: 'Tuot' nhieu co hoi vi 'su co' ngoai te), VietnamNet, viewed 20 
May 2006 2009, http://www.vietnamnet.vn/kinhte/2009/05/847960/. 
Huynh-The-Du (2007), 'Impossible Trinity (in Vietnamese: Bộ ba bất khả thi)', The 
Saigon Times, no. 25-2007, 14 June 2007, pp. 52-3. 
IMF (1996), Vietnam Transition to a Market Economy, IMF Occasional Paper, No. 
135, International  Monetary Fund, Washington DC. 
Lan-Huong (2003), 'The Recent management of Foreign Exchange Control and 
Exchange Rate (in Vietnamese: Dieu hanh Chinh sach Ty gia Thoi gian qua)', 
Banking Journal, No. Special topics, pp. 69-70. 
Le-Huy-Trong (2004), 'Recent Foreign Exchange Control in Vietnam (in Vietnamese: 
Thuc trang ve quan ly ngoai hoi o Vietnam trong thoi gian qua) ', in Le-QuocLy (ed.), Foreign Exchange Control and Management of Exchange Rate in 
Vietnam (in Vietnamese: Quan ly ngoai hoi va dieu hanh ty gia hoi doai o Viet 
Nam), Statistics Publisher, Ha Noi, pp. 152-85. 
Le-Quoc-Ly (2004), Exchange Rate: Theoretical Issues and Practice of Managing in 
Vietnam (in Vietnamese: Ty gia hoi doai - Nhung van de ly luan va thuc tien 
dieu hanh o Vietnam), Statistics Publisher, Ha Noi. 
Le-Van-Te & Nguyen-Quoc-Khanh (2000), Some Issues Regarding the Exchange 
Rate Policy for Economic Development of Vietnam (in Vietnamese: Mot so 
 
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Van de ve Chinh sach Ty gia Hoi doai cho Muc tieu Phat trien Kinh te Viet 
Nam), Statistics Publisher, Ho Chi Minh City. 
Luu-Minh-Ngoc (2008), Interviewing through Yahoo!Messenger regarding the 
operation of the current forex market of Vietnam, 20 May 2008. 
Minh-Duc (2008), Exchange Rate Volatility: The State Bank of Vietnam is Capable to 
Intervene (in Vietnamese: Ty gia bien dong: Ngan hang Nha nuoc du suc can 
thiep), Vietnam Economic Times, viewed 20 August 2008, 
<http://vneconomy.vn/home/59336P0C6/ty-gia-bien-dong-ngan-hang-nhanuoc-du-kha-nang-can-thiep.htm>. 
Moosa, I. A. (2004), International Finance: An Analytical Approach, 2 edn, McGrawHill, Sydney. 
Muranaga, J. & Shimizu, T. (1999), Market Microstructure and Market Liquidity, 
Working paper, Bank for International Settlements, Basle. 
Nguyen-Dac-Hung (2003), 'Complicated Development in the Forex Market: Reasons 
and Impacts on Economic Activities (in Vietnamese: Bien dong phuc tap cua 
thi truong ngoai hoi: Nguyen nhan va anh huong toi hoat dong kinh te)', 
Vietnamese Securities, No. 11, pp. 24-5. 
Nguyen-Duc-Tho & Bandara, J. S. (1994), 'Economic Reforms in Vietnam', in D. T. 
Nguyen & K. C. Roy (eds), Economic Reform, Liberalisation and Trade in the 
Asia-Pacific Region, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, pp. 116-38. 
Nguyen-Tan (2008), ‘Businesses are experiencing a hard time because of the 
exchange rate (in Vietnamese: doanh nghiep kho vi ty gia) ', The Saigon 
Times, 26 June 2008, pp. 12-3. 
Nguyen-Thi-Kim-Anh & Pham-Thi-Hoang-Oanh (2007), 'The Use of Forex 
Derivatives for Hedging at Vietnamese Commercial Banks   ', paper presented 
to the Conference "Measures for Promoting Derivative Market in Vietnam", 
Committee of Banking Science and Technology, Department of Banking 
Development Strategy, The State Bank of Vietnam. 
Nguyen-Tran-Phuc (2009), The Foreign Exchange Market in Vietnam: Evolution, 
Current Structure, and Operational Characteristics, Working Paper, Griffith 
University, Brisbane. 
Nguyen-Tran-Phuc & Nguyen-Duc-Tho (2009), 'Exchange Rate Policy in Vietnam, 
1985-2008', ASEAN Economic Bulletin, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 137-63. 
Nguyen-Tri-Hung (1999), The Inflation of Vietnam in Transition, CAS Discussion 
Paper, No. 22, Centre for International Management and Development 
Antwerp, Centre for ASEAN Studies  
Nguyen-Trong-Tai (2006), 'Currency Option in Hedging Exchange Rate Risk (in 
Vietnamese: Hop dong quyen chon tien te trong phong ngua rui ro hoi doai) ', 
Banking Science and Training, Vol. , No. 50, pp. 28-31. 
Nguyen-Van-Tien (2002), Vietnam's Foreign Exchange Market Under Progress of 
International Integration, Statistics Publisher, Hanoi. 
—— (2006), Guidance on Forex Market and Forex Transactions (In Vietnamese: 
Cam Nang Thi Truong Ngoai Hoi va Cac Giao Dich Ngoai Hoi), Statistics 
Publisher, Hanoi. 
Pham-Do-Chi & Le-Viet-Duc (2003), 'A Decade of Doi Moi in Restrospect: 1989-99', 
in B. Tran-Nam & C. D. Pham (eds), The Vietnamese Economy: Awakening 
the Dormant Dragon, RoutledgeCurzon, London, pp. 30-52. 
Pham-Quoc-Trung (2008), The Forex Market: Businesses are Put at Double 
Disadvantages (in Vietnamese: Thi truong ngoai hoi: Doanh nghiep thiet don 
thiet kep), viewed 15 June 2008, 
 
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

<http://www.diendandoanhnghiep.com.vn/Desktop.aspx/TinTuc/Phantich_Nh
andinh/Doanh_nghiep_thiet_don_thiet_kep/>. 
Pham-Xuan-Nam (2007), 'Vietnam: 20 Years of Socioeconomic Renewal', Social 
Sciences Information Review, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 3-10. 
Quang-Phuong (2008), Keeping the Objetive of Controlling Inflation, Ensuring Social 
Welfare (in Vietnamese: Tiep tuc muc tieu kiem che lam phat, bao dam an sinh 
xa hoi), SGGP, viewed 4 June 2008, 
http://www.sggp.org.vn/chinhtri/2008/6/154356/. 
Sarr, A. & Lybek, T. (2002), Measuring Liquidity in Financial Markets, IMF 
Working Paper, No. WP/02/232, International Monetary Fund, Washington, 
DC. 
SBV (1999)-(2007), Annual Report (for the relevant year), The State Bank of 
Vietnam, Hanoi. 
—— (2009), Stabilizing the Foreign Exchange Market to Promote Socio-Economic 
Development (in Vietnamesse: On dinh thi truong ngoai hoi de phat trien kinh 
te xa hoi), The State Bank of Vietnam, viewed 20 May 2009 2009, 
http://www.sbv.gov.vn/vn/home/tinHDNH.jsp?tin=4686. 
Song-Linh (2008), There Is no Reason for Predicting a Devaluation of the Dong up to 
40% (In Vietnamese: Du doan dong Viet Nam pha gia toi 40% la khong co co 
so), VNExpress, viewed 6 June 2008, http://www.vnexpress.net/GL/Kinhdoanh/2008/06/3BA03103/. 
Tran-Nga (2008), The Flexible Unknown of the Exchange Rate (in Vietnamese: An so 
linh hoat cua ty gia), Tai Chinh Vietnam, viewed 14 July 2007, 
www.taichinhvietnam.com. 
Truong-Van-Phuoc (2006), 'The Choice of Relevant Regime and the Management of 
Exchange Rate Policy of Vietnam under the Process of Economic Integration 
(in Vietnamese: Lua chon co che phu hop va dieu hanh chinh sach ty gia hoi 
doai cua Viet Nam trong qua trinh hoi nhap)', Phd, University of Economics of 
Ho Chi Minh City. 
VCB (2002)-(2006), Annual Report (for the relevant year), Vietcombank, Hanoi. 
Vo-Dai-Luoc (2004), 'Vietnam's Economic Renovation Along Socialist-Oriented 
Market Economy', paper presented to the International Policy Conference on 
Transition Economies, Ha Noi. 
Vo-Tri-Thanh, Dinh-Hien-Minh, Do-Xuan-Truong, Hoang-Van-Thanh & Pham-ChiQuang (2000), 'Exchange Rate Arrangement in Vietnam: Information Cotent 
and Policy Options', East Asian Development Network (EADN) - Individual 
Research Project. 
Vo-Tri-Thanh & Pham-Tri-Quang (2008), Managing Capital Flows: The Case of 
Vietnam, Discussion Paper, No. 105, Asian Development Bank Institute, 
Tokyo. 
Vu-Thuy-Trang (2007), 'Developing a Currency Futures Market in Vietnam', Banking 
University of Ho Chi Minh City. 
Xin, W. (2004), 'Problems and Countermeasures in China's Foreign Exchange 
Market', China and World Economy, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 62-74. 
Zhang, J. & Liang, Y. (2006), 'The Institutional and Structural Problems of China's 
Foreign Exchange and Implications for the New Exchange Rate Regime', 
China: an Internatinal Journal, Vol. 4, No. 1, p. 26. 
 
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

 
The Foreign Exchange Market in Vietnam, 1986-2008:  
A Market Microstructure Approach 
  
Tables and Figures 
 
 
Table 1 
Average Daily Turnover on Forex Market in Vietnam and Selected Countries,  
1995-2007 (USD billion) 
  
1995 
1998 
2001 
2004 
2007 
United Kingdom 
171
161
167
238 
429
United States 
73
148
98
159 
278
Japan 
73
42
48
64 
67
Australia 
17
20
16
16 
61
Singapore 
27
22
24
26 
35
Hong Kong 
23
0
18
17 
28
India 
n.a
1.34
2.84
5.62 
21.15
South Korea 
n.a
0.46
7.11
13.77 
21.11
China 
n.a
0.21
0.19
0.61 
9.10
Thailand 
n.a
1.75
1.12
1.77 
3.88
Malaysia 
n.a
1.68
0.92
1.01 
2.16
Philippines 
n.a
0.46
0.87
0.51 
1.97
Indonesia 
n.a
0.72
1.78
1.04 
1.85
Vietnam 
0.02
0.03
0.07
0.12 
0.15*
Note:  Data shown for all countries except Vietnam relate to daily averages for the month of 
April, include spot, forward and swap transactions, and exclude cross-border 
transactions.  For Vietnam, data relate to daily averages for the entire year, and include 
both local inter-bank transactions and client-market transactions. 
    
(*) 2006 
Sources: BIS (1996, 1999, 2002, 2005, 2007); SBV (1999-2007); Nguyen Van Tien (2006);  
Authors’ estimation.   
 
 
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Table 2 
Ratio of Forex Market Turnover to Foreign Trade Volume 
(based on daily averages), percent 
  
1995 
1998 
2001 
2004 
2007 
United Kingdom 
121.1
99.2
102.4
108.1 
146.3
Australia 
53.5
59.4
46.2
29.5 
72.3
United States 
19.5
32.8
18.5
24.4 
31.4
India 
n.a
7.0
11.2
11.9 
23.6
Singapore 
40.7
37.4
37.0
26.1 
22.2
Japan 
33.9
22.9
22.8
22.6 
18.4
Hongkong 
22.4
0.5
16.4
11.9 
14.0
South Korea 
n.a
0.7
8.8
10.4 
10.4
Philippines 
n.a
2.7
4.6
2.2 
6.3
Thailand 
n.a
6.5
3.2
3.3 
4.8
Indonesia 
n.a
3.0
6.8
3.0 
3.1
Malaysia 
n.a
4.6
2.1
1.6 
2.4
China 
n.a
0.2
0.1
0.2 
1.5
Vietnam 
0.6
0.6
0.8
0.8 
0.6*
Note:  The notes for Table 1 are also applicable to data for forex market turnover used in 
calculating the figures shown in this table.  
 
(*) 2006 
Sources:     BIS (1996, 1999, 2002, 2005, 2007); The IMF's International Financial Statistics 
(Online), SBV (1999-2007); GSO (2006); Nguyen Van Tien (2006); Authors’ 
estimation.   
 
 
Table 3 
 Share of Interbank Transactions in Total Forex Market Turnover 
 
1998 
2001
2004 
2007 
India 
 
 
 
 
         Both cross-border and local transactions 
82%
76%
70% 
78% 
         Local transactions only 
71%
71%
66% 
64% 
Indonesia 
 
 
 
 
         Both cross-border and local transactions 
79%
94%
83% 
69% 
         Local transactions only 
65%
90%
64% 
55% 
Malaysia 
 
 
 
 
         Both cross-border and local transactions 
92%
75%
71% 
86% 
         Local transactions only 
79%
76%
60% 
80% 
Philippines 
 
 
 
 
         Both cross-border and local transactions 
84%
77%
80% 
94% 
         Local transactions only 
76%
69%
73% 
93% 
Thailand 
 
 
 
 
         Both cross-border and local transactions 
81%
81%
70% 
77% 
         Local transactions only 
76%
69%
73% 
93% 
Vietnam 
 
 
         Local transactions only 
11%
11%
9% 
14%*
Note: (*) 2006 
Sources: BIS (1996, 1999, 2002, 2005, 2007); SBV (1999-2007); Nguyen Van Tien (2006); 
Authors’ calculation.    
 
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

 
Table 4 
Share of Forward and Swap Transactions  
in Total Forex Market Turnover for Vietnamese Banks, 1998-2006 
 
Share of Forwards and Swaps Combined 
Year 
All Vietnamese 
banks 
Banks located  
in Ho Chi Minh City 
1998 
10.6% 
4.6% 
1999 
2.8% 
4.7% 
2000 
5.5% 
5.6% 
2001 
5.6% 
5.4% 
2002 
5.6% 
5.5% 
2003 
4.9% 
7.4% 
2004 
5.2% 
8.2% 
2005 
5.5% 
6.6% 
2006 
5.6% 
n.a 
 
Source:  Adapted from Nguyen Thi Kim Anh and Pham Thi Hoang Oanh (2007) and Vu Thuy 
Trang (2007) 
 
 
 
 
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

 
Table 5 
Shares of Forward and Swap Transactions  
in Total Forex Market Turnover for Selected Asian Emerging Economies, 
Selected Years 
 
1998
2001
2004 
2007 
China 
 
 
 
 
     Both cross-border and local transactions 
n.a.
n.a.
n.a. 
10% 
     Local transactions only 
2%
5%
n.a. 
10% 
India 
 
 
 
 
     Both cross-border and local transactions 
53%
54%
49% 
58% 
     Local transactions only 
62%
55%
49% 
61% 
Indonesia 
 
 
 
 
     Both cross-border and local transactions 
53%
13%
57% 
40% 
     Local transactions only 
53%
13%
44% 
49% 
Malaysia 
 
 
 
 
     Both cross-border and local transactions 
70%
63%
50% 
51% 
     Local transactions only 
74%
70%
59% 
62% 
Philippines 
 
 
 
 
     Both cross-border and local transactions 
53%
57%
49% 
53% 
     Local transactions only 
53%
61%
48% 
55% 
Thailand 
 
 
 
 
     Both cross-border and local transactions 
71%
69%
60% 
78% 
     Local transactions only 
70%
71%
66% 
80% 
Vietnam 
 
 
     Local transactions only 
11%
6%
5% 
6%*
 
Note: (*) 2006 
Source:  BIS (1996, 1999, 2002, 2005, 2007); Data for China for years 1998 and 2001 are 
taken from Zhang and Liang (2006); Data for Vietnam are adapted from  from 
Nguyen Thi Kim Anh and Pham Thi Hoang Oanh (2007); Authors’ calculations. 
  
 
Table 6 
Average Retail Forex Bid-Ask Spread at Vietcombank,  
2002-2009 (Percentage of Mid Rate) 
 
 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009*
 Mean 
0.001 
0.000 
0.000
0.001
0.022
0.032
0.098 
0.065
 Median 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.025
0.012 
0.000
 Maximum 
0.032 
0.026 
0.013
0.019
0.118
0.279
0.748 
0.726
 Minimum 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000 
0.000
 Std. Dev. 
0.005 
0.003 
0.001
0.003
0.032
0.033
0.145 
0.147
 Skewness 
4.76 
9.02 
16.06
3.80
1.25
2.94
1.56 
2.90
 Kurtosis 
24.96 
82.34 
259.00
17.59
3.34
17.99
4.96 
11.77
Observations 
253 
253 
 261
252
252
259
249 
76
* Data for 2009 cover the period up to 29 April 2009 only  
Note:  Calculations are based on daily data.   
Sources: The website of Vietcombank, viewed from 10 March  2008 to 30 August 2008 
<www.vcb.com.vn>; Authors’ calculations. 
 
 
 
 
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Table 7 
Average Inter-bank Forex Bid-Ask Spread in Selected Countries, 
1998-2001 (Percentage of Mid Rate) 
 
 
1998 
1999 
2000 
Oct. 11, 
2001 
Canada 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
n.a. 
Malaysia 
0.36 
0.08 
0.03 
n.a. 
Singapore 
0.12 
0.05 
0.04 
0.05 
Australia 
0.09 
0.08 
0.09 
n.a. 
South Africa 
0.19 
0.12 
0.10 
0.10 
Mexico 
0.22 
0.18 
0.13 
0.14 
South Korea 
0.04 
0.10 
0.19 
0.03 
Indonesia 
2.38 
0.86 
0.53 
0.43 
Thailand 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
0.16 
Philippines 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
0.08 
China 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
0.00 
Source: Adapted from Sarr  and Lybek (2002). 
 
 
 
 
Table 8 
Average volatility (RMSPE) in month-end data (%) 
  
Jan 92- 
Dec 94 
Jan 95- 
Dec 96 
Jan 97- 
Dec 98 
Jan 99- 
Dec 01 
Jan 02- 
Dec 03 
Jan 04- 
Dec 07 
 VND/USD 
0.7 
0.2 
2.0 
0.4 
0.2 
0.2 
CNY/USD 
5.7 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.5 
THB/USD 
0.4 
0.5 
9.1 
2.5 
1.3 
1.5 
JPY/USD 
2.6 
3.7 
5.0 
2.9 
2.2 
2.3 
USD/GBP 
3.8 
1.8 
1.9 
1.9 
2.5 
2.1 
NEER for VN 
n.a 
1.3 
3.3 
1.2 
1.3 
0.9 
NEER for the US 
1.4 
1.2 
1.4 
0.9 
1.3 
1.1 
NEER for China 
5.4 
1.1 
1.7 
0.9 
1.2 
1.1 
Source: Nguyen Tran Phuc and Nguyen Duc Tho (2009) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Table 9 
Changes in the Trading Band around the Official Exchange Rate  
 
Date of Change 
Trading Band 
Mar-1989 
    ± 
 5.00%  
16/08/1991 
    + 
 0.50%  
02/07/1994 
    + 
 0.10%  
03/10/1994 
    ± 
 0.50%  
21/11/1996 
    ±  
 1.00%  
27/02/1997 
    ±  
 5.00%  
13/10/1997 
    ±  10.00%  
10/01/1998 
    + 
10.00%  
06/08/1998 
    + 
7.00%  
25/02/1999 
    + 
0.10%  
01/07/2002 
    ±  
0.25%  
02/01/2007 
    ±  
0.50%  
24/12/2007 
    ±  
0.75%  
10/03/2008 
    ±  
1.00%  
27/06/2008 
    ±  
2.00%  
07/11/2008 
    ±  
3.00%  
24/03/2009 
     ± 
5.00% 
 
 
Source: Various Decisions by the SBV from 1989 to 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

 
Figure 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nominal VND/USD rate, 1985-2008
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
Year
VND per USD
Note: Period average rate 
Source: The IMF's International Financial Statistics (Online). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 
International Trade Volume and Turnover on Forex Markets, 
1995-2006
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
'95
'96
'97
'98
'99
'00
'01
'02
'03
'04
'05
06
Year
USD Billion
International trade (tw o-w ay)
Total forex market turnover 
Client market turnover
 
Source: SBV (1999-2006); GSO (2006); Nguyen Van Tien (2006); Authors’ estimation.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Figure 3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allowable Variations around Official Exchange Rate, 
Mar 1989 - June 2009
-11%
-6%
-1%
4%
9%
Mar-89
Mar-91
Mar-93
Mar-95
Mar-97
Ma
Upper band
Note: There was no stipulated lower band for the periods Aug 91–Sept 94 and Jan 98–Jun 02 
 
Source: Various Decisions by the SBV from 1989 to 2009 
  
  
 
Figure 4 
Daily Official Exchange  Rate, Upper and Lower Bounds, 
and Bank Ask Rate, Jul 04 - Dec 06
15600
15800
16000
16200
1/07/04
1/01/05
1/07/05
1/01/06
1/07/06
Date
VND per USD
Offcial Rate
Low er Bound
Upper Bound
Ask Rate
 
 
Source:  Various Decisions by the SBV from 2002 to 2009; the website of the SBV 
<www.sbv.gov.vn > and Vietcombank (www.vcb.com.vn >, viewed from 10 March  
2008 to 31 May 2009 ; Authors’ calculations. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
r-99
Mar-01
Mar-03
Mar-05
Mar-07
Mar-09
Lower band
Feb 1999
Asian Financial 
Crisis
World Financial 
Crisis
Aug 1991
 
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Figure 5 
 
Official Exchange Rate, Upper and Lower Bounds, 
and Bank Ask Rate, Jan 07- Jun 09
15700
16100
16500
16900
17300
17700
2/1/07
2/7/07
2/1/08
2/7/08
2/1/09
Date
VND per USD
Offcial Rate
Low er Bound
Upper Bound
Ask Rate
 
 
Source:  Various Decisions by the SBV from 2002 to 2009; the website of the SBV 
<www.sbv.gov.vn > and Vietcombank (www.vcb.com.vn >, viewed from 10 March  
2008 to 18 June 2009 ; Authors’ calculations. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China: Official Rate, Its Bounds, 
and Commercial Bank Selling Rate, Jul 07-Dec 07
720
730
740
750
760
770
2/07/2007
2/08/2007
2/09/2007
2/10/2007
2/11/2007
2/12/2007
Date
CNY/USD100
Official Rate
Bank selling rate
Low er bound
Upper bound
 
Source:  the website of the Bank of China < www.boc.cn/en/>  viewed from 10 May  2009 
to 15 July 2009 ; Authors’ calculations. 
 
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

 
 
 
Figure 7 
Official Rate, Its Bounds, Commercial Bank Selling Rate, 
and Parallel Market Selling Rate, Jan 08 -Apr 09
15,500
16,000
16,500
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
2/01/08
28/03/08
1/07/08
24/09/08
18/12/08
24/03/09
Date
Daily VND/USD
Low er Bound
Official Rate
Upper Bound
Bank Selling Rate
Parallel Market Selling Rate
 
Source: SBV, the Banking Association of Vietnam, Vietcombank, and VNexpress.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 
Ratio of Parallel Market Rate to Official Exchange Rate, 
1985-1989
7.67
23.61
5.64
5.56
1.10
0
5
10
15
20
25
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
 
 
Source: Le Van Te and Nguyen Quoc Khanh  (2000); Authors’ calculations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

 
 Figure 9 
 
Movement of VND/USD Exchange Rates and Parallel Market 
Premium, Jan 1990 - Dec 1991
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Jan-90
Jul-90
Jan-91
Jul-91
VND per USD
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Parallel market premium
Average parallel 
market rate (LHS)
Average official 
rate (LHS)
Parallel market 
premium (RHS)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Nguyen Van Tien (2002) ; Authors’ calculations. 
  
 
 
 
Figure 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Estimates of the Extent of Overvaluation of the VND
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
Parallel Market Premium
Computed from Cross Rates 
VND/EUR
 
Source:  The websites of OANDA corporation <www.oanda.com>  and  Vietcombank 
<www.vcb.com.vn >, viewed from 10 March  2008 to 12 June 2009 ; Authors’ 
calculations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

Figure 11 
 
Allowable Exchange Rate Band and Quoted Bid-Ask Spread, 
Jan 2002-June 2009 
0%
2%
4%
6%
1/1/02
1/1/03
1/1/04
1/1/05
1/1/06
1/1/07
1/1/08
1/1/09
Date
Allow able Exchange Rate Band
Quoted Bid-Ask Spread
 
 
Source:  Various Decisions by the SBV from 2002 to 2009; the website of the SBV 
<www.sbv.gov.vn > and Vietcombank <www.vcb.com.vn >, viewed from 10 March 
2008 to 18 June 2009; Authors’ calculations. 
 
 
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162

NOTES 
                                                 
1  In 2008, the annual inflation rate again increased to 23.0 percent, compared with rates in the range of 
-1.6 to 8.3 percent in the previous ten years. 
2 As discussed in Sub-section 4.2, however, it is not clear exactly how this average rate is calculated. 
3 There were originally four state-owned specialized banks, each providing banking services to a 
designated sphere of economic activity. 
4 Initially, the Bank for Foreign Trade of Vietnam (“Vietcombank”) was the only bank licensed to 
conduct banking activities in foreign exchange and international payments, and to maintain accounts 
with overseas banks. 
5 The authorities undertook the task of rationing administratively the amount of foreign exchange 
available, with all the attendant inefficiencies (Le Quoc Ly 2004).  This task became exceedingly 
difficult in the presence of the huge gap between the official exchange rate and the parallel market rate, 
serious trade deficits and continuing expectations of high inflation.   
6 The IMF (2006, p. 36) in its description of the evolution of Vietnam’s exchange rate regime refers to 
this period as the phase of the SBV “following” the market, when the government explicitly aimed at 
narrowing the gap between the official rate and the parallel market rate. 
7 Unless otherwise stated, the dollar sign ($) indicates US dollars. 
8 The foreign exchange surrender requirement makes it compulsory for businesses to sell a proportion 
of their forex revenues to commercial banks upon receipt.  Before September 1998, businesses that 
generated revenues in foreign currency could hold a certain proportion for their business activities as 
per their plans of receipts and expenditures; the remainder must be sold to commercial banks.  In 1999, 
the proportion to be surrendered was standardized.  It was initially set at 80 percent, but has been 
gradually reduced.  It has been set at zero since 2003. 
9 Nguyen Dac Hung (2005, p. 34) reported that the SBV bought and sold $3.54 billion of foreign 
currency in this year.  The figure presented in the text is an estimate based on this volume of SBV 
trading.   
10 As yet there are no forex brokers in Vietnam. 
11 In 2008, Vietcombank was “equitized”, i.e., it became a joint-stock commercial bank, with 
shareholdings owned by both the state (about 90 percent) and the public.  
12 In calculating this and similar market shares, the SBV is typically excluded.  
13 In 2003, the SBV approved for this bank to act as a pilot bank in designing and offering option 
contracts to customers as a response to the strong appreciations of the euro against the US dollar at the 
time, which were generating exchange rate risk for those businesses having international payables 
denominated in the euro. 
14 In the following discussion, for brevity we shall focus mainly on cases of excess demand for foreign 
currency.  The opposite case – an excess supply of foreign currency – can be treated analytically as an 
equivalent excess demand for the domestic currency. 
15 For simplicity and clarity, in this figure we have excluded observations where either variable was 
less than 2 percent – these would simply show up as a lot of bunched-together observations.  However, 
the correlation coefficient reported is based on all observations.  
16 In these cases, the forward contract would be used mainly as a hedge against the risk of illiquidity 
rather than the risk of unfavourable changes in the exchange rate. 
17 Forex swaps could also be used for similar purposes. 
18 The survey of administrative measures adopted to support the stability in the VND/USD rate, and 
banking practices developed to deal with the resultant excess demand for USDs, was current as of 
around December 2008.  
19 By this, we mean to exclude temporary episodes of de facto floating, such as those associated with 
the Asian Financial Crisis, which tend to end soon after the relevant contingency has passed.  Whether 
the recent increases in exchange rate flexibility (following the Global Financial Crisis) will persist or 
not is an open question. 
 
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1461162
