 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 1  
 
 
A volume-weighted-average-price (VWAP) 
method for estimating beta in the context of 
reference-day risk. 
 
Keshav Sahadev 
Mike Ward 
Chris Muller 
 
Gordon Institute of Business Science 
University of Pretoria 
South Africa 
 
Partially funded by a National Research Foundation Grant 
 
February 2018 
 
Abstract 
The ability to accurately estimate systematic risk (or beta) when reference-day risk is considered is an 
ineluctable requirement for all applications of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM).  
This research documents evidence of reference-day risk for shares on the Johannesburg All Share Index. In 
response to the need for greater accuracy when estimating systematic risk, this paper contributes a volumeweighted-average-price (VWAP) method for estimating beta which may be employed when reference-day risk 
is considered.  
Furthermore, this research applies a graphical time-series approach to test the underlying risk-reward tenet 
postulated by the CAPM. Using beta as a measure of systematic risk, this research finds that the CAPM appears 
to imperfectly specify the risk-reward trade-off. 
 
Keywords: Beta, reference-day risk, VWAP 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 2  
 
Introduction 
The risk-reward tradeoff has been a prominent focus for empirical finance literature and investment practitioners 
since the 1950s. The parsimony of this risk-reward relationship is intuitively captured by the capital asset pricing 
model (CAPM), jointly ascribed to Markowitz (1952; 1956; 1959), Treynor (1961), Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965) 
and Mossin (1966) for their respective contributions to its development.  
The CAPM describes a simple linear model for estimating the expected return on an asset in terms of its 
systematic risk, and by doing so, provides a formal relationship between risk and return (Fama & French, 2004; 
Ward & Muller, 2012). The CAPM can be expressed as: 
E(Ri) = Rf + βi (E(Rm) −Rf) 
 (Equation 1) 
Where;  
E(Ri) is the expected return on the share (asset), 
Rf is the risk-free rate of interest, such as interest arising from government bonds,  
E(Rm) is the expected return of the market, and  
βi is the “beta” (a term originally coined by Sharpe (1964)) and represents the systematic risk component of an 
asset, as specified by the CAPM. In essence, beta describes the sensitivity of the expected excess returns of 
an asset to the expected excess returns earned by the market, and is expressed as; 
βi = Cov (Ri, Rm)
Var (Rm) 
(Equation 2) 
where Cov (Ri, Rm) is the covariance between the return on asset i and the return on the market portfolio, using 
historical data (Chen & Reeves, 2012; Heymans & Brewer, 2015). Simply stated, the CAPM emphasises that 
the risk of an asset is a function of its beta (Gonzalez, Rodriguez & Stein, 2014).  
Equivalently, Fama and Macbeth (1973) suggest a method for estimating beta by using a rolling linear regression 
of individual share returns on market returns (monthly), typically over a five-year period. By convention, monthly 
returns are estimated by constructing a series of consecutive monthly closing prices, typically using the last date 
of each month as data points in the series, over a five-year period. Thereafter, each of the monthly share and 
market returns are computed by estimating the log returns between the closing prices over the period. This 
method is commonly referred to as the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression method. For the purposes of 
this paper, we will refer to the OLS regression method as the convention for estimating beta.  
Since its development, the CAPM in its simplicity and intuition, was not earnestly questioned until the publication 
of a paper by Fama and French (1992), who suggested that if assets are priced rationally, then share risks are 
not one-dimensional (i.e. exclusively a function of beta) but rather, multi-dimensional. This finding was radical in 
the field of systematic risk estimation, especially given the extensive use of beta and the CAPM in academia 
and practice. Despite the theoretical and practical appeal of the CAPM however, the empirical evidence in 
support of the model is at best, weak (Ward & Muller, 2012). Most of this criticism has emanated from 
investigations focused on beta. Studies conducted by Fabozzi and Francis (1978), Collins, Ledolter and Rayburn 
(1987), Faff and Brooks (1996), and Brooks, Faff, Gangemi and Lee (1997) have analysed a variety of financial 
markets and found evidence of beta instability. In other words, the findings suggest that beta coefficients move 
randomly through time rather than remain stable, as the OLS regression model presumes. Furthermore, Novak 
(2015) suggests that the conventional method for estimating beta has also been criticised for low explanatory 
power in explaining share returns. Along with the estimation criticism, Fama and French (1992; 2004), van 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 3  
 
Rensburg and Robertson (2003), Montier (2009), Strugnell, Gilbert and Kruger (2011) and Ward and Muller 
(2012), suggest that there is essentially little to no evidence of a positive, linear relationship between systematic 
risk and returns. In contrast, research has found that there is an inverse relationship between systematic risk 
and return when one approximates systematic risk using beta, a finding which is unequivocally contradictory to 
the underlying tenet of the CAPM (Montier, 2009; Ward and Muller, 2012). According to Novak (2015), the wave 
of literature documenting the low explanatory power of beta and the inverse relationship documented by some 
authors has led some to proclaim beta “dead”. One of the foremost criticisms against beta is the concept of 
reference-day risk.  
In a seminal paper, Acker and Duck (2007) introduced the concept of “reference-day risk” to refer to large 
sampling variations and estimation risks that can be detected in share returns, variances and share betas, and 
which is simply attributable to the choice of an initial reference day when calculating monthly share returns. In 
summary, reference-day risk creates additional uncertainty for investors and finance practitioners and leads to 
inadvertent or unwarranted outcomes based on beta estimates. As a result, reference-day risk has become one 
of the most preeminent research areas to gain momentum in recent years, as it has significant implications for 
accurate beta estimation. Investigations conducted by Acker and Duck (2007), Dimitrov and Govindaraj (2007), 
Gonzalez et al (2014), and Baker, Rajaratnam and Flint (2016) have all evidenced that by using any five-year 
sample, and selecting one day of the first month as the reference day to construct a series of monthly returns, 
different choices for the reference day produce large variations in estimated betas. 
The findings from the original investigation by Acker and Duck (2007) have prompted significant research into 
developing and testing alternative, independent-reference-day methods for estimating beta. Among the beta 
estimation methods tested, were the Blume (1971) regression method, the Dimson (1979) adjustment for thin 
trading, the Vasicek (1973) Bayesian beta estimate and the t-distribution method for adjusting beta as developed 
by Cademartori, Romo, Campos and Galea (2003). Out of these, only the method prescribed by Cademartori et 
al (2003) yielded any promising result for accurately estimating systematic risk when reference-day risk is 
considered.  
This paper aims to resurrect the systematic risk parameter, beta, by contributing a volume-weighted-averageprice (VWAP) estimate for beta which can be employed in the context of reference day risk. To achieve this, this 
research first evidences the degree to which reference-day risk leads to variations in beta for shares on the JSE 
ALSI. Thereafter, estimates of beta using the VWAP methodology are statistically tested to determine the 
robustness and applicability of applying the VWAP method as a variation to the conventional method of 
estimating beta.  
Lastly, this research transcends prior research investigations of a similar nature by determining whether the 
reference-day-independent beta adheres to the underlying tenets of the CAPM. This is achieved by employing 
a graphical time-series analysis to observe whether VWAP betas are a more reliable representation of 
systematic risk in the risk-return tradeoff.  
Consequently, an appropriate methodology is derived to test each of these objectives.  
This paper is therefore organised as follows. The following section reviews the literature on the subject. 
Thereafter, the sample, methodology and results are detailed and discussed. The last section offers concluding 
comments and guidelines for future research.  
Literature review 
Reference-day risk and the mitigation of it thereof, is one of the most contemporary issues contributing to 
financial literature intended for accurate beta measurement. The results of the original investigation by Acker 
and Duck (2007) have prompted significant research into developing and testing alternative, independentreference-day methods for estimating beta. Among the methods most tested were the Blume (1971) regression 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 4  
 
method, the Vasicek (1973) Bayesian beta and the Dimson (1979) adjustment for thin trading. This section 
presents some of the empirical literature describing reference-day risk and the variations that different choices 
of reference day have on beta estimates. We begin with a brief overview of the three commonly used adjustment 
methods. 
The Blume regression method for estimating beta 
In 1971, Marshall E. Blume set out to examine the stationarity of the conventional beta estimate over time and 
to propose a method of obtaining improved assessments of systematic risk. By using the conventional estimation 
method, Blume (1971) created portfolios of shares according to the magnitude of estimated betas. Blume then 
estimated the betas for the resultant portfolios across two, non-overlapping consecutive periods. Blume’s results 
indicate a tendency for the high-risk portfolios (i.e. portfolios with the high beta estimates) to decline 
monotonically towards a mean of 1, whereas the lower-risk portfolios tend upwards towards a mean of 1 over 
time (Blume, 1971; Baker et al, 2016). 
Blume (1971) uses the betas generated from the two consecutive, non-overlapping periods to estimate 
“predicted betas” for a third, non-overlapping period. This is done by regressing the estimated values of beta (βi) 
in one period on the values estimated in the previous period (βi–1) to yield a modified estimate for the assessment 
of future systematic risk. This relationship is represented by the equation; 
βi = a + bβi–1 + et  
 
(Equation 3) 
where; 
βi is the beta in one period, 
βi–1 is the beta in the preceding period, 
a and b are regression coefficients, and 
et is a zero-mean error term (Baker et al, 2016). 
The mean squared errors for the adjusted and unadjusted beta estimates are compared to the beta estimates 
generated using the conventional estimation method. The research conducted by Blume (1971) concludes that 
for both individual shares and portfolios of two or more shares, the estimates adjusted for the historical rate of 
regression are more accurate than the unadjusted estimates. 
The Dimson adjustment for thin trading 
Dimson (1979) uses the findings of Fisher (1966) to propose an adjustment method to beta estimation when 
shares are subject to infrequent trading. Fisher (1966) suggests that a major source of bias in estimating beta 
emanates from the tendency of shares which are subject to thin trading having substantially underestimated 
covariances. Fisher (1966) also proved that the downward bias in the covariance of frequently traded shares is 
less significant when compared to infrequently traded shares. The findings of this investigation formed the 
premise for Dimson’s (1979) Aggregate Coefficients (AC) method for estimating the systematic risk of a share.  
Dimson’s (1979) AC method asserts that the true systematic risk parameter beta (𝛽̂) can be obtained from price 
data which is subject to infrequent trading by regressing observed share returns on lagged, synchronous and 
leading market returns. The regression equation is given by the expression; 
𝑅t̂ = 𝛼̂ + ∑𝛽k̂ 𝑀̂t+k + 𝜀t,
𝑛
𝑘=−𝑛
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Equation 
5) 
 
 
where; 
𝑅t̂ represents the observed share returns, 
𝑀t+k represents the lagged, synchronous and leading market returns 
𝛼̂ and 𝛽k̂ are the estimated intercept and slope coefficients, respectively and 
𝜀t is a zero-mean error term (Dimson, 1979). 
Subsequently, the systematic risk parameter beta (β) is calculated as the sum of the aggregate coefficients in 
Equation 5. Thus,  
𝛽̂ = ∑𝛽k̂
𝑛
𝑘=−𝑛
 
(Equation 6) 
Dimson (1973) compares the beta estimates derived using the AC method against the conventional regression 
method. After controlling for and simplifying assumptions to allow comparison across methods, Dimson 
concludes that the AC method is a more efficient beta estimation method as the conventional regression method 
is significantly biased for shares which are thinly traded. 
The Vasicek Bayesian method for beta estimation 
Using Bayesian Decision Theory, Vasicek (1973) presented a method for generating Bayesian estimates for 
beta. According to Vasicek (1973), Bayesian Decision Theory provides formal procedures which makes use of 
information available prior to sampling, in conjunction with the sample information, to construct optimal estimates 
which minimise the expected error.  
In deriving the Bayesian beta estimate, Vasicek (1973) argues that the properties of the standard OLS beta 
parameter do not reasonably reflect the required properties of a beta estimator. Specifically, the conventional 
estimator assumes the property; 
𝐸(𝑏|𝛽) = 𝛽 
which describes the mean value of beta, with the conjoint assumption that the true value for beta is known. 
Vasicek (1973) challenges the assumption that the true value of beta is known and described by the mean of 
the estimator. In other words, one would not require an estimator (b) if the true value of beta (β) is known. 
Vasicek (1973) therefore hypothesises that the reverse of this is true; it is the sample coefficient (b) which is 
known and on this basis, one can infer about the distribution of the parameter, beta (β).  
Vasicek (1973) therefore suggests that given the normal prior distribution with mean b΄ and variance s΄2b, the 
distribution of β is approximately normal, with mean b΄΄ and variance s΄΄2b, and b is the conventional estimate of 
systematic risk and; 
𝑏΄΄ = 
(𝑏΄/𝑠΄2b+ 𝑏/𝑠2b)
(1/𝑠΄2b + 1/𝑠2b)
 ,  
𝑠2b = 
𝑠2
∑(𝑀t− 𝑀̅)2
 , 
𝑠΄΄2b = 
1
(1/𝑠΄2b + 1/𝑠2b)
 , 
𝑠2 =
∑(𝑅t− 𝛼̂− 𝑏𝑀t)2
(𝑇−2)
 , 
where t is the time step, with t = 1, 2, …, T (Baker et al, 2016).  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 6  
 
According to Vasicek (1973), the Bayesian estimate for the systematic risk parameter, beta, is given by the 
mean of the distribution b΄΄ and describes the knowledge about the distribution of the estimated beta, given the 
information from the sample and the prior information.  
Lastly, Vasicek (1973) asserts that Bayesian estimates are preferred to the conventional beta estimates as the 
Bayesian procedure minimises the loss of accuracy arising from misestimation. In contrast, the conventional 
estimates minimise the error of sampling. Furthermore, in addition to the sample information, the Bayesian 
estimates incorporates prior information is the estimation of systematic risk (Vasicek, 1973).  
Estimating beta when reference-day risk is considered 
Acker and Duck (2007) were the first to demonstrate the existence of reference-day risk associated with monthly 
returns implicit in shares listed on the S&P500 Index and set out to explore the level of reference-day risk implicit 
in estimates of beta.  
Using data from a sample of 459 companies sourced through Datastream, Acker and Duck (2007) examined 
data for a 15 year period, across three five-year sub-intervals. They prove that estimates of beta are highly 
sensitive to the choice of reference day. In extreme cases, the choice of reference-day can significantly amplify 
the estimate of a share’s beta as well as alter the sign of beta estimates. Drawing on the sample of listed 
companies on the S&P500, the authors present evidence of a share’s beta falling by 0.931 and rising by 3.454 
depending on the choice of reference-day. Perhaps more pertinent to this paper, is the finding that approximately 
75% of all observed betas estimated using the conventional methodology could be classified as either positive 
or negative by an appropriate choice of reference day. This finding has profound ramifications for both academia 
and industry, as it renders risk-adjusted asset selection using conventional beta estimates impractical, 
inconsequential and insufficient for portfolio construction.  
Acker and Duck (2007) thereafter commence with investigating whether the Blume (1971) regression method, 
the Vasicek (1973) Bayesian beta and the Dimson (1979) adjustment for thin trading reduces the variation and 
range of beta estimates for which the unadjusted beta is highly sensitive to the choice of reference day.  
The authors report that the Blume (1971) regression method reduces only the most severe reference-day 
variability. Similarly, the Vasicek (1973) Bayesian estimation method also reduces the range and variation of 
beta estimates for shares which have high sensitivity to the selection of a reference day (Acker & Duck, 2007). 
However, both estimation methods exhibit sensitivity to the choice of reference day (although this variation is 
less marked for estimates of Blume betas). The findings imply that estimated betas using both the Blume (1971) 
and Vasicek (1973) adjustments are indeed subject to reference-day risk, causing shares to be incorrectly 
classified as either aggressive or defensive based on the selection of an initial reference day (Acker & Duck, 
2007). 
Lastly, even though the investigation evidenced the presence of reference-day risk for both individual shares 
and equity indices, Acker and Duck (2007) hypothesise that the effect of reference-day risk may be amplified by 
thin trading. Accordingly, the authors apply the Dimson (1979) adjustment method for thin trading in estimating 
betas in the context of reference-day risk. The results of the investigation suggest that the Dimson (1979) 
adjustment method only slightly reduces the variability of beta estimates for the highest ranges. The authors 
also observe a tendency for estimated betas to exhibit significant variation based on the choice of reference 
day, indicating that the Dimson (1979) adjustment does not yield any significant difference in estimating 
systematic risk when reference-day risk is observed. 
Dimitrov and Govindaraj (2007) set out to investigate the findings from Acker and Duck’s (2007) study from a 
data dependency perspective. They argue that Acker and Duck’s (2007) sample (which was drawn from 
Datastream) may not be applicable for the United States context and propose replicating the analysis using data 
sourced from the Centre for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Furthermore, Dimitrov and Govindaraj (2007) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 7  
 
expand the study by Acker and Duck (2007) by investigating the existence of reference-day risk using daily 
returns (as opposed to monthly returns) over a five-year period.  
Using data sourced from the CRSP from the period January 1995 to December 1999, Dimitrov and Govindaraj 
(2007) use daily dividend-adjusted share returns to construct a series of 60 monthly returns across 19 different 
reference days, for each of 439 sample companies. The investigation verifies the existence of reference-day 
risk in companies listed on the S&P500, using data sourced from the CRSP (Dimitrov & Govindaraj, 2007). 
Dimitrov and Govindaraj (2007) also report that betas estimated from the sample exhibit significant variation 
when different choices of the initial reference day are used in the computation. Lastly, the findings from the 
investigation suggest that reference day risk is implicit for both individual shares and market indices.  
Gonzalez et al (2014) explicate the research conducted by both Acker and Duck (2007) and Dimitrov and 
Govindaraj (2007) by expanding the data dependency and methodology parameters employed in the previous 
studies. Gonzalez et al (2014) compare the t-distribution method for adjusting beta as developed by Cademartori 
et al (2003) to the conventional method and Blume’s (1971) regression method for estimating beta.  
According to Gonzalez et al (2014), the t-distribution method proposes a replacement of the standard normal 
distribution with the Student’s t, which is a symmetric distribution with heavier tails than the normal distribution. 
Gonzalez et al (2014) purport that the heavier tails in the Student’s t are more appropriate for estimating beta 
when reference-day risk is considered, as it more appropriately compensates for the error term in the linear 
regression used to estimate betas. Furthermore, Cademartori et al (2003) prove that the t-distribution method 
for adjusting beta is better able to incorporate the influence of outliers in estimating beta. Lastly, Blume’s (1971) 
method was selected by Gonzalez et al (2014) for comparison to the t-distribution method, as it was the method 
which reduced the effect of reference-day risk the most in Acker and Duck’s (2007) investigation. 
Gonzalez et al (2014) select a sample of 1563 shares, traded on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ exchanges 
obtained from the CRSP, for the period 2007 to 2011 and report that the choice of reference day results in 
significant variations in estimated betas. Gonzalez et al (2014) also report that betas estimated using Blume’s 
(1971) regression method exhibited significant variations across different reference days. Using the t-distribution 
method however, they record that the choice of reference day becomes less significant citing that the larger 
recorded ranges decreased significantly for the betas. They conclude that the t-distribution method for adjusting 
beta most significantly reduces reference-day variation when compared to Blume’s (1971) method and the 
conventional method.  
More recently, Baker et al (2016) set out to establish the existence of reference-day risk in the JSE Top 40. 
Baker et al (2016) use daily closing levels of the ALSI and closing prices for shares making up the JSE Top 40 
index for the period January 2000 to July 2015, sourced from Datastream.  
As observed by Acker and Duck (2007), Dimitrov and Govindaraj (2007) and Gonzalez et al (2014), the authors 
indicate that reference-day risk exists on the JSE op 40 and creates additional uncertainty for investors intending 
to create share portfolios, valuing companies or managing capital (Baker et al, 2016). The authors also test the 
Blume (1971), Dimson (1979) and Vasicek (1973) Bayesian methods for adjusting beta to investigate whether 
the adjusted betas exhibit lower reference-day ranges than the conventional betas (Baker et al, 2016).  
In estimating the betas calculated using Blume’s (1971) regression method, Baker et al (2016) report that the 
Blume-adjusted betas increase the variation and range of beta estimates for 19 out of 31 companies and 
conclude that the Blume (1971) regression method does not consistently and considerably reduce the variation 
and range for betas when reference day risk is observed. Similarly, the average range for the Dimson-adjusted 
betas was significantly larger than that of the conventional betas. The range for beta estimates using the Dimson 
(1979) adjustment increased for 30 out of the 40 companies sampled, leading the authors to conclude that the 
Dimson (1979) adjustment for thin trading actually pronounces reference day variation in systematic risk 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 8  
 
estimates. Lastly, the authors report that the Vasicek (1973) Bayesian adjustment method was the only 
estimation method yielding any promising results, with 35 out of the JSE Top 40 companies exhibiting lower 
reference-day ranges than the conventional betas.  
Baker et al (2016) then introduce the prospect of using a nonparametric bootstrap method to determine beta 
estimates which are independent of the reference-day. Given that there are at least 20 trading days in every 
month, the authors first organise share price and index level data in series, according to each of the 20 trading 
days, with the first trading day not necessarily corresponding to the first calendar day of the month. Using each 
series, Baker et al (2016) estimate betas for each share using the conventional methodology (i.e. using 60 
months data) across the 20 different trading days to bootstrap a beta distribution for the companies under 
investigation. In other words, assuming that a share has a value for beta which is not directly observable in the 
market, the authors simulate returns data for each company and the market index using the correlation 
relationship for the observed beta distribution. Baker et al (2016) simulate 60 returns-paired sequences (for the 
company and the market index) representing 60 months. This process assumes an arbitrary reference day, 
allowing for the estimation of share betas for each of the 60 returns sequences. The authors then select 20 such 
sequences for which the variance of beta is maximised (giving the largest possible range). Lastly, they then 
select a random share price and use the random sequence of share and index returns to calculate “bootstrapped 
betas”.  
Using this method, the authors note that for shares on the JSE Top 40, the expected value of a reference-day 
independent beta (i.e. the bootstrapped beta) was approximately equal to the average of the 20 betas estimated 
for each day using the conventional method. Baker et al (2016) propose that the mean value of the bootstrapped 
beta distribution therefore provides a reference-day independent estimate of systematic risk for a particular 
share. Even though the results of the investigation do not yield the desired result, the authors do note some 
benefits of employing this method in estimating beta (See Baker et al, 2016).  
In summary, the literature discussed above has not revealed a methodology which is independent of the 
reference-day problem in beta estimation. The final component of this theoretical discussion now focuses on the 
relevant literature regarding the proposed VWAP methodology.  
Empirical evidence of VWAP as a method to eliminate the reference-day problem 
The is little to no literature available on estimating beta through employing a VWAP adjustment or VWAP 
methodology in the context of reference-day risk. However, perhaps the most pertinent literature is presented 
by Ting (2005; 2006) who suggests that a VWAP is closer to the equilibrium price of a share than the daily 
closing price. Ting (2005; 2006) bases this on the premise that VWAP considers all the intra-day prices at which 
transactions have occurred and evidences that daily returns computed with VWAP have a smaller realised 
variance than that with the closing price. Moreover, Ting (2006) concludes that the variance spread between 
VWAP and the closing price is economically significant and has implications for performance measurement and 
pricing of derivatives.  
More critical to this research however, Ting (2006) suggests that relative to the volatility of VWAP returns, the 
volatility of closing price returns tends to understate the beta risk estimation result for portfolios. By 
consequence, the research suggests that by using VWAP along with the closing price, estimation of financial 
risk and asset pricing can be performed with considerably less noise (Ting, 2006).  
The literature presented above has verified the existence of reference-day risk on the S&P500 as well as for the 
JSE Top 40 index, even after applying various adjustments to the estimation method for beta. Analogous to the 
South African studies, the question of whether reference-day risk can be observed on the JSE ALSI beckons. 
Moreover, where estimation methodologies indicate an improvement in the robustness of beta estimates, none 
of the estimated betas were empirically tested to verify whether beta estimates adhered to the tenets of the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 9  
 
CAPM. The empirical evidence presented in the literature also evidences the critical need for a methodology 
which produces a stable estimate for beta which is independent of the reference day. 
This research contributes to this body of literature and proposes a methodology for estimating beta which is 
intuitively simple, yet differs markedly from the empirical methods tested previously. Additionally, this research 
aims to redeem the underlying tenet of the CAPM, in attempting to explain a positive risk-reward relationship 
between the systematic risk parameter, beta, and expected returns.  
The sample 
This research uses the daily closing level of the JSE ALSI and closing prices of each of the qualifying shares 
making up the index between 31 December 1992 and 30 June 2017, sourced from Datastream and Ward and 
Muller’s (2015) style engine. The choice of the JSE ALSI as the selected sample, ensured that 99% of South 
Africa’s market capitalisation was accounted for in this research (JSE, 2017). Given the longitudinal time-based 
nature of the research, the qualification of companies to the population applied to any firm which at any stage 
between 1985 and 2016 had sufficient market capitalisation, irrespective of their eventual state. This eliminated 
the potential for survivorship bias.  
Consistent with the studies by Gonzalez et al (2014), Baker et al (2016), and Carter, Muller and Ward (2017), 
all share prices included adjustments for any unbundling, mergers, share splits and dividend pay-outs. For all 
comparisons of standard betas against the estimated VWAP betas, all qualifying companies on the JSE ALSI 
during the period 3 January 2012 until 31 January 2017 with at least five years historical share price data were 
considered. This resulted in a total of 136 shares under observation.  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 10  
 
Methodology and results  
Investigating the existence of reference-day risk 
Every month within the sample period has approximately 20 trading days, as the trading of listed shares on the 
JSE typically excludes weekends and South African public holidays. The daily closing share prices and JSE 
ALSI levels can therefore be organised per 20 trading days, with the first trading day corresponding to the first 
working day of the initial month, in a five-year time series. Monthly log returns for each of the qualifying shares 
on the JSE ALSI and the index are thereafter calculated for the period 3 January 2012 to 31 January 2017. This 
resulted in a series of monthly returns for each of the 20 trading days, estimated for each of the 136 sampled 
shares and the JSE ALSI. 
Using these data, 20 different estimates of beta were generated for each share, by approximating the slope of 
the regression between an individual share’s returns and the JSE ALSI returns (or equivalently, by using 
Equation 2). The purpose for estimating share betas for each of the 20 trading days was to understand whether 
share betas exhibited variation when estimated using the conventional method, but by using 20 different starting 
points in estimating beta for a given share, within the same sample period.  
Consistent with the findings of Gonzalez et al (2014) and Baker et al (2016), first inspection of the conventional 
beta estimates reveals that there is indeed an effect on beta when the reference day is varied. Using the range 
of beta across the 20 trading days, reference-day risk is most pronounced in Lonmin (LON), Kumba Iron Ore 
(KIO) and Royal Bafokeng Platinum (RBP). Similarly, there are also companies for which share betas are 
relatively constant across the 20 trading days, which includes Remgro (REM), Rebosis Property Fund (REB) 
and British American Tobacco (BTI).  
Alarmingly, 15 out of the 136 sampled companies also exhibited conventional betas which could be classified 
as either positive or negative by an appropriate choice of the reference day. An equally noteworthy observation 
is that nine out of ten companies with the highest ranges in betas across the 20 trading days were resources 
companies. This finding potentially indicates a systemic characteristic in the way resources shares exhibit 
reference-day risk, or is merely a function of the JSE ALSI being more heavily weighted toward resources shares 
as compared to other stock exchanges.  
Table 1: Smallest and largest ranges in standard betas 
 
Smallest ranges 
 
Largest ranges 
 
REM 
REB 
BTI 
 
LON 
KIO 
RBP 
Max 
1.173 
0.618 
0.589 
 
5.148 
3.010 
1.965 
Min 
0.896 
0.323 
0.288 
 
2.259 
0.488 
0.474 
Range 
0.277 
0.295 
0.301 
 
2.890 
2.521 
1.491 
Mean 
1.049 
0.482 
0.463 
 
3.486 
1.776 
0.985 
Variance 
0.005 
0.006 
0.010 
 
0.571 
0.545 
0.209 
Median 
1.052 
0.471 
0.492 
 
3.458 
1.776 
0.779 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 11  
 
As suggested by Acker and Duck (2007), Gonzalez et al (2014) and Baker et al (2016), the differences in betas 
have profound implications in all its applications. One could consider beta-style portfolio construction as such a 
case.  
Consider the investor with a risk-averse profile intending to construct a portfolio of mainly defensive shares. 
Such a portfolio will have the characteristics of being weakly correlated with the market and having a positive 
portfolio beta, which is low in value and less than 1. If such an investor were to estimate the betas for KIO or 
RBP on a trading day which yields a relatively low beta, such a portfolio may have a positive beta ranging 
between 0.488 (if the portfolio is constructed entirely of KIO shares) or 0.474 (if the portfolio is constructed 
entirely of RBP shares) – varying according to the weightings of each of the shares held. Applying beta to the 
CAPM, one could therefore expect returns from such a portfolio which have a low correlation with the market. 
This implies that the investor would realise smaller positive returns when the market moves up, but be shielded 
from all downward movements in the market.  
However, the investor has inadvertently constructed a portfolio with a worst-case scenario beta ranging between 
1.965 and 3.010, being the largest betas for RBP and KIO, respectively. Such a portfolio would exhibit extreme 
fluctuations in value when the market moves in either direction. The systematic risk of the investor’s portfolio 
has been severely misestimated due to reference-day risk. Baker et al (2016) further indicate that an in such a 
case, an investor may be leisurely to react to a sharp decline in the market, believing his portfolio is weakly 
correlated with the market.  
Equivalent results would be reached for an investor looking to create a portfolio of shares which are negatively 
correlated with the market. Such an investor may achieve this by including shares with a negative beta in a 
portfolio. However, the choice of reference day may once again, severely undermine the investors ability to 
construct such a portfolio, as some shares yield estimates of beta which can be classified as either positive or 
negative based on the choice of the reference day (E.g. Brimstone Investment Corporation (BRN)). In similar 
fashion, managing reference-day risk is made even more complex when one is looking to construct a diversified 
portfolio of shares or when used in the construction of market-neutral hedge funds. In such cases, variations in 
beta may yield unintended and potentially severe consequences for the performance of the fund.  
To statistically determine the degree to which varying the reference day leads to variations in estimated betas, 
an ANOVA was performed for the 20 trading days. Even though the preliminary analysis of estimated betas 
across the 20 trading days suggests that there is indeed a trading day effect when estimating share betas, at 
both the 5% and 10% level of significance, the ANOVA reveals insufficient evidence to verify a definitive trading 
day effect of beta, when the reference day is varied (p-value = 0.501). The result is indeed surprising when one 
considers the large variation in estimated betas exhibited by some shares, suggesting that perhaps the 
covariance between shares within individual trading days may cancel each other out. Not surprisingly however, 
a similar result was also reported by Baker et al (2016), who could not statistically verify a trading day effect on 
beta across their 20 estimates of share betas for the JSE Top 40. Different results are however reached when 
comparing the minimum and maximum estimated betas for each share.  
Each share has a trading day corresponding to its highest beta estimate and equivalently, a trading day which 
yields its lowest beta estimate. Using a (two-tailed) t-test to compare the means of these beta values across 
firms indicated that the highest and lowest beta values are significantly different at the 5% level (p < 0.0001). 
This result indicates that for some part, reference-day risk does indeed create additional uncertainty when 
estimating share betas. Baker et al (2016) also tested this hypothesis and noted a significant difference in 
minimum and maximum betas for 22 out of the 40 sampled shares. The variation in beta estimates across 
reference days implies that any application of share betas (and consequently, the CAPM) may severely 
undermine one’s understanding of risk. It may further lead to inefficient share selection when creating portfolios 
and ultimately, increase the likelihood of sub-optimal investment decisions, especially when valuing companies 
or constructing market-neutral hedge funds.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 12  
 
Developing a point estimate of systematic risk for application when reference-day risk is considered 
The primary aim of this research was to develop a more robust point estimate of beta when reference-day risk 
is exhibited in estimates of systematic risk. Baker et al (2016) presented the potential for using an average of 
the betas across the 20 trading days as an estimate of systematic risk for a share, but note the potential 
introduction of errors due to small sample size. In this subsection, the research investigated the feasibility of 
using a VWAP method for estimating beta when reference-day risk is considered.  
Using the total daily value of shares traded together with the number of shares traded for each share on the JSE 
ALSI, a daily 60-day ex-ante VWAP was estimated for the sample, as per the computation prescribed by Ting 
(2006); 
𝑉𝑊𝐴𝑃= 
∑
𝑃k𝑉k
𝑛
𝑘=1
𝑉
= ∑𝑊k 𝑃k
𝑛
𝑘=1
 
(Equation 3) 
Where; 
Wk is the weight and calculated as Vk / V, 
Pk are the n intraday prices at which transactions have occurred during the period, 
V is the total share volume traded over the period and is equal to ∑
𝑉k
𝑛
𝑘=1
, 
Vk are the subtotals of all shares transacted at the price Pk (Ting, 2006). 
The equation simply states that the VWAP is a combination of all intraday prices, which for the case of this 
research, occurred over the past 60 days for a share, inclusive of the reference-day. For the JSE ALSI, the 
VWAP of the index is weighted on a per share basis, and changes daily with movements in the market 
capitalisation of firms.  
Using the VWAP for each share and the index, log returns were computed over a five-year period. Put simply, 
we estimate share returns (and index returns) monthly by using the VWAP at each month end (instead of the 
closing price). VWAP betas were then estimated for each share using the conventional methodology for the 
period 30 March 2012 to 31 March 2017.  
At this point, Gonzalez et al (2014) tested the significance of the differences between standard betas against 
Blume (1971) betas and betas approximated using a student’s t-distribution method. The authors focused on 
comparing mean share beta variances for each of the three methods, across 20 trading days. Baker et al (2016) 
employed a different approach and compared adjusted regression coefficients using the Blume (1971), Dimson 
(1979) and Vasicek (1973) Bayesian adjustment methods.  
This research employed a unique approach in estimating beta which was simple and intuitive, yet distinctly 
different from the previous investigations on reference-day risk. The conventional method for estimating beta 
was maintained, however monthly closing prices were substituted with the 60-day ex-ante VWAP. This was 
done prior to regressing individual share returns against the market returns. Reiterating Ting (2005; 2006), the 
VWAP is statistically more efficient than the closing price in reflecting value as it is closer to the unobservable 
equilibrium price, resulting in a smaller realised variance, which is the essence of the beta measure.   
To understand whether the VWAP beta is a more robust estimate of systematic risk when reference-day risk is 
considered, VWAP betas were compared to standard betas. To achieve this, both the standard betas and VWAP 
betas were estimated using the same sample period and tested for statistical difference. This test is critical to 
the investigation as estimates of VWAP betas employ the same computational methodology as the standard 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 13  
 
beta. Even though the estimation methods are different, the two measures must produce statistically 
independent estimates of systematic risk. A positive result is therefore fundamental in proposing VWAP as an 
alternate estimation method in the context of reference-day risk. A paired t-test at the 5% level of significance 
confirms that the two measures are statistically different.  
Application of the VWAP beta and understanding whether VWAP betas perform better under conditions of 
reference-day risk 
The first step in this analysis was to understand how estimates of VWAP betas for the 136 sampled shares were 
distributed, and whether tighter estimates of share betas were possible using the conventional method. 
Furthermore, the research also aimed to understand if there exists a trading day within the 20-day range for 
which betas tend to be more robust. A visual and statistical comparison was conducted, in analogous fashion to 
Baker et al (2016), when attempting to understand whether systematic risk estimates using the bootstrapped 
beta method were more robust for shares on the JSE Top 40 index.  
VWAP betas for the sample shares were plotted on a histogram to understand the sample characteristics of 
estimated share betas, particularly focusing on the skewness and kurtosis of the distribution. Similarly, beta 
estimates for the sample shares were thereafter plotted using the median beta for each share from the 20 trading 
days. This process was then repeated for all share betas estimated using the 20th trading day (as this day yielded 
the tightest distribution in estimated betas). For control, standard betas were also estimated for the sample and 
equivalently plotted. The resultant distributions were then visually compared. Figure 1 (below) plots each of the 
distributions for estimates of share betas for the same sample. A positive result would be a normally distributed 
set of betas, tightly distributed around the mean value, 1 (which represents the market beta).  
Figure 1: Distribution of estimated betas 
 
To test the various distributions statistically, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov, Cramer-Von Mises and Anderson-Darling 
tests were performed to understand whether the estimated betas were normally distributed. Furthermore, the 
variance for each of the distributions was analysed to determine which method yielded the tightest share beta 
estimates around the mean, congruent to the method employed by Gonzalez et al (2014). Thereafter, a Levene’s 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 14  
 
test was conducted to statistically verify that the variances were distinctly different across the alternate 
measures, consequently verifying the visual result.  
As evident in Figure 1, betas estimated using the 20th trading day of the month produced the most robust 
estimates in share betas for the sample period, even more so than the standard betas which use month end 
share values. Counter-intuitively, the VWAP method produces a less robust set of share betas for the sample. 
This was also verified statistically as described above. 
Following this result, there is still the potential for the VWAP betas to be applied in finance. As per the method 
conducted by Baker et al (2016), beta estimates using the VWAP method were also tested on a per share basis. 
This is achieved by comparing the distribution of standard beta across the 20 trading days against estimates of 
beta using the VWAP method. To ensure a robust test of the VWAP beta method on a share by share basis, 
additional VWAP betas were generated from a non-overlapping, out-of-sample period using a further 10 years 
historical data (1 January 2002 to 31 January 2012). As conducted prior, differences were tested both visually 
and statistically.  
The results indicate that for most shares, the distributions of VWAP betas are not statistically different from the 
standard betas. However, upon closer inspection, some positive results were observed when analysing the 
shares with the largest distributions in standard betas. For the top three shares with the largest ranges in 
standard beta across the 20 trading days (LON, KIO and RBP), KIO and RBP had statistically different 
distributions (p = 0.004 and p = 0.002, respectively) for which the VWAP estimates were significantly tighter 
around the mean. This is illustrated in Figure 2. For LON, this was not the case. Further inspection into LON’s 
share price history does however reveal that the share did experience significant volatility during the sample 
period, potentially influencing estimates of share betas for the company.  
Figure 2: Distribution of estimated betas for Kumba Iron Ore and Royal Bafokeng Platinum 
 
 
As expected for the three shares with the smallest range in estimated betas (REM, REB and BTI), there was 
little evidence of a VWAP method improving the range of estimates.  
This result suggests that, for cases of extreme reference-day variation in estimated betas, the VWAP beta 
estimation method does indicate some evidence of a more robust estimate of systematic risk. The VWAP 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 15  
 
method for estimating beta could consequently be applied alongside other measures of systematic risk. This is 
especially the case when estimating betas for shares which exhibit a large degree of reference-day variation. 
Furthermore, future research could contemplate the appropriateness of the VWAP beta, when estimating 
systematic risk for resources shares, as these were evidenced to have the highest effect when the reference 
day was varied.  
Understanding whether the VWAP betas adhere to the tenets of the CAPM 
To consolidate the findings between the standard beta and VWAP beta, the VWAP beta must adhere to the 
underlying tenet of the CAPM, which states that higher betas would lead to higher returns, and vice versa. This 
was investigated by means of a graphical time series style analysis, congruent to the methodology employed by 
Ward and Muller (2012) and Muller and Ward (2013). 
To conduct this, each share in the sample was ranked according to the magnitude of the 60-day ex-ante VWAP 
betas and placed into virtual portfolios in the form of quintiles. Portfolio 1 contained the shares with the highest 
VWAP betas whereas Portfolio 5 contains the shares with the lowest VWAP betas. The performance of each of 
the portfolios was thereafter simulated using the Ward and Muller (2015) style engine, which contained share 
returns data over the period 1985 to 2017. The simulation was then run over the sample period. 
To ensure a robust analysis, each of the VWAP betas for shares within the ALSI are recalculated and ranked 
every three months. This was done in a similar fashion to that of Carter et al (2017) and ensured that the correct 
shares were placed in the appropriate portfolios according to their updated betas. The portfolios are rebalanced 
quarterly on this basis.  
Consistent with Ward and Muller (2012), the graphical time series analysis also plots a price relative line to 
indicate the relationship between quintile 1 (which had shares with the highest VWAP betas) and quintile 5 
(which had shares with the lowest VWAP betas). The graphical time series analysis also plots a price relative 
line between quintile 1 and the market. This acts as a control variable would in the investigation, and is used to 
test whether high VWAP beta shares lead to abnormal returns (i.e. returns more than what the market could 
provide), as specified by the CAPM. The performance of the portfolios as well as the relationship between each 
portfolio and the market was then visually analysed. 
Figure 3: Ranked portfolios in terms of VWAP betas 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 16  
 
 
The analysis indicates that the quintiles ranked from highest to lowest, according to the simulated annualised 
returns, were quintile 4, quintile 3, quintile 5, quintile 2 and lastly, quintile 1. The price relative further indicates 
that since December 1999, the quintile with the lowest VWAP betas (quintile 5) consistently outperformed 
quintile 1, which contained the highest ranked VWAP betas. The data suggest that, even though the VWAP 
betas are statistically different from the standard betas, the VWAP betas do not adhere to the tenet of the CAPM 
that a higher level of risk (as estimated by beta) will lead to higher returns, and vice versa. Counter intuitively, 
the analysis has suggested that shares with a lower VWAP beta tend to outperform shares with high VWAP 
betas. This is consistent with the findings of Ward and Muller (2012), who found that estimates of standard betas 
also invert the CAPM.   
Conclusion 
This paper set out to resurrect the systematic risk parameter, beta, by contributing a volume-weighted-averageprice (VWAP) point estimate for beta when reference-day risk is considered. This investigation evidenced a 
significant degree of reference-day risk when estimating share betas on the JSE ALSI, congruous to the findings 
of Acker and Duck (2007), Dimitrov and Govindaraj (2007), Gonzalez et al (2014) and Baker et al (2016). As a 
result, this creates additional uncertainty for investors and practitioners applying beta in portfolio construction, 
risk management, business valuation and all applications of the CAPM. Moreover, this finding underpins the 
need for a more accurate estimate of systematic risk, when reference-day risk is observed. 
VWAP betas were also found to be statistically different from standard betas. Despite the indication from Ting 
(2005; 2006), there is however limited evidence to suggest that a VWAP method improves estimates of 
systematic risk for shares. Even so, the investigation recommends that for cases of extreme reference-day 
variations, the VWAP beta may be applied alongside other measures to improve financial decision making.  
Lastly, this research contributes further insight into the risk-relationship trade-off postulated by the CAPM. A 
graphical time-series style analysis revealed that estimates of beta employing a VWAP methodology still inverts 
the expected returns. In addition to the empirical findings documented by other researchers, this investigation 
suggests that the CAPM appears to imperfectly specify the risk-reward trade-off (van Rensburg & Robertson, 
2003; Montier, 2009; Strugnell et al, 2011; Ward & Muller, 2012). Further research is however required to verify 
this.  
For further research, the investigation evidenced a significant degree of reference day risk when estimating 
share betas for resources shares. Appreciating that the composition of the JSE ALSI is weighted heavily towards 
resources shares, further research may potentially uncover additional characteristics in the way resources 
shares exhibit reference-day risk.  
To end, this research also evidenced that for shares on the JSE ALSI, VWAP returns produced more robust 
covariance matrices for shares. Financial practitioners may find this result useful for many financial applications. 
 
References 
Acker, D., & Duck, N. W. (2007). Reference-day risk and the use of monthly returns data. Journal of 
Accounting, Auditing &  Finance, 22(4), 527-557. 
Baker, C., Rajaratnam, K., & Flint, E. J. (2016). Beta estimates of shares on the JSE Top 40 in the context of 
reference-day  risk. Environment Systems and Decisions, 36(2), 126-141. 
Blume, M. E. (1971). On the assessment of risk. The Journal of  Finance, 26(1), 1-10. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 17  
 
Brooks, R. D., Faff, R.W., Gangemi, M.A.M., & Lee, J.H.H. (1997). A further examination of the effect of 
diversification on the  
stability of portfolio betas. Applied Financial Economics,  Vol. 7,  9-14. 
Cademartori, D., Romo, C., Campos, R., & Galea, M. (2003). Robust  estimation of systematic risk using the t 
distribution in the  Chilean stock markets. Applied Economics Letters, 10(7), 447- 453. 
Carter, B., Muller, C., & Ward, M. (2017). The applicability of Black’s  variation of the capital asset pricing 
model (CAPM) in the South  African context (Master’s thesis). Illovo, South Africa: Gordon  Institute of 
Business Science.  
Chen, B., & Reeves, J. J. (2012). Dynamic asset beta measurement.  Applied Financial Economics, 22(19), 
1655-1664, DOI:  10.1080/09603107.2012.674203. 
Collins, D. W., Ledolter, J., & Rayburn, J. (1987). Some further  evidence on the stochastic properties of 
systematic  risk. Journal of Business, 425-448. 
Dimitrov, V., & Govindaraj, S. (2007). Reference-day risk:  observations and extensions. Journal of 
Accounting,  Auditing & Finance, 22(4), 559-572. 
Dimson, E. (1979). Risk measurement when shares are subject to  infrequent trading. Journal of Financial 
Economics, 7(2),  197- 226. 
Fabozzi, F. J., & Francis, J. C. (1978). Beta as a random coefficient.  Journal of Financial and Quantitative 
Analysis, 13, 101-15. 
Faff, R., & Brooks, R. (1996). Further evidence on the relationship  between beta stability and the length of the 
estimation  period (No. 96-10). Retrieved from:  https://ideas.repec.org/p/fth/melrfi/96-10.html 
Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1992). The cross section of expected stock  returns. Journal of Finance, 47(2), 
427- 465. 
Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2004). The capital asset pricing model:  theory and evidence. Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 18(3),  25–46.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/0895330042162430. 
Gonzalez, M., Rodriguez, A., & Stein, R. (2014). Adjusted betas under  reference-day risk. The Engineering 
Economist,  59(1), 79-88. 
Heymans, A., & Brewer, W. P. (2015). The influence of volatility spill- overs and market beta on portfolio 
construction. South African  Journal of Economic and Management Sciences, 18(3), 277- 290. 
JSE. (2017). What is the JSE All Share Index (ALSI)? Retrieved from:  https://www.jse.co.za/grow-mywealth/what-is-the-jse-all-share- index. 
Lintner, J. (1965). The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection  of Risky Investments in Stock Portfolios 
and Capital  Budgets. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 47(1),  13–17. http://doi.org/10.2307/1924119. 
Markowitz, H. M. (1952). Portfolio Selection. The Journal of  Finance, 7(1), 77. http://doi.org/10.2307/2975974. 
Markowitz, H.M. (1956). The optimization of a quadratic  function subject  to linear constraints. Naval 
Research Logistics Quarterly, 3(1- 2):111-133. 
Markowitz, H.M. (1959). Portfolio selection: Efficient diversification  of investments. New York: Wiley. 
Montier, J. (2009). Behavioural Investing: a practitioner’s guide to  applying behavioural finance. John Wiley & 
Sons. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561 
Page | 18  
 
Mossin, J. (1966). Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market.  Econometrica,  34(4), 768–783. 
http://doi.org/10.2307/1910098. 
Muller, C., & Ward, M. (2013). Style-based effects on the Johannesburg  Stock Exchange: A graphical timeseries approach. Investment  Analysts Journal, 77, 1–16.  
Novak, J. (2015). Systematic risk changes, negative realized excess  returns and time-varying CAPM beta. 
Journal of  Economics and  Finance, 65, 2015 (2), 167-190. 
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market  Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk. The 
Journal of  Finance, 19(3), 425–442. http://doi.org/10.2307/2977928. 
Strugnell, D., Gilbert, E., & Kruger, R. (2011). Beta, size and value  effects on the JSE, 1994–
2007. Investment Analysts  Journal, 40(74), 1-17. 
Ting, C. (2005). Which daily price is more efficient? (Vol. 1).  Working paper, Singapore Management 
University.  Retrieved from:  https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Christopher_Ting/publ 
ication/260399763_Which_Daily_Price_is_More_Efficient/li nks/53d5c5d70cf228d363ea103a.pdf. 
Ting, C. (2006). Which daily price is less noisy?. Financial  Management, 35(3), 81-95. 
Treynor, J. (1961). Market value, time, and risk. Unpublished  manuscript dated 08/08/1961, No. 95-209. 
Van Rensburg, P., & Robertson, M. (2003). Size, price-to-earnings and  beta on the JSE Securities 
Exchange. Investment Analysts  Journal, 32(58), 7-16. 
Vasicek, O. A. (1973). A Note on Using Cross‐sectional  Information in  Bayesian Estimation of Security 
Betas. The Journal of  Finance, 28(5), 1233-1239. 
Ward, M., & Muller, C. (2012). Empirical Testing of the CAPM on  the JSE. Investment Analysts Journal, 76, 
1–12.  
Ward, M., & Muller, C. (2015). The Risk-Free Rate and the CAPM on the  JSE. Unpublished, 1–7. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3210561
