ALGORITHMIC TRADING AND INVESTMENT-TO-PRICE SENSITIVITY
NIHAD ALIYEV a,∗, FARIZ HUSEYNOV b,∗, AND KHALADDIN RZAYEV c, d,e,∗
a University of Technology Sydney
b North Dakota State University
c University of Edinburgh
d Koc University
e Systemic Risk Centre, London School of Economics
Abstract. Does the increased prevalence of algorithmic trading (AT) produce real
economic effects? We find that AT contributes to managerial learning by fostering the
production of new information, thereby increasing firms’ investment-to-price sensitivity.
We show that AT improves managers‘ earnings forecast accuracy, encourages information
acquisition of market participants, and has a stronger impact on investment-to-price
sensitivity for stocks with greater managerial learning, suggesting that AT increases the
revelatory efficiency of stock prices.
While in aggregate AT contributes positively to
managerial learning, we also show that a subset of AT, namely opportunistic AT is harmful
to managerial learning.
Keywords: Algorithmic trading, investment-to-price sensitivity, revelatory price efficiency,
real effects of algorithmic trading
(∗) Nihad Aliyev (nihad.aliyev@uts.edu.au), Fariz Huseynov (fariz.huseynov@ndsu.edu), Khaladdin
Rzayev (khaladdin.rzayev@ed.ac.uk).
1
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

ALGORITHMIC TRADING AND INVESTMENT-TO-PRICE SENSITIVITY
Abstract. Does the increased prevalence of algorithmic trading (AT) produce real
economic effects? We find that AT contributes to managerial learning by fostering the
production of new information, thereby increasing firms’ investment-to-price sensitivity.
We show that AT improves managers‘ earnings forecast accuracy, encourages information
acquisition of market participants, and has a stronger impact on investment-to-price
sensitivity for stocks with greater managerial learning, suggesting that AT increases the
revelatory efficiency of stock prices.
While in aggregate AT contributes positively to
managerial learning, we also show that a subset of AT, namely opportunistic AT is harmful
to managerial learning.
Keywords: Algorithmic trading, investment-to-price sensitivity, revelatory price efficiency,
real effects of algorithmic trading
1
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

2
1. Introduction
Dramatic improvements in technology (e.g., high-speed computers and real-time data
feeds) and regulatory environment (e.g., Regulation National Market System in the U.S.)
have led to the proliferation of automated trading with a considerably high trading speed
in financial markets. Does the proliferation of algorithmic trading (AT) produce real effects on the economy? Given the extensive literature on the effects of AT on market quality,
it is surprising that we know little about the real economic effects of AT.1 In this paper, we
address this question by exploring whether AT enables firm managers to obtain more informative feedback from the financial markets and use it in their investment decisions.
Specifically, we investigate the empirical relationship between AT and the sensitivity of
corporate investment to stock prices (investment-to-price sensitivity).
Establishing the relationship between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity is important for various reasons. First, the theory dating back to Hayek (1945) suggests that
one of the main roles of financial markets is to aggregate information from many different
market participants who do not have direct channels of communication with the firm outside the trading process (e.g., Dow and Gorton 1997; Subrahmanyam and Titman 1999).
Thus, stock prices complement the information of managers and guide them in making
corporate investment decisions. Our research sheds light on the extent to which AT improves or distorts the informational role of financial markets.
Second, previous studies of AT mainly focus on the impact of AT on different aspects of
market quality, and in particular, liquidity and price discovery.2 However, an AT-sourced
liquidity or price discovery does not necessarily imply changes in managers’ investment
decisions since market quality in sub-second intervals may not be too important in making
corporate investment decisions (e.g., Cochrane 2013). The real economic effects of AT
1 AT (also known as automated trading or algo-trading) uses a computer program that follows an algorithm to place and manage orders and trades. We take a broader definition of automated trading and define
AT as all participants who use algorithms to submit and cancel orders, including high-frequency trading
(HFT), which is a subset of AT with considerably higher trading speeds. Throughout this paper, we use the
acronym AT interchangeably to refer to algorithmic trading and algorithmic traders.
2 See, for example, Brogaard et al. (2014), Foucault et al. (2016), Foucault et al. (2017), Weller (2018),
Brogaard et al. (2019), and Yang and Zhu (2020).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

3
depend on the extent to which stock prices reveal information for real efficiency, not on the
overall impact of AT on price discovery. Due to the importance of such a distinction, Bond
et al. (2012) distinguish between two notions of price efficiency: (i) the forecasting price
efficiency (FPE) as the extent to which the price of a given security accurately predicts the
future value of that security and (ii) the revelatory price efficiency (RPE) as the extent to
which prices reveal information necessary for decision makers. While previous studies of
AT mainly focus on the role of AT in driving the FPE, the innovation in this paper is to
show the impact of AT on the RPE.
Third, many modern financial market participants employ algorithms to make certain
trading decisions and submit and manage orders. ATs drive most of the trading in financial markets; for instance, HFT represents about 50% of US equities trading volume.
Therefore, AT is at the very core of market design issues to promote market liquidity and
attract trading volume.3 Understanding the real economic effects of AT would help policymakers and market organizers to design trading rules that optimally balance the costs
and benefits of AT.
Motivated by these issues, this paper contributes to the debate on the real economic implications of AT. Specifically, we test the effects of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity
of firms using a large sample of US-listed stocks during 1996-2019. We use a normalized
measure of electronic message traffic (quote-to-trade ratio, QT) as a proxy for AT and
capital expenditures, including and excluding research and development expenses and
change in total assets as measures of firms’ investment. We find that the amount of AT
activities in stocks significantly increases the investment-to-price sensitivity of firms. Financial markets process available information of market participants and reflect in stock
prices, and naturally, managers have incentives to learn from stock prices (e.g., Dow and
Gorton 1997; Subrahmanyam and Titman 1999; Foucault and Gehrig 2008). Our results
suggest that AT enhances managers’ learning experience by fostering the production of
new information.
3 For example, Budish et al. (2015) view the high-frequency trading arms race as a symptom of flawed
market design and propose to use frequent batch auctions instead of the continuous limit order book to
reduce the socially wasteful arms race between ATs/HFTs.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

4
We begin our analysis with the empirical relationship between AT and the investmentto-price sensitivity in the ordinary least squares (OLS) setting. We find that, on average,
AT increases the effect of one standard deviation shock on the stock price on the next
year’s capital expenditures (CAPEX) by 50%, capital expenditures including research and
development expenses (CAPEXRND) by 22%, and change in total assets (CHGASSET)
by 40%. This suggests that managers are more likely to use stock prices to guide their
investment decisions when AT is more prevalent in their stocks. The economic significance
of these effects is substantial and underscores the significant economic implications of AT
for corporate investment decisions.
It is possible that the relationship between AT and investment-to-price sensitivity is not
causal. For example, Biais and Foucault (2014) argue that ATs are inherently attracted
to liquid stocks. This implies that ATs tend to trade the stocks of the firms with greater
investment-to-price sensitivity and benefit from their price informativeness, raising a reverse causality concern. In addition, there may be omitted variables that simultaneously
affect the trading/order book activity and firms’ investment decisions. To establish causality we first use the introduction of the NYSE Autoquote in 2003 as an exogenous event in
the difference-in-differences setting. The Autoquote replaced manual dissemination of
the inside quote by specialists with a new automated quote and provided quicker feedback to algorithms, resulting in an increase in electronic message traffic in the NYSE. We
find that the introduction of Autoquote in the NYSE led to an increase in the investmentto-price sensitivity of NYSE-listed firms (treatment group) compared to NASDAQ-listed
firms (control group).
Next, we employ a two-stage instrumental variable framework that exploits the staggered implementation of Autoquote for the NYSE stocks, as well as the lagged QT and average QT by stocks’ size quartile group as instruments. In addition, we use the two-stage
Heckman estimation approach to test for selection bias in how ATs trade across stocks and
report the results in the Internet Appendix. Our findings confirm the baseline OLS results
and allow us to establish a strong causal relationship between AT and the investment-toprice sensitivity.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

5
We link the positive association between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity to
the contribution of AT to the RPE in three different ways. First, we investigate the impact of
AT on managers’ earnings forecast accuracy. Management earnings forecasts are a key voluntary disclosure mechanism through which firm managers provide earnings guidance
to financial markets. Based on the information received from the market, firm managers
update their earnings forecasts throughout the year. The idea is to study whether AT’s
greater capacity for quickly processing various pieces of information and incorporating
them into stock prices have an impact on the RPE. Thus, we hypothesize that if AT contributes to the RPE and reveals new information that is unknown to managers, then AT
should also improve managers’ earnings forecast accuracy. Consistently, we find that an
average level of AT increases the effect of a one standard deviation shock to the stock price
on managers’ forecast accuracy by about 17%.
Second, we examine the impact of AT on the information acquisition of market participants as measured by the number of non-robot downloads of financial reporting data of
firms from the SEC’s EDGAR database. The idea is that ATs also indirectly contribute
to the RPE by impacting how other market participants acquire information. Although
financial data of firms in EDGAR is not new to firm managers, information acquisition
of market participants is likely to increase RPE as investors usually combine their private
information with the information posted by firms to make their trading decisions (e.g., Edmans et al. 2015). Consistently, we find a positive association between AT and the number
of non-robot downloads of financial data from the SEC EDGAR database, suggesting that
AT encourages overall information acquisition in the market.
Third, we analyze which stock characteristics influence the magnitude of the impact of
AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity. We focus on five variables that have clear theoretical predictions regarding the association between AT and RPE. We find that the impact
of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity is stronger for stocks with high institutional
holdings, high private information (as measured by Brogaard et al. 2022), low relative
spread, high trading volume, and more positive information (as measured by the amount
of earnings surprise). These results show that the impact of AT on investment-to-price
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

6
sensitivity is higher when AT is more likely to contribute to RPE, providing further support for the association between AT and RPE.
We extend the baseline tests in various directions. First, we distinguish between marketmaking (liquidity-supplying) and opportunistic (liquidity-demanding) AT strategies and
examine their impacts on investment-to-price sensitivity. We measure the level of opportunistic AT for a random sample of 120 stocks during 1996-2019 in the spirit of Budish
et al. (2015) as the number of latency arbitrage opportunities that ATs can exploit in
high frequency for each stock separately for each year. We find that while in aggregate
AT contributes positively to the investment-to-price sensitivity of firms, opportunistic ATs
weaken the investment-to-price sensitivity by exploiting profitable latency arbitrage opportunities. This implies that the effect of AT strategies on price informativeness is not
homogeneous, but rather depends on the specific trading techniques employed by ATs. In
addition, this finding reconciles the literature that highlights the detrimental effects of AT,
such as Dugast and Foucault (2018), Weller (2018), and Ye et al. (2023), with studies that
focus on positive impacts of AT on the price discovery, such as Jovanovic and Menkveld
(2016) and Brogaard et al. (2019).
Second, we construct additional AT measures by using the Securities and Exchange
Commission’s (SEC) Market Information Data Analytics System (MIDAS) data and
present that the results are robust to various measures of AT. Third, we investigate the
association between AT and firms’ ex-post performance as measured by return on assets
and sales growth. We find that the amount of AT activities in stocks and the resulting
increase in the investment-to-price sensitivity significantly improve firm performance. In
terms of economic magnitude, a median level increase in AT increases the next year’s return on assets by 2.75% and sales growth by 26%. Lastly, we control for several additional
factors to explore alternative explanations for our main finding. We find that the association between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity remains positive and significant
after controlling for (i) managers‘ existing information, (ii) analyst coverage, and (iii)
firms’ capital constraints.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

7
2. Related literature
The paper contributes to different strands of literature. First, it contributes to the ongoing debate about the real economic consequences of ATs. On the one hand, Budish et
al. (2015), Biais and Foucault (2014), and Biais et al. (2015) focus on the socially wasteful
arms race between ATs/HFTs (see also Aquilina et al. 2022). On the other hand, Jovanovic
and Menkveld (2016) argue that ATs face lower adverse selection costs due to their ability
to quickly update quotes, thereby improving gains from trade through their greater willingness to provide liquidity. Our paper contributes to this debate by providing evidence
on the impact of AT on firms’ investment and performance.
Second, the paper contributes to the literature on the impact of AT on market quality.
The evidence on this has so far been inconsistent. On the one hand, AT increases liquidity
through processing public information quickly, decreasing spread, and trading against
transitory prices pressures. Foucault and Gehrig (2008) and Fang et al. (2009) show that
higher liquidity and/or lower trading costs increase informed traders’ incentive to obtain
private information and thus improve the informativeness of stock prices. Given that ATs’
participation in the market increases liquidity, it is plausible that AT also leads to greater
price informativeness. Consistent with this, Brogaard et al. (2019) show that efficient
price discovery occurs predominantly through HFTs-initiated limit orders.
On the other hand, while ATs incorporate existing information into prices, due to their
opportunistic back-running and order anticipation strategies, they may also discourage
the acquisition of new information and worsen price discovery (e.g., Weller 2018; Dugast
and Foucault 2018). That is, back-running strategies may erode rents to information acquirers and reduce incentives to search for new information (e.g., Yang and Zhu 2020). For
example, Ye et al. (2023) find that a larger tick size increases the investment-to-price sensitivity by reducing AT and encouraging fundamental information acquisition. Furthermore, arbitrage strategies employed by ATs may deteriorate price discovery by increasing
the transaction costs (e.g., Foucault et al. 2016; Foucault et al. 2017).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

8
Our paper contributes to these papers in three important ways. First, the literature generally focuses on the effects of AT on market quality with no distinction between FPE and
RPE. By contrast, our results are along the direction of the impact of AT on the RPE. Second, we reconcile the abovementioned studies by showing that the association between
AT and RPE is not uniform, but depends on the trading strategies employed by ATs. The
closest papers to ours are Ye et al. (2023) and Lee and Watts (2021), who show that a larger
tick size increases fundamental information acquisition and the investment-to-price sensitivity by decreasing ATs’ activities. Consistently, the relevant market microstructure literature emphasizes that a larger tick size decreases opportunistic ATs, not market-making
ATs (e.g., Hagstr¨omer and Nord´en 2013) and its impact on total ATs’ activities is ambiguous. Along this line, we document that ATs weaken the investment-to-price sensitivity
by exploiting opportunistic strategies, while in aggregate AT improves RPE, increases the
investment-to-price sensitivity and leads to superior firm performance.
Third, the literature generally investigates AT’s effects at seconds and milliseconds frequencies (e.g., Menkveld 2016). In contrast, our results emphasize the importance of AT
for long-term investors due to its impact on firms’ investment and operating performance.
In this regard, the closest papers to ours are Chakrabarty et al. (2015) and Chordia and
Miao (2020), which provide evidence for long-term implications of AT by focusing on the
price informativeness around earning announcements.
We also contribute to the literature analyzing how stock prices affect firms’ investment
decisions (e.g., Barro 1990; Morck et al. 1990). Our paper is related to the growing empirical studies of managerial learning channel: the role of private information in stock prices
(e.g., Chen et al. 2007), cross-listing in multiple exchanges (e.g., Foucault and Fr´esard
2012), the informativeness of peers’ stock prices (e.g., Foucault and Fresard 2014; Dessaint
et al. 2019), firms’ capital constraints (e.g., Baker et al. 2003) in driving the investment-toprice sensitivity of firms. We contribute to these studies by showing that AT produces new
information to managers and increases the efficiency of their learning from stock prices,
resulting in superior firm performance.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

9
3. Data and descriptive statistics
3.1. Sample selection. We compile data from multiple sources. We obtain intraday data
on trades and quotes, aggregated at an hourly frequency, from Refinitiv Tick History
(RTH), and yearly financial statement data from Compustat. The data on daily stock
prices, bid and ask quotes, trading volume, and shares outstanding are from the Center
for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). We use RTH to compute the measure of algorithmic trading for all ordinary common shares in CRSP and Compustat that trade on the
New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, and NASDAQ for the period
of 1996-2019. We use Compustat variables to capture firms’ investment and performance
measures, along with other control variables such as firms’ cash flow and total assets.
From Compustat, we collect firms’ market value of equity, total assets, capital expenditures, research and development (R&D) expenses, sales, cash flows, and additional
variables that serve as proxies for firm profitability and financial policy for the period
of 1996– 2019. We follow Foucault and Fr´esard (2012) and exclude financial firms (SIC
codes between 6000 and 6999) and international affairs and non-operating establishments
(SIC codes 9000– 9999) as these industries’ financial statement numbers are dependent on
statutory capital requirements. We also exclude firms with missing information on total
assets, equity, and capital expenditures, as well as firms with less than 3 years of observations and firms with market values less than $10 million.
For the models that we use Compustat and RTH data in the baseline analysis, our final sample includes 51,581 firm-year observations and 5,195 unique firms during 19962019. We complement our main datasets with the institutional ownership data obtained
from Refinitiv, “Company Issued Guidance” (CIG) data from Refinitiv, EDGAR downloads from the SEC, insider trading activities from Thomson Financial’s TFN database,
and the number of analysts following the stock from I/B/E/S to run additional tests.
3.2. AT measures. To investigate the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity,
one needs to observe whether a particular order is generated and submitted by computer
algorithms. This data is not generally available, and therefore, researchers employ various
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

10
proxies for AT. We follow Hendershott et al. (2011) and Malceniece et al. (2019) and use
the ratio of number of quote messages to number of trades, QTi,t, as the main proxy for
AT.4 The intuition of this measure is that the majority of message activity is generated by
ATs. Thus, the number of quote messages increases with the amount of AT activities in
stocks. However, using the number of quotes alone would pick up the effects of trading
volume, and hence, we normalize the number of quotes with the number of trades for
each day and then calculate yearly averages.
In the robustness tests, we construct three more AT measures capturing different aspects
of AT strategies. The first measure is the cancel-to-trade ratio, CTi,t, computed as the number of all cancel messages (full or partial) divided by the number of trades obtained from
the SEC’s MIDAS data. Hasbrouck and Saar (2013) show that most of the messages submitted by ATs are cancelled. A higher CTi,t is thus associated with more AT. The second
AT measure is the odd-lot rate, OddLoti,t, or the number of odd-lot trade messages (trades
with less than 100 shares) divided by the number of all trade messages obtained from the
SEC’s MIDAS data. Given that ATs split their parent orders into smaller child orders to
reduce the price impact of their trades, it is expected that OddLoti,t increases with AT (e.g.,
O’Hara et al. 2014; Weller 2018). Lastly, to capture the opportunistic AT strategies, we use
the first-level quote data from Refinitiv and identify the total number of latency arbitrage
opportunities (LAOi,t) associated with the correlation breakdown at high frequency similar to Budish et al. (2015). Given the massive size of the quote data, we construct this
measure for a random sample of 120 firms.5
3.3. Investment measures. We use three different investment measures to capture various
aspects of firms’ investment activities. The first measure is CAPEXi,t+1, measured as the
capital expenditure for year t + 1 divided by the total asset for year t. The second measure
is CAPEXRNDi,t+1 computed as the sum of capital expenditures including research and
4 The number of quote messages is the sum of best bid and best ask updates during the hourly interval,
where an update is a change to the price or quantity at either the best bid or offer. The quote messages
capture all order submissions, amendments, and cancellations, at or within the best prevailing quotes (e.g.,
Hendershott et al. 2011; Malceniece et al. 2019).
5 To make our sample selection random and consistent with the literature, we use the same 120 firms
that have been included in the widely-accepted NASDAQ HFT dataset (e.g., Brogaard et al. 2014).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

11
development expenses for year t + 1 divided by the total asset for year t. The last measure
is CHGASSETi,t+1, calculated as the percentage change in book value of assets from year
t to t + 1. While CAPEXi,t+1 and CAPEXRNDi,t+1 show firms’ ongoing investments,
CHGASSETi,t+1 captures firms’ acquisition and divestiture activities.
3.4. Performance measures. We employ two operating performance measures: return on
assets (ROAi,t+1) and sales growth (SGi,t+1). ROAi,t+1 is computed as the earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) in year t + 1 divided by total
assets in the same year. SGi,t+1 is the percentage change in total revenue from year t to
t + 1. To take into account that the investment decision usually takes time to materialize
into performance, we also calculate the average annual values of ROA and SG over the
next three years and include the results in the Internet Appendix.
3.5. Other variables. We employ several other variables in our analysis. The normalized
stock price (Tobin’s Q) for firm i in year t, Qi,t, is computed as the market value of equity
plus the book value of assets minus the book value of equity, scaled by the book value of
assets.6 We follow Foucault and Fr´esard (2012) and include the cash flow scaled by the
book value of assets for firm i at time t (CFi,t) and the natural logarithm of total assets
(ln(Asseti,t)) for firm i at time t in our regressions to control for the effects of cash flow
and firm size. CFi,t is the sum of net income before extraordinary items, depreciation and
amortization expenses, and R&D expenses for year t, scaled by total assets in year t −1.
In addition, we include institutional holdings (INSi,t) and institutional traders’ horizon
(INSTRi,t) for firm i in year t to control for the real effects of institutional investors for reasons unrelated to managerial learning (e.g., Derrien et al. 2013). INSi,t is computed as the
fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding for firm i in year t. INSTRi,t
is the weighted average of the quarterly churn rates of institutional investors. Following
Gaspar et al. (2005), we calculate the quarterly churn rate for each institutional investor
6 We calculate the book value of equity as the book value of the stockholder’s equity (Compustat item
SEQ) plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (Compustat item TXDITC) minus the
book value of preferred stocks. The book value of preferred stocks is the first non-missing value of redemption (Compustat item PSTKRV ), liquidation (Compustat item PSTKL), or par value (Compustat item
PSTK) in that order (e.g., Fama and French 1993).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

12
as the absolute change in the dollar value of the investor’s position from the last quarter,
scaled by the average dollar value of the investor’s position in that quarter. Thus, INSTRi,t
shows how frequently institutional investors rotate stock positions in their portfolio and
higher INSTRi,t implies shorter investment horizon.
To investigate whether AT contributes to the RPE, we compute managers’ earnings forecast accuracy (∆Accuracyi,t) from the “Company Issued Guidance” (CIG) database maintained by Refinitiv and the number of non-robot viewership data (EDGARi,t) from the
SEC’s EDGAR server. Managers’ earnings forecast accuracy for firm i in year t is computed following Zuo (2016) as the difference in the errors of two subsequent forecasts
scaled by the stock price before the first forecast. The number of non-robot viewership
data (EDGARi,t) for firm i in year t is identified following Drake et al. (2015) and Ryans
(2017) by removing downloads by computer programs (or robots) from the log files. We
do this filtering by using a classification algorithm proposed in Ryans (2017).7
We conduct cross-sectional analysis based on five stock characteristics. Our stock characteristics are institutional holdings (INSi,t), the private information measure of Brogaard
et al. (2022) (PrivateInfoi,t), relative spread (Spreadi,t), trading volume (V olumei,t),
and the amount of earning surprise (ESPi,t). As defined above, INSi,t is the fraction of
institutional holdings. PrivateInfoi,t is computed using a vector autoregression model
(VAR) to decompose a return variance into four components (market-wide information,
private firm-specific information, public firm-specific information, and noise).8 Spreadi,t
and V olumei,t are liquidity measures. Spreadi,t is the yearly average of the differences between monthly ask and bid quotes divided by the midquote. V olumei,t is the total number
of shares traded for firm i’s stock in year t. ESPi,t is defined as the percentage difference
between actual and average analyst forecast earnings per share for firm i and year t.
7 An IP address is considered to be a robot if the address (i) downloads more than 25 items in a single
minute, (ii) downloads more than 3 different companies’ items in a single minute, and (iii) downloads more
than 500 items in a single day. See Ryans (2017) for more details.
8 To construct PrivateInfoi,t, we first estimate the responses of stock returns to three shocks (market
returns, firm-specific order flow, and other idiosyncratic shocks captured in the stock-return residual) in the
VAR setting. PrivateInfoi,t is the product of the firm-specific order flow innovation in the structural VAR
and the long-run effect of a unit shock on the firm-specific order flow, inferred from the cumulative impulse
response function. See Brogaard et al. (2022) for more details.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

13
In the robustness tests, we include additional controls for the informational and capital
environment of firms. We use the ratio of insider dollar volume to the total dollar volume (Insideri,t) and the abnormal stock return around the earnings announcement dates
(RESi,t) for a given firm-year to capture the managerial information. RESi,t is computed
as the yearly average of the absolute market-adjusted returns over four quarterly earnings
announcements periods (day - 1 to day 1). We also control for the average number of analysts issuing earnings forecasts (Analysti,t) and firms’ capital constraints using the fourvariable version of the Kaplan-Zingales index (KZi,t) developed by Baker et al. (2003).9
Table 1 provides the definitions of variables, computation methods, and data sources.
[Table 1 here]
3.6. Summary statistics. Table 2 provides the summary statistics of all main (Panel A)
and supplementary variables (Panel B). Our main sample (at the intersection of Compustat and RTH) consists of 5,195 unique firms and 51,581 firm-year observations. We have
eleven other subsamples for extensions and robustness tests. The number of observations
of each variable is provided in Table 2.
In our full sample, the mean of QTi,t, is 11.17, indicating that, on average, 1 out
of 11 quotes is executed.
The average Tobin’s Q is 1.95.
The average CAPEXi,t and
CAPEXRNDi,t are 5.92% and 11.02%, respectively, suggesting that, on average, firms
roughly spend 5.9% of their total assets on capital expenditure and 5.1% on research
and development projects. The mean of CHGASSETi,t is 12.94%, indicating, on average, firms’ total assets increase by about 13% during the sample period. In terms of firms’
operating performance, an average firm has 9.1% return on assets and 5.6% annual sales
growth. The average INSi,t is 0.56, suggesting that, on average, about 56% of shares are
owned by institutional traders. The medians and standard deviations of the main and
supplementary variables are also reported in Table 2.
[Table 2 here]
9 The Kaplan-Zingales index is computed as a weighted sum of cash flow (Cashi,t), cash dividend
(DIVi,t), and cash balances (Ci,t) all scaled by lagged assets, and the leverage ratio (LEVi,t). We use the
following Compustat items to calculate the Kaplan-Zingales index: Cashi,t = CH/AT, DIVi,t = (DV P +
DV C)/AT, Ci,t= CHE/AT, and LEVi,t = (DLTT + DLC)/(DLTT + DLC + SEQ).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

14
4. Main tests
4.1. AT and investment-to-price sensitivity.
4.1.1. Ordinary least squares (OLS). To measure the impact of AT on the investment-toprice sensitivity, we estimate various specifications of the standard investment equation
(e.g., Baker et al. 2003; Chen et al. 2007; Foucault and Fr´esard 2012):
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt+β1Qi,t + β2QT i,t + β3Qi,tQT i,t + δ1CF i,t + δ2 ln(Asseti,t)
+δ3INSi,t + δ4INSTRi,t + εi,t,
(1)
where Ii,t+1 is the investment of firm i in year t + 1 proxied by CAPEXi,t+1,
CAPEXRNDi,t+1 and CHGASSETi,t+1 in different versions of the model. αi and γt are
firm and time fixed effects, Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price, QTi,t is the measure
of AT, CFi,t is the firm’s cash flow, ln(Asseti,t) is the natural logarithm of the firm’s total
assets, INSi,t is institutional holdings, and INSTRi,t is the institutional investors’ horizon.
All these variables are defined in Table 1.
According to Equation (1), the marginal effect of AT (QTi,t) in stock i on the firm i’s
investment activities is given by ∂Ii,t+1
∂QTi,t = β2 + β3Qi,t. Our primary focus of interest in
Equation (1), however, is the investment-to-price sensitivity with and without AT, the
difference of which captures the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity. The
investment-to-price sensitivity without AT (i.e., QTi,t = 0) is given by ∂Ii,t+1
∂Qi,t = β1, whereas
the investment-to-price sensitivity with AT is given by ∂Ii,t+1
∂Qi,t
= β1 + β3QTi,t. Therefore,
the coefficient β3 measures the extent to which the association between investment Ii,t+1
and price Qi,t differs due to AT. If firm managers learn more information from observing
their stock price when AT is more widespread in their stocks and use this information to
make investment decisions, we expect this coefficient to be positive and significant.
Table 3 reports the findings for the model in Equation (1) with CAPEXi,t+1,
CAPEXRNDi,t+1, and CHGASSETi,t+1 as investment measures to examine the association between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity. Standard errors are double
clustered by firm and year as defined in Petersen (2009) and all regressions are estimated
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

15
with de-meaned variables to account for firm and year fixed effects in all models. In line
with the prior literature, all three measures of investment (Ii,t+1) are positively and significantly (at 1 percent level) associated with Qi,t. The classical explanation for this relationship given by Tobin (1969) and Von Furstenberg (1977) is that stock prices reflect the
marginal product of capital. Alternatively, this association may arise because high stock
prices may induce financially constrained firms to issue shares and undertake new investments with the proceeds (e.g., Baker et al. 2003), or stock prices may allow firm managers
to learn new information from stock prices (e.g., Chen et al. 2007).
Our main goal is to examine whether AT enhances this learning process by conveying
information to firm managers, estimated as the coefficient of the interaction term, (β3) in
Equation (1). The results show that, for all investment measures, the coefficient of the
interaction term between Qi,t and QTi,t are positive and statistically significant at 1 percent level with t-statistics of 11.20 for CAPEXi,t+1, 7.19 for CAPEXRNDi,t+1, and 13.37
for CHGASSETi,t+1. Thus, the investment-to-price sensitivity is higher for firms whose
shares are more actively traded by ATs.
[Table 3 here]
To put the economic significance into perspective, we consider a one standard deviation
shock to Qi,t (1.43). This shock, on average, is associated with an increment of 1.256%
(β1·StdDev(Q) = 0.878·1.43) in CAPEXi,t+1 without AT. An average level of AT increases
this impact to 1.878% (β1·StdDev(Q)+β3·StdDev(Q)·Average(QT) = 0.878·1.43+0.039·
1.43 · 11.17), increasing the previous increment by about 50%. That is, an average level of
AT increases the impact of a one standard deviation price shock on CAPEXi,t+1 by 50%.
The economic magnitude of the impact of the average AT on a one standard deviation
price shock is 22% for CAPEXRNDi,t+1 and 40% for CHGASSETi,t+1.10 These results
suggest managers are more likely to use stock prices as a guide for investment decisions
when AT is more prevalent in their stocks.
10 Alternatively, one can assess the economic impact of AT as the impact of a one standard deviation
shock to AT on the average investment-to-price sensitivity. A one standard deviation shock to AT increases
the average CAPEX-to-price sensitivity by about 60%, CAPEXRND-to-price sensitivity by about 27%, and
CHGASSET-to-price sensitivity by about 49%.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

16
4.1.2. Difference-in-differences (DID). We have established a positive association between
AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity. However, it is not sufficient to regress investment on stock price and the interaction of stock price with AT and other controls to establish a causal link between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity. There are two
main challenges to establishing such a causal link. First, ATs are more active in the most
liquid stocks implying that ATs could choose to trade stocks of the firms that have a higher
investment-to-price sensitivity due to their stocks’ greater price informativeness (e.g., Biais and Foucault 2014). While we use the first lag of independent variables in Equation (1),
this could still raise a concern of reverse causality (e.g., Bond et al. 2012). Second, there
may be variables that simultaneously affect the trading/order book activity (AT proxies
are generally computed by using trading and order book data) and firms’ investment decisions. It is not possible to control all these variables, and hence, we may have an omitted
variable issue.11
We first employ difference-in-differences estimation method to establish causality. We
use the introduction of NYSE Autoquote in 2003 as an exogenous event to identify the
causal effect of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity by comparing the NYSE-listed
stocks as the treatment group to the NASDAQ-listed stocks as the control group. As discussed in Hendershott et al. (2011) and Chordia and Miao (2020), Autoquote was an
important innovation that allowed ATs to continuously monitor the market and automatically update their quotes. Thus, it provides an immediate feedback about the potential
impacts of AT trades on investment. Specifically, we estimate the following model:
Ii,t+1 = αi+β1Qi,t + β2Eventi,t + β3Treatmenti,t + β4Eventi,tTreatmenti,t
+β5Qi,tEventi,t + β6Qi,tTreatmenti,t + β7Qi,tEventi,tTreatmenti,t
+δ1CFi,t + δ2 ln(Asseti,t) + δ3INSi,t + δ4INSTRi,t + εi,t,
(2)
where Eventi,t is a dummy variable that is set to zero before the Autoquote and one afterward. We use 24 months window in this model and drop the Autoquote implementation
11 In Section 5.4, we control more directly for additional factors that could explain the association between
AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

17
year (2003) from the sample. Hence, Eventi,t is set to zero in 2001 and 2002 and set to one
in 2004 and 2005. Treatmenti,t is a dummy variable that is set to one for the NYSE-listed
firms and zero for the NASDAQ-listed firms. We do not have time fixed effects in this
model because there is no time variation in Eventi,t. The other variables are the same as
defined in Table 1.
The triple interaction term, Qi,tEventi,tTreatmenti,t, is our main variable of interest as its
coefficient captures the effect of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity. Table 4 shows
that the association between AT and the investment-price-sensitivity after the introduction of Autoquote is positive for all three investment measures and statistically significant
for CAPEXi,t+1 and CAPEXRNDi,t+1. The coefficients of the triple interaction term for
CAPEXi,t+1 and CAPEXRNDi,t+1 are 0.448 and 1.356 with t-statistics of 2.88 and 4.79,
respectively. Consistent with the OLS findings, these results suggest that the introduction
of Autoquote in the NYSE led the investment-to-price sensitivity of the NYSE-listed firms
to increase in comparison to the NASDAQ-listed firms.
[Table 4 here]
The use of Autoquote as an exogenous shock in the DiD setting is well-established in
the literature. For instance, Chordia and Miao (2020) utilize this approach to investigate
the impact of HFT on price efficiency by examining the market efficiency of NYSE-listed
stocks relative to NASDAQ-listed stocks around the time of Autoquote. However, there
are several limitations of this approach. First, we cannot include time fixed effects in the
DiD model as the Eventi,t variable does not have time variation. In addition, prior research
has raised some concerns regarding this approach. For example, Erhard and Sloan (2020)
highlight that during the implementation of NYSE Autoquote, NASDAQ also introduced
significant changes, such as its dual listing system in 2004, which allowed NYSE companies
to list concurrently on NASDAQ. To address such concerns, in the next section, we use
Autoquote as an instrumental variable for NYSE-listed stocks only similar to Hendershott
et al. (2011) along with other instruments in the 2SLS setting.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

18
4.1.3. Two-stage least squares (2SLS). We now use a two-stage least-squares (2SLS) instrumental variable (IV) approach with several instruments to mitigate endogeneity concerns.
First, we use the staggered implementation of Autoquote as an instrument. In this model,
we follow Hendershott et al. (2011) and restrict the sample to the NYSE-listed stocks
only. The NYSE-listed stocks have been included in the Autoquote system from January
29, 2003 to May 27, 2003. To capture the staggered implementation of the Autoquote, we
first build a daily panel data from 1 January, 2001 to 31 December, 2005. In the first stage,
we regress our daily QT measure on the Autoquote dummy that is set to zero before the
introduction of NYSE Autoquote and one afterward along with control variables that capture the main market quality dynamics of the trading process. In the second stage, we use
the yearly averages of daily fitted values of QT in the baseline investment-to-price sensitivity model (e.g., Malceniece et al. 2019). Consistent with the literature, we also use the
yearly averages of the daily control variables from the first-stage model in the second-stage
estimation.
Our sample period with the Autoquote instrument is smaller than the full sample, spanning from 2001 to 2005. Therefore, we use two additional instruments to capture the whole
sample period. First, following Sarkar and Schwartz (2009) and Foley and Putnins (2016),
we use the first lag of QTi,t (QTi,t−1) as an instrument. Second, we use the average level of
AT in all other stocks in the corresponding market capitalization quartile (AveQTi,t) as an
intrument (e.g., Hasbrouck and Saar 2013, Comerton-Forde and Putnins 2015). We also
include both QTi,t−1 and AveQTi,t as instruments in a separate specification. We estimate
four different versions of the following model:
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2d
QT i,t + β3Qi,td
QT i,t + Controls + εi,t,
(3)
where d
QT i,t is the fitted values of QT i,t obtained from the first-stage model with different
instruments. The control variables are the firm’s cash flow (CFi,t), the natural logarithm
of the firm’s total assets (ln(Asseti,t)), the fraction of institutional holdings to total shares
outstanding (INSi,t), and institutional investors’ turnover (INSTRi,t) in all versions of
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

19
the 2SLS model. We additionally include the first lag values of inverse price, trading volume, relative spread, natural logarithm of market value, and the absolute value of price
changes in the Autoquote model to control for the market quality dynamics as the first
stage of the Autoquote model is at the daily frequency.
[Table 5 here]
We report the findings of the second-stage of all four versions of the 2SLS model when
the investment is measured as CAPEXi,t+1 in Table 5, and report the results of the firststage of the models as well as the results of CAPEXRNDi,t+1 and CHGASSETi,t+1 in the
Internet Appendix. In all specifications, we find that the association between CAPEX
and the interaction of Q and QT is positive and statistically significant. Importantly, we
obtain statistically significant association between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity with the Autoquote instrument even with a small sample size. Overall, the coefficient
estimates range between 0.007 to 0.048, and t-statistics vary between 2.04 and 10.89 in the
2SLS framework. These results are consistent with the results of the OLS and DiD approaches and suggest that there is a strong and persistent causal link between AT and the
investment-to-price sensitivity.
4.2. AT and revelatory price efficiency. Our analysis with various empirical specifications reveals that AT positively impacts the investment-to-price sensitivity of firms,
thereby contributing to managerial learning from stock prices. Intuitively, managerial
learning from stock prices should only occur if managers learn new information from
stock prices, the concept known as ’revelatory price efficiency’ (RPE) in the literature (e.g.,
Bond et al. 2012, Foucault and Fr´esard 2012). Thus, managerial learning increases by the
level of RPE in prices (e.g., Edmans et al. 2017).12
12 For AT to impact RPE it is sufficient that they incorporate or encourage the incorporation of some
incremental information useful to firm managers. While firm managers may have more information about
their firms, financial market participants can provide valuable insights into potential investment opportunities, as the market aggregates information from many traders. Additionally, investment decisions depend
not only on internal information of the firm that the firm manager are generally more informed, but also on
external information such as the state of the economy, the position of competitors and so on (see Bond et al.
2012 for more discussion).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

20
We investigate the impact of AT on RPE in three different ways. First, we investigate the
impact of AT on managers’ earnings forecast accuracy. Second, we investigate the impact
of AT on information acquisition as measured by the number of non-robot downloads of
financial reporting data of firms from the SEC’s EDGAR server. We argue that the impact
of AT on both of these variables are conceptually related to the RPE. Third, as in Foucault
and Fr´esard (2012), we conduct cross-sectional analysis based on stock characteristics with
clear predictions about the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity through
managerial learning. The intuition of the cross-sectional analysis is that the impact of AT
on the investment-to-price sensitivity is expected to be stronger for firms where learning
is more valuable, helping to further address endogeneity concerns.
4.2.1. Managers’ forecast accuracy. Management earnings forecasts are a key voluntary disclosures through which firm managers provide guidance to financial markets and markets
significantly react to such disclosures (e.g., Beyer et al. 2010; Zuo 2016). Therefore, managers revise annual earnings forecasts based on the information received from the market.
We hypothesize that if AT increases RPE by revealing new information that is unknown to
managers, then AT should also improve managers’ earnings forecast accuracy.
To investigate the impact of AT on managers‘ forecast accuracy, we regress the yearly
average of ∆Accuracyi,t (difference in the errors of two subsequent forecasts scaled by
the stock price just before the first forecast as in Zuo 2016) on |Returni,t| (absolute return
between managers’ initial and updated forecast dates), QT i,t−1, and their interaction as
∆Accuracyi,t = αi + γt + β1|Returni,t| + β2QT i,t−1 + β3∆|Returni,t|QT i,t−1
+ Controls + εi,t,
(4)
where Controls are TAi,t, INSi,t, INSTRi,t, V olumei,t, and BTM i,t. We expect a positive
sign for the coefficient of the interaction term |Returni,t|QTi,t−1, indicating the impact of
price changes on the accuracy of managerial earnings forecasts is more pronounced for
stocks with higher AT activities.
[Table 6 here]
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

21
We report the results in Table 6, where in the first column, we exclude QT i,t−1 and
|Returni,t|QT i,t−1 from the above model, whereas in the second column, we include them.
Consistent with Zuo (2016), the first column shows a positive and statistically significant
association between ∆Accuracyi,t and |Returni,t|, suggesting that managers learn from
changes in stock prices. Importantly, we find that the interaction term, |Returni,t|QT i,t−1,
is positive (the coefficient estimate is 0.005) and statistically significant (t-statistic is 1.72)
at 10%. Note that we have a small sample size with 1,540 observations for this analysis because (i) managers’ earnings forecast data is not available before 2003, and (ii) the
computation of ∆Accuracyi,t requires forecast revisions.
To calculate the economic significance, we consider a one standard deviation shock
to |Returni,t| (2.83). This shock, on average, is associated with an increment of 0.906%
(β1 · StdDev(|Returni,t|) = 0.320 · 2.83) in ∆Accuracyi,t without AT. An average level of
AT increases this impact to 1.064% (β1 · StdDev(|Returni,t|) + β3 · StdDev(|Returni,t| ·
Average(QT) = 0.320 · 2.83 + 0.005 · 2.83 · 11.17), increasing the previous increment by
about 17%. That is, an average level of AT increases the impact of a one standard deviation price shock on managers’ forecast accuracy by 17%.
4.2.2. Information acquisition. The proliferation of algorithms in trading impacts the speed
at which traders acquire and incorporate value-relevant information into prices, making
ATs essential for managerial learning in financial markets. However, the role of ATs on
managerial learning is not limited to how quickly they can parse through various pieces
of information and incorporate that into prices, but also on how they impact information
acquisition of other market participants. Conceptually, various AT strategies can either
encourage or discourage information acquisition of market participants. On the one hand,
Menkveld (2016) argues that replacing market makers in standard microstructure models
(e.g., Glosten and Milgrom 1985; Kyle 1985) would result in less adverse-selection cost and
tighter bid-ask spread and encourage other market participants to acquire information.
On the other hand, Weller (2018) argues that opportunistic ATs impede the acquisition of
new information and result in lower information content in prices.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

22
To investigate the impact of AT on information acquisition, we use investors’ access to
regulatory filings of financial reporting data of firms through the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC)’s EDGAR (Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval) system. The EDGAR system is the main source of firms’ regulatory filings and the SEC maintains log files of all activities performed by users on EDGAR.13 Following Lee et al. (2015)
and Ryans (2017), we first eliminate the requests made by computer programs or automated web crawlers (i.e., robots) and only use non-robot EDGAR downloads.14 From the
data, we are able to directly observe investors’ information acquisition activity for a broad
cross-section of firms over a sample period of 2003-2017.
We are interested in the impact of AT on the information acquisition of (non-robot)
market participants. Although the information in EDGAR is not new to managers, the idea
is that the increase in information acquisition of market participants is likely to increase
RPE by improving the feedback effect from these market participants to managers (e.g.,
Edmans et al. 2015). This is because investors usually combine their private information
with the information posted by companies to make their trading decisions. Thus, AT’s
impact on the information acquisition of market participants is related to whether firm
managers extract new information from stock prices.
To examine whether AT encourages or discourages the information acquisition of market participants, we regress the number of non-robot EDGAR downloads EDGARi,t on
QTi,t as
EDGARi,t+1 = αi + γt + β1QT i,t + Controls + εi,t,
(5)
where we control for inverse price (InversePi,t), relative spread (Spreadi,t), natural logarithm of market value (ln(MVi,t)), trading volume (V olumei,t), absolute value of price
changes (∆Pricei,t), institutional holdings (INSi,t), and institutional investors’ horizon
(INSTRi,t) as control variables.
13 The raw data is available for download at https://www.sec.gov/data/edgar-log-file-data-set.html and
the processed data is available at http://www.jamesryans.com.
14 We use three different filtering algorithms proposed by Drake et al. (2015), Loughran and McDonald
(2017) and Ryans (2017). The results are virtually the same with all three approaches. For brevity, we only
report the results with Ryans (2017) and report the other two in the Internet Appendix. See Ryans (2017)
for more details on various classifications of robot and non-robot downloads procedure.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

23
We report the findings in Table 7, where the first column shows the findings for raw
values of QTi,t and the second column shows for the predicted values of QTi,t using
Autoquotei,t as an instrument. The effect of AT on non-robot EDGAR downloads are
positive and statistically significant in both models, suggesting that ATs increase information acquisition of market participants.
The magnitude of the impact is economically meaningful. An average level of QTi,t (11.17) increases EDGARi,t by about 5.1%
(β1 ·Average(QTi,t)/Average(EDGARi,t) = 11.17·0.003/0.66). Thus, ATs not only directly
contribute to managerial learning by quickly incorporating information into stock prices,
but also indirectly contribute to managerial learning by encouraging the overall information acquisition in the market.
[Table 7 here]
4.2.3. Cross-sectional analysis. We now analyze which stock characteristics influence the
magnitude of the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity. We do this analysis by allocating stocks to high (above 75th percentile) group each year according to five
stock characteristics:15 (i) the fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding
(INSi,t), (ii) the variance of stock returns driven by private information (PrivateInfoi,t),
(iii) relative spread (Spreadi,t), (iv) trading volume (V olumei,t), and (v) the amount of
earnings surprise (ESPi,t).
We focus on these stock characteristics as they have clear predictions about how AT
should impact the investment-to-price sensitivity through managerial learning and RPE.
First, institutional investors are generally considered as informed investors that have positive impact on RPE. Second, we use the variance of returns driven by private information
(PrivateInfoi,t) developed by Brogaard et al. (2022). We prefer this measure over standard private information measures because it is (arguably) more related to RPE given it
excludes noise and a significant proportion of news already known by managers. Thus,
we expect the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity to increase with both
measures.
15 We repeat the same analysis using median values as a cut-off to allocate stocks to high and low groups
and obtain consistent results.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

24
Next, we include stocks’ liquidity as measured by relative spread and trading volume
in the cross-sectional analysis for two reasons. First, stocks with higher liquidity have relatively greater price informativeness (e.g., Foucault and Gehrig 2008; Fang et al. 2009).
Second, ATs are more active in liquid stocks and therefore the contribution of AT to price
informativeness is expected to be higher in these stocks. Thus, we expect a stronger impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity in more liquid stocks (i.e., higher trading
volume and lower spread).
Lastly, the cross-sectional analysis with the amount of earnings surprise ESPi,t (difference between the actual and the average earnings per share forecast by analysts) aims to
capture the asymmetric managerial learning about positive and negative information from
stock prices. Conceptually, such asymmetry arises because it takes more time for prices
to reflect negative information than positive information due to managerial learning. The
intuition is that managerial learning (even with bad news) increases the stock price, resulting in less profitability for trading on negative information (e.g., Edmans et al. 2015).
Thus, we expect the impact of AT-driven investment-to-price sensitivity to be higher for
firms with positive news than the firms with negative news.
To conduct the cross-sectional analysis, we create a dummy variable Dh that is equal to
one if the firm’s stock is in the high group according to each stock characteristic. We then
re-estimate Equation (1) by including Dh, Qi,tDh, QTi,tDh, and QTi,tQi,tDh as
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2QT i,t + β3Dh + β4Qi,tQTi,t + β5Qi,tDh + β6QTi,tDh
+ β7Qi,tQT i,tDh + Controls + εi,t,
(6)
where the coefficient of interest is β7, showing the difference in the impact of AT on the
investment-to-price sensitivity in the high and low groups. A positive (resp. negative)
β7 implies the positive impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity is higher in the
high (resp. low) group.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

25
The results for CAPEXi,t+1 are reported in Table 8.16 The coefficient of the triple interaction (β7) is positive and statistically significant for INSi,t, PrivateInfoi,t, V olumei,t,
and ESPi,t, and negative and statistically significant for Spreadi,t. That is, the impact of AT
on the investment-to-price sensitivity is higher for firms with (i) shares more traded by
institutional and informed investors, (ii) more liquid shares, and (iii) more positive information. These results are also economically significant. For the average level of QTi,t, the
difference in the impact of a one standard deviation price shock on CAPEXi,t+1 between
the high and low institutional trading group is 0.43% (β7·Average(QT)·StdDev(Q)), constituting 7.3% of the average CAPEXi,t+1 (5.92%). The respective economic magnitudes
are 6.8% for PrivateInfoi,t, -5.1% for Spreadi,t, 15.1% for V olumei,t, and 6.5% for ESPi,t.
These results provide further support for AT’s positive impact on RPE and managerial
learning.
[Table 8 here]
5. Extensions and robustness tests
5.1. Opportunistic AT strategies. Our main results suggest that in aggregate AT fosters
managerial learning from stock prices. However, there are various AT strategies that can
crowd out information acquisition and harm stock price informativeness and managerial
learning. For example, Dugast and Foucault (2018) provide a theoretical argument on
how the reduction of the cost of information that are often associated with the technological improvements in information acquisition can reduce the stock price informativeness
due to the low precision signals crowding out the high precision signals. Similarly, Weller
(2018) and Ye et al. (2023) provide evidence that AT can impede the acquisition of new
information, thereby worsening stock price informativeness.
To reconcile our results with this literature, we distinguish between market-making
(liquidity-supplying) and opportunistic (liquidity-demanding) AT strategies and examine their impacts on investment-to-price sensitivity. On the one hand, liquidity-supplying
16 We obtain qualitatively consistent results for CAPEXRNDi,t+1 and CHGASSETi,t+1. These results
are reported in the Internet Appendix.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

26
strategies of market-maker ATs can increase liquidity, reduce the cost of information and
improve stock price informativeness (e.g., Hendershott et al. 2011; Menkveld 2013; Brogaard et al. 2019). On the other hand, order anticipation strategies (such as back-running
and latency arbitrage) of opportunistic ATs can crowd out the acquisition of new information by eroding rents to information acquirers and deteriorate stock price informativeness
(e.g., Budish et al. 2015; Weller 2018; Yang and Zhu 2020). We argue that the difference
in the results can be attributed to various AT strategies.
We measure the opportunistic AT activities as the number of latency arbitrage opportunities or “stale” quotes in the spirit of Budish et al. (2015). Budish et al. (2015) identify
stale quotes using the jump size in mid-price. Specifically, the quote at time z −1 is considered as stale if the absolute value of mid-price changes from time z −1 to z exceeds
half-spread. The intuition is that such stale quotes can be exploited (“sniped”) by opportunistic ATs before being cancelled. Using this intuition more conservatively, we measure
the jump size based on the difference between the mid-price at time z and the ask and bid
quotes at time z −1. Formally, if MidPricez > Askz−1 + TickSize, where TickSize = 0.01
USD then there is a profitable latency arbitrage opportunity and an opportunistic AT can
submit a limit buy order at Askz−1 + Tick Size to exploit this opportunity at time z. Similarly, if MidPricez < Bidz−1 −TickSize, then an opportunistic AT can submit a limit sell
order at Bidz−1 −Tick Size to exploit this opportunity at time z.
The main challenge of computing a latency arbitrage opportunity is that it requires ultra
high-frequency data. For this, we obtain the first-level of quote data from Refinitiv. Our
measure of the latency arbitrage opportunities (LAOi,t) is the total number of first-level
quotes satisfying the above criteria for each firm i in year t. Given the massive size of
this data, we use a random sample of 120 firms included in the widely-accepted NASDAQ
HFT dataset in this test (e.g., Brogaard et al. 2014). Consistent with the main analysis,
our sample period is from 1996 to 2019. To differentiate the effects of the market-maker
and opportunistic ATs on the investment-to-price sensitivity, we re-estimate the baseline
model in Equation (1) with LAOi,t:
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

27
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2QT i,t + β3Qi,tQT i,t + β4LAOi,t + β5Qi,tLAOi,t
+ β6QTi,tLAOi,t + β7Qi,tQTi,tLAOi,t + Controls + εi,t.
(7)
Table 9 highlights three key findings. First, consistent with our main findings, the
coefficient of Qi,tQTi,t, showing the aggregate impact of AT on the investment-to-price
sensitivity is positive for all three investment measures and statistically significant for
CAPEXi,t+1 and CHGASSETi,t+1 even after controlling for LAOi,t. Second, the interaction between Qi,t and LAOi,t is negative for all three measures of investment and statistically significant for CAPEXi,t+1 and CAPEXRNDi,t+1, suggesting that opportunistic
ATs deteriorate the investment-to-price sensitivity. Lastly, the coefficient of the triple interaction term, Qi,tQTi,tLAOi,t, is negative and statistically significant for CAPEXi,t+1 and
CAPEXRNDi,t+1, implying that the opportunistic ATs weaken the aggregate association
between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity by exploiting profitable latency arbitrage opportunities.
[Table 9 here]
Using the SEC’s Tick Size Pilot Program, Ye et al. (2023) and Lee and Watts (2021) find
that a rise in tick size increases the information acquisition and investment-to-price sensitivity. Both studies show that the underlying mechanism of increase in information acquisition is reduction in AT. Complementary to Ye et al. (2023) and Lee and Watts (2021),
we demonstrate that the underlying mechanism is potentially not the decline in total AT,
but in opportunistic AT. This is indeed plausible because Hagstr¨omer and Nord´en (2013)
show that an increment in tick size decreases opportunistic HFT activities, while increasing market-making HFT activities. The intuition is that market-making HFTs typically
earn the spread, while opportunistic HFTs pay the spread (e.g., Menkveld 2013). Given
that a larger tick size implies higher spread, it is likely that the stocks included in the Tick
Size Pilot Program experience a decrease in opportunistic ATs, not market-making ATs.
Therefore, a larger tick size is likely to increase the information acquisition and investmentto-price sensitivity as documented by Ye et al. (2023) and Lee and Watts (2021).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

28
5.2. Alternative measures of AT. While QTi,t is the most common AT proxies used in the
literature, we employ two additional AT measures from the SEC’s MIDAS database: (i) the
cancel-to-trade ratio (CTi,t) and (ii) the odd-lot ratio (ORi,t). The cancel-to-trade ratio for
a given firm-year is the number of all cancellation messages (full or partial) divided by the
number of all trade messages. The odd lot ratio for a given firm-year is the number of oddlot trade messages (i.e., trade messages that executed smaller than 100 shares) divided by
the number of all trade messages. The literature suggests that ATs continuously submit
and cancel limit orders to monitor the conditions of limit-order book (e.g., Hasbrouck
and Saar 2013) and slice large parent orders into smaller child orders, reducing the price
impact of their orders (e.g., O’Hara et al. 2014). Therefore, the increased level of cancelto-trade or odd-lot ratio in a particular stock is associated with the increased level of AT
activities in that stock.
Tables 10 reports the relationship between the new measures of AT and the
investment-to-price sensitivity, where for brevity we only report CAPEXi,t+1 and report
CAPEXRNDi,t+1 and CHGASSETi,t+1 in the Internet Appendix. In line with our main
findings, the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity is positive and statistically
significant for both measures of AT with a slight decrease in t-statistics. The lowered statistical significance is expected because of the smaller MIDAS sample size of 10,665 firm-year
observations covering a shorter period of 2012-2019.
[Table 10 here]
5.3. AT and operating performance. The practical implication of our main results is that
AT helps managers make better-informed decisions, increasing their ability to identify
projects with positive net present values. We test this hypothesis by examining the effects
of the AT-driven investment-to-price sensitivity on firms’ operating performance. To directly examine this hypothesis, we need the interaction coefficient (β3) in Equation (1) for
each firm-year and then relate it to a firm’s future operating performance. Estimating β3
for each firm-year is not empirically feasible. Therefore, we proceed with two alternative
approaches: (i) a ranking approach and (ii) a portfolio approach.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

29
In the ranking approach, we construct a new variable, Rankingi,t, representing the percentile of the amount of AT activities of stock i in year t (e.g., Chen et al. 2007). We then
estimate:
OPi,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Rankingi,t + β2Qi,t + Controls + εi,t,
(8)
where OP i,t+1 is the operating performance of firm i in year t + 1, Rankingi,t ∈(0, 100)
is the percentile of the degree of AT for firm i in year t. We employ two performance
measures: (i) one-year ahead return on assets (ROAz,t+1) and (ii) one-year ahead sales
growth (SGz,t+1). We also use the average of the three-year ahead values of these performance measures (ROAz,t+3 and SGz,t+3) as in Foucault and Fr´esard 2012 and report
the results in the Internet Appendix. The control variables are CF i,t, ln(Assetz,t), INSi,t,
INSTRi,t, and the lagged value of the respective operating performance to control for the
persistence in the operating performance of firms.
Table 11 reports the results. In columns (i) and (ii), Rankingi,t is determined based
on the actual QTi,t in the full sample and in columns (iii) and (iv), Rankingi,t is determined based on the predicted QTi,t (d
QT i,t) in the autoquote sample using autoquote as an
instrument. The associations between Rankingi,t and OPi,t+1 are positive and statistically
significant across all specifications. The coefficient of Rankingi,t is 0.005 with a t-statistic of
2.38 when the performance measure is ROAi,t+1 and 0.029 with a t-statistic of 5.80 when
SGi,t+1. These results are economically significant. A median level increase in QTi,t increases ROAi,t+1 by 2.75% and SGi,t+1 by 25.85%.17
[Table 11 here]
In the portfolio approach, we split our sample into deciles each year based on the interaction variable (Qi,tQTi,t) and run year-by-year investment regressions for each portfolio
to obtain the interaction coefficient for each of the 10 portfolios each year (denoted as βz,t).
Effectively, βz,t captures AT-driven investment-to-price sensitivity for portfolio z in year t.
Then, we estimate the following regression:
17 We calculate the economic impact of the median level increase in the amount of AT (QTi,t) on return
on assets (ROAi,t+1) as β1Median(Ranking)/Average(ROA) = 0.005 · 50/9.09 = 2.75%. The calculation
follows similarly for the sales growth (SGi,t+1 ).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

30
OPz,t+1 = αz + γt + β1βz,t + β2Qz,t + Controls + εz,t,
(9)
where OP z,t+1 is the operating performance of portfolio z in year t + 1 and βz,t is the ATdriven CAPEX-to-price sensitivity of portfolio z in year t, and Qz,t is the average Tobin’s
Q for portfolio z in year t. The control variables are the average cash flow (CF z,t), the average logarithm of the total assets (ln(Assetz,t)), the average fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding (INSz,t), the average turnover of institutional investors
(INSTRz,t), and the lagged dependent variable (OP z,t) for portfolio z in year t. αz and γt
are portfolio and time fixed effects. The coefficient of interest in Equation (9) is β1, showing the impact of the AT-driven investment-to-price sensitivity on the future operating
performance of portfolios.
Table 12 reports the impact of the AT-driven CAPEX-to-price sensitivity (βz,t) on the
future operating performance of firms. The impact of βz,t is positive for both measures of
operating performance and statistically significant (at 1 percent level) for ROAz,t+1. We
also report the average of the three-year ahead values of the operating performance and
the results for CAPEXRND- and CHGASSET-to-price sensitivity in the Internet Appendix. We find a positive association between the AT-driven investment-to-price sensitivity
and future operating performance of firms across all specifications, though the results of
CHGASSET-to-price sensitivity is not statistically significant, potentially due to a smaller
sample size (we have 10 portfolios for 24 years making 240 portfolio-year observations).
Overall, these results are in line with the ranking approach and provide additional support to our hypothesis that AT helps managers make better-informed investment decisions
and improves firms’ future operating performance.
[Table 12 here]
5.4. Controlling for additional factors. We extend the baseline model in Equation (1)
by controlling for additional factors that may affect the association between AT and the
investment-to-price sensitivity. First, we control for the managerial information as measured by the insiders’ trading activities and the return around earnings’ announcements.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

31
The intuition is that if AT does not contribute to the production of new information and
only improve information content of prices by incorporating existing information that
firm managers already know about, then the positive association between AT and the
investment-to-price sensitivity should disappear after controlling for the managerial information.
We obtain the insiders’ trading activities from the Thomson Financial’s TFN database.
We measure insider volume rate as the insider transactions’ dollar volume divided by the
total dollar volume of all transactions for firm i in year t (Insideri,t). We also use the
return around earnings’ announcements (RESi,t) computed as the yearly average of the
absolute market-adjusted stock returns over the four quarterly earnings announcements
periods (day-1 to day 1) for stock i in year t. The idea is that firm managers know the
accounting numbers before they are released to investors and thus the absolute abnormal
(market-adjusted) return around an earnings announcement is a proxy for the managerial
information that was not impounded entirely into stock prices before the announcement
(e.g., Fr´esard 2012). Table 13 reports the results after controlling for Insideri,t in column
(i) and RESi,t in column (ii). The coefficients of the interaction term (Qi,tQTi,t) are positive and statistically significant (t-statistics are 8.62 and 10.30) in both models.
[Table 13 here]
Next, we control for the analyst coverage. We measure the analyst coverage of a given
firm by the annual average of the monthly number of earnings per share forecasts for the
next fiscal year of the firm from the I/B/E/S database. Analyst coverage is one of the
important sources of information for firm managers. Therefore, when there is more coverage by analysts, managers may have less incentive to learn from stock prices, impacting
the association between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity. To test this, we extend
the model by adding analyst coverage (Analysti,t) and the interaction of Tobin’s Q and
analyst coverage (Qi,tAnalysti,t) as additional control variables and report the results in
column (iii) of Table 13. We find that the relationship between AT and the investment-toprice sensitivity (Qi,tQTi,t) is positive and significant even after controlling for the analyst
coverage.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

32
Lastly, we control for the level of financial constraints of firms. It is well-documented
that firms with highly liquid stocks have lower expected returns (e.g., Amihud and
Mendelson 1986; Amihud 2002; Acharya and Pedersen 2005). Butler et al. (2005) find that
firms with higher stock market liquidity incur less cost of raising external capital. Given
that ATs are one of the main determinants of stock market liquidity (e.g., Hendershott
et al. 2011; Menkveld 2013), it is plausible that AT reduces the cost of capital. Consistently, Rosu et al. (2021) find that a large quote-to-trade ratio (QTi,t) is associated with
low expected returns.
A lower cost of capital implies easier access to external equity finance, leading the firms
with a lower cost of capital to be more equity dependent. Along this line, Baker et al.
(2003) provide evidence that the investment-to-price sensitivity is higher for firms with
greater equity dependence. The cost of capital channel is one of the well-established channels that financial markets can affect investment decisions (e.g., Fischer and Merton 1984;
Morck et al. 1990; Stein 1996). The positive association between AT and the investmentto-price sensitivity could then be explained by the extent to which AT impacts the cost
of capital or capital constraints of firms. If this mechanism explains our findings, the relation between AT and the investment-to-price sensitivity should then disappear in the
framework controlling for capital constraints.
We control for capital constraints of firms by including a four-variable version of the
Kaplan-Zingales measure (KZi,t) constructed by Baker et al. (2003). KZi,t is a weighted
sum of cash flow, cash dividend, cash balances (all scaled by lagged assets), and the leverage ratio. As reported in column (iv) of Table 13, the coefficient of the KZi,t is negative
and significant, implying that more capital-constrained firms have a lower level of investment. The coefficient of Qi,tKZi,t is positive and significant, suggesting that firms with
more capital constraints have higher investment-to-price sensitivity as reported in Baker
et al. (2003). More importantly, the association between AT and the investment-to-price
sensitivity remains positive and significant after controlling for capital constraints, ruling
out the possibility that firms’ capital constraints are the main driver of our results.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

33
5.5. Additional tests. We perform a series of additional tests to check the robustness of
our results and report the results in the Internet Appendix. These tests include (i) the
impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity across various AT quintiles, (ii) further
controls such as the interaction of Qi,t and two measures of institutional trading (INSi,t
and INSTRi,t), (iii) further estimation approaches such as the Heckman (1979) selection
and Fama-Macbeth approach, and (iv) further measures such as Peters and Taylor (2017)
Qi,t instead of original Tobin‘s Qi,t to account for intangible capital and the average of
the next three years operating performance measures. In all these tests, the results are
generally consistent with our main findings.
6. Conclusion
The real economic consequences of AT is an open question that lends itself to an ongoing discussion. To contribute to this discussion, we provide evidence that the increased
level of AT activities in firms’ stocks is positively related to the investment-to-price sensitivity. We obtain this result using various estimation procedures, namely OLS, differencein-differences and 2SLS with different instruments. We link our findings to the impact of
AT on the revelatory price efficiency (RPE) by showing (i) a positive association between
AT and managers’ forecast accuracy, (ii) a positive association between AT and non-robot
downloads of firms’ financial reporting data, and (iii) a stronger impact of AT on the
investment-to-price sensitivity for stocks with higher institutional ownership, higher private information, more liquid, and more positive information.
Extending the baseline tests, we document that while in aggregate AT is positively associated with the investment-to-price sensitivity, opportunistic ATs that exploit profitable
latency arbitrage opportunities weaken the investment-to-price sensitivity. We also show
that AT-driven investment-to-price sensitivity leads to superior firm performance, suggesting that AT helps managers to make better investment decisions. We rule out alternative explanations such as other information sources and firms’ capital constraints as the
main drivers of our results. These results are robust to various measures of investment,
operating performance, algorithmic trading, and normalized stock price.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

34
Our findings highlight that the role of AT is not limited to market quality in high frequency but also has broader implications for long-term investors. From our findings, it
might be tempting to conclude that AT should be encouraged in financial markets. Multiple caveats apply before one jumps into this sort of conclusion. First, while AT may be
welfare-improving in the dimension of the investment-to-price sensitivity and firm performance, it may well be welfare-destroying in another dimension. Second, while AT enhances managers’ learning from stock prices, this may not be enough to justify the huge
infrastructure costs spent by ATs. Lastly, while our results suggest the overall positive
impact of AT on managerial learning, various opportunistic AT strategies may adversely
impact the managerial learning from stock prices. We provide suggestive evidence for one
of these cases.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

35
References
Acharya, V. V. and Pedersen, L. H. (2005), ‘Asset pricing with liquidity risk’, Journal of Financial Economics
77(2), 375–410.
Amihud, Y. (2002), ‘Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects’, Journal of Financial
Markets 5(1), 31–56.
Amihud, Y. and Mendelson, H. (1986), ‘Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread’, Journal of Financial Economics
17(2), 223–249.
Aquilina, M., Budish, E. and O’Neill, P. (2022), ‘Quantifying the high-frequency trading “arms race”’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 137(1), 493–564.
Baker, M., Stein, J. C. and Wurgler, J. (2003), ‘When does the market matter? Stock prices and the investment
of equity-dependent firms’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3), 969–1005.
Barro, R. J. (1990), ‘The stock market and investment’, Review of Financial Studies 3(1), 115–131.
Beyer, A., Cohen, D. A., Lys, T. Z. and Walther, B. R. (2010), ‘The financial reporting environment: Review
of the recent literature’, Journal of Accounting and Economics 50(2-3), 296–343.
Biais, B. and Foucault, T. (2014), ‘HFT and market quality’, Bankers, Markets & Investors 128, 5–19.
Biais, B., Foucault, T. and Moinas, S. (2015), ‘Equilibrium fast trading’, Journal of Financial Economics
116(2), 292–313.
Bond, P., Edmans, A. and Goldstein, I. (2012), ‘The real effects of financial markets’, Annual Review of Financial
Economics 4(1), 339–360.
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T. and Riordan, R. (2014), ‘High-frequency trading and price discovery’, Review
of Financial Studies 27(8), 2267–2306.
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T. and Riordan, R. (2019), ‘Price discovery without trading: Evidence from limit
orders’, Journal of Finance 74(4), 1621–1658.
Brogaard, J., Nguyen, T. H., Putnins, T. J. and Wu, E. (2022), ‘What moves stock prices? The roles of news,
noise, and information’, Review of Financial Studies 35(9), 4341–4386.
Budish, E., Cramton, P. and Shim, J. (2015), ‘The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions
as a market design response’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(4), 1547–1621.
Butler, A. W., Grullon, G. and Weston, J. P. (2005), ‘Stock market liquidity and the cost of issuing equity’,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40(2), 331–348.
Chakrabarty, B., Moulton, P. and Wang, X. (2015), ‘Attention effects in a high-frequency world’, Working
Paper .
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

36
Chen, Q., Goldstein, I. and Jiang, W. (2007), ‘Price informativeness and investment sensitivity to stock price’,
Review of Financial Studies 20(3), 619–650.
Chordia, T. and Miao, B. (2020), ‘Market efficiency in real time: Evidence from low latency activity around
earnings announcements’, Journal of Accounting and Economics 70(2-3), 101335.
Cochrane, J. H. (2013), ‘Finance: Function matters, not size’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(2), 29–50.
Comerton-Forde, C. and Putnins, T. J. (2015), ‘Dark trading and price discovery’, Journal of Financial Economics 118(1), 70–92.
Derrien, F., Kecsk´es, A. and Thesmar, D. (2013), ‘Investor horizons and corporate policies’, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 48(6), 1755–1780.
Dessaint, O., Foucault, T., Fr´esard, L. and Matray, A. (2019), ‘Noisy stock prices and corporate investment’,
Review of Financial Studies 32(7), 2625–2672.
Dow, J. and Gorton, G. (1997), ‘Stock market efficiency and economic efficiency: Is there a connection?’,
Journal of Finance 52(3), 1087–1129.
Drake, M. S., Roulstone, D. T. and Thornock, J. R. (2015), ‘The determinants and consequences of information
acquisition via EDGAR’, Contemporary Accounting Research 32(3), 1128–1161.
Dugast, J. and Foucault, T. (2018), ‘Data abundance and asset price informativeness’, Journal of Financial
Economics 130(2), 367–391.
Edmans, A., Goldstein, I. and Jiang, W. (2015), ‘Feedback effects, asymmetric trading, and the limits to
arbitrage’, American Economic Review 105(12), 3766–3797.
Edmans, A., Jayaraman, S. and Schneemeier, J. (2017), ‘The source of information in prices and investmentprice sensitivity’, Journal of Financial Economics 126(1), 74–96.
Erhard, R. and Sloan, R. G. (2020), ‘Does low latency trading improve market efficiency? A discussion’,
Journal of Accounting and Economics 70(2-3), 101342.
Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (1993), ‘Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds’, Journal of
Financial Economics 33(1), 3–56.
Fang, V. W., Noe, T. H. and Tice, S. (2009), ‘Stock market liquidity and firm value’, Journal of Financial Economics 94(1), 150–169.
Fischer, S. and Merton, R. C. (1984), ‘Macroeconomics and finance: The role of the stock market’, CarnegieRochester conference series on public policy 21, 57–108.
Foley, S. and Putnins, T. J. (2016), ‘Should we be afraid of the dark? Dark trading and market quality’, Journal
of Financial Economics 122(3), 456–481.
Foucault, T. and Fr´esard, L. (2012), ‘Cross-listing, investment sensitivity to stock price, and the learning
hypothesis’, Review of Financial Studies 25(11), 3305–3350.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

37
Foucault, T. and Fresard, L. (2014), ‘Learning from peers’ stock prices and corporate investment’, Journal of
Financial Economics 111(3), 554–577.
Foucault, T. and Gehrig, T. (2008), ‘Stock price informativeness, cross-listings, and investment decisions’,
Journal of Financial Economics 88(1), 146–168.
Foucault, T., Hombert, J. and Rosu, I. (2016), ‘News trading and speed’, Journal of Finance 71(1), 335–382.
Foucault, T., Kozhan, R. and Tham, W. W. (2017), ‘Toxic arbitrage’, Review of Financial Studies 30(4), 1053–
1094.
Fr´esard, L. (2012), ‘Cash savings and stock price informativeness’, Review of Finance 16(4), 985–1012.
Gaspar, J.-M., Massa, M. and Matos, P. (2005), ‘Shareholder investment horizons and the market for corporate control’, Journal of Financial Economics 76(1), 135–165.
Glosten, L. R. and Milgrom, P. R. (1985), ‘Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders’, Journal of Financial Economics 14(1), 71–100.
Hagstr¨omer, B. and Nord´en, L. (2013), ‘The diversity of high-frequency traders’, Journal of Financial Markets
16(4), 741–770.
Hasbrouck, J. and Saar, G. (2013), ‘Low-latency trading’, Journal of Financial Markets 16(4), 646–679.
Hayek, F. (1945), ‘The use of knowledge in society’, American Economic Review 35(4), 519–530.
Heckman, J. J. (1979), ‘Sample selection bias as a specification error’, Econometrica 47(1), 153–161.
Hendershott, T., Jones, C. M. and Menkveld, A. J. (2011), ‘Does algorithmic trading improve liquidity?’,
Journal of Finance 66(1), 1–33.
Jovanovic, B. and Menkveld, A. J. (2016), ‘Middlemen in limit order markets’, Working Paper .
Kyle, A. S. (1985), ‘Continuous auctions and insider trading’, Econometrica 53(6), 1315–1335.
Lee, C. M., Ma, P. and Wang, C. C. (2015), ‘Search-based peer firms: Aggregating investor perceptions
through internet co-searches’, Journal of Financial Economics 116(2), 410–431.
Lee, C. M. and Watts, E. M. (2021), ‘Tick size tolls: Can a trading slowdown improve earnings news discovery?’, The Accounting Review 96(3), 373–401.
Loughran, T. and McDonald, B. (2017), ‘The use of EDGAR filings by investors’, Journal of Behavioral Finance
18(2), 231–248.
Malceniece, L., Malcenieks, K. and Putnins, T. J. (2019), ‘High frequency trading and comovement in financial markets’, Journal of Financial Economics 134(2), 381–399.
Menkveld, A. J. (2013), ‘High frequency trading and the new market makers’, Journal of Financial Markets
16(4), 712–740.
Menkveld, A. J. (2016), ‘The economics of high-frequency trading: Taking stock’, Annual Review of Financial
Economics 8, 1–24.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

38
Morck, R., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W. (1990), ‘Do managerial objectives drive bad acquisitions?’, Journal
of Finance 45(1), 31–48.
O’Hara, M., Yao, C. and Ye, M. (2014), ‘What’s not there: Odd lots and market data’, Journal of Finance
69(5), 2199–2236.
Peters, R. H. and Taylor, L. A. (2017), ‘Intangible capital and the investment-q relation’, Journal of Financial
Economics 123(2), 251–272.
Petersen, M. A. (2009), ‘Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches’,
Review of Financial Studies 22(1), 435–480.
Rosu, I., Sojli, E. and Tham, W. W. (2021), ‘Quoting activity and the cost of capital’, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 56(8), 2764–2799.
Ryans, J. (2017), ‘Using the EDGAR log file data set’, Working Paper .
Sarkar, A. and Schwartz, R. A. (2009), ‘Market sidedness: Insights into motives for trade initiation’, Journal
of Finance 64(1), 375–423.
Stein, J. (1996), ‘Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world’, Journal of Business 69(4), 429–455.
Subrahmanyam, A. and Titman, S. (1999), ‘The going-public decision and the development of financial
markets’, Journal of Finance 54(3), 1045–1082.
Tobin, J. (1969), ‘A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
1(1), 15–29.
Von Furstenberg, G. M. (1977), ‘Corporate investment: Does market valuation matter in the aggregate?’,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1977(2), 347–408.
Weller, B. M. (2018), ‘Does algorithmic trading reduce information acquisition?’, Review of Financial Studies
31(6), 2184–2226.
Yang, L. and Zhu, H. (2020), ‘Back-running: Seeking and hiding fundamental information in order flows’,
Review of Financial Studies 33(4), 1484–1533.
Ye, M., Zheng, M. Y. and Zhu, W. (2023), ‘The effect of tick size on managerial learning from stock prices’,
Journal of Accounting and Economics 75, 101515.
Zuo, L. (2016), ‘The informational feedback effect of stock prices on management forecasts’, Journal of Accounting and Economics 61(2-3), 391–413.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

39
Table 1
Definitions of variables
This table reports the notation, description, and source of variables. The units of the variables are in parentheses following the variable names. Panel A reports the main model variables and Panel B reports the supplementary variables.
Panel A: Main model variables
Variable
Description
Data source
CAPEXi,t (%)
Capital expenditure for firm i in year t is computed as capital expenditures in
year t scaled by total assets in year t −1.
Compustat
CAPEXRNDi,t (%)
Capital expenditure plus research and development expenditure (R&D) for firm
i in year t is computed as capital expenditures plus R&D in year t scaled by total
assets in year t −1.
Compustat
CHGASSETi,t (%)
Change in total assets for firm i in year t is computed as the percentage change in
book value of assets from year t −1 to year t.
Compustat
ROAi,t (%)
Return on assets for firm i in year t is computed as earnings before interest, tax,
depreciation, and amortization (EBITDAi,t) in year t divided by total assets in
year t.
Compustat
SGi,t (%)
Sales growth for firm i in year t is computed as the percentage change in total
revenue from year t −1 to year t.
Compustat
QTi,t
Algorithmic trading measure for firm i in year t is computed as the number of
quote messages divided by the number of transactions.
Refinitiv
Qi,t
The normalized stock price for firm i and year t is computed as the market value
of the equity plus the book value of assets minus the book value of equity, scaled
by the book value of assets.
Compustat
CFi,t (%)
Cash flow for firm i in year t is computed as the sum of net income before
extraordinary items, depreciation and amortization expenses, and R&D expenses
for year t, scaled by total assets in year t −1.
Compustat
ln(Asseti,t)
Natural logarithm of the total assets in dollars for firm i in year t.
Compustat
INSi,t (%)
Institutional holdings measure for firm i in year t is computed as the fraction of
institutional holdings to total shares outstanding.
Refinitiv
INSTRi,t
Institutional traders’ horizon measure for firm i in year t is computed as the
weighted average of the quarterly churn rates of institutional investors. The churn
rate for each institutional investor r and quarter q is computed following Gaspar
et al. (2005) as:
CRr,q =
P
j∈Q |Nj,r,qPj,q−Nj,r,q−1Pj,q−1−Nj,r,q−1∆Pj,q|
P
j∈Q
Nj,r,qPj,q+Nj,r,q−1Pj,q−1
2
,
where j is a company index and Q is the set of companies held by an institutional
investor, Nj,r,q is the number of shares of company j held by institutional
investor r at quarter q, and Pj,q is the price of share of company j for quarter q.
Refinitiv
∆Accuracyi,t (%)
Manager’s forecast accuracy for firm i in year t is computed following Zuo (2016):
∆Accuracyi,t = −100 ·
(|MF d2
i,t −AEarningi,t|−|MF d1
i,t −AEarningi,t|)
P d1−2
i
,
where MF d2
i,t is the earnings forecast released by firm i on date d2, MF d1
i,t is the
most recent earnings forecast (for the same earning) released by firm i prior to
MF d2
i,t , AEarningi,t is the actual earnings for year t announced by firm i, and
P d1−2
i
is the stock price two days before the issuance of MF d1
i,t .
Refinitiv
EDGARi,t (÷105)
The number of non-robot EDGAR filings downloads for firm i in year t. Following
Ryans (2017), IP addresses are considered as robot if they (i) download more than
25 items in a single minute, (ii) download more than 3 different companies’ items
in a single minute, and (iii) download more than 500 items in a single day.
SEC
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

40
Panel B: Supplementary variables
Variable
Description
Data source
ESPi,t (%)
The amount of earning surprise measure for firm i in year t is computed as the
percentage difference between the actual and forecast earnings per share.
Forecast earnings per share is the average earnings forecast of analysts.
I/B/E/S
PrivateInfoi,t
The private firm-specific information for firm i in year t is computed using a
vector autoregression model following Brogaard et al. (2022), where the
responses of stock returns to three shocks (market returns, firm-specific order
flow, and other idiosyncratic shocks captured in the stock-return residual) are
estimated. PrivateInfoi,t is then computed as the product of the firm-specific
order flow innovation and the long-run effect of a unit shock on the firm-specific
order flow, inferred from the cumulative impulse response function.
CRSP
Insideri,t (%)
Insider volume rate for stock i in year t is computed as the ratio of insider dollar
volume to the total dollar volume of all transactions for stock i in year t.
TFN/CRSP
RESi,t (%)
Return around earnings announcements for stock i in year t is computed as the
yearly average of the absolute market-adjusted return over the four quarterly
earnings announcements periods (day-1 to day 1) for stock i in year t.
TFN/CRSP
Analysti,t
Annual average of monthly number of analysts issuing EPS forecasts for the next
year of firm i in year t.
I/B/E/S
KZi,t
Kaplan-Zingales metric for firm i in year t is computed as the weighted sum of
cash flow (CFi,t), cash dividend (DIVi,t), and cash balances (Ci,t) all scaled by
lagged assets, and the leverage ratio following Baker et al. (2003) as:
KZi,t = −1.002CFi,t −39.368DIVi,t −1.315Ci,t + 3.139LEVi,t
Compustat
CTi,t
Cancel to trade ratio for firm i in year t is computed as the number of all
cancellation messages (full or partial) divided by the number of trade messages
for firm i’s stock in year t.
MIDAS
OddLoti,t (%)
Odd lot ratio for firm i in year t is computed as the number of odd lot trade
(trades with less than 100 shares) messages divided by the number of all trade
messages for firm i’s stock in year t.
MIDAS
LAOi,t (÷105)
Latency arbitrage opportunities for firm i in year t is the total number of “stale”
quotes (first-level quote updates with mid-price jump) as in Budish et al. (2015).
The ask (resp. bid) quote at time z −1 is stale MidPricez > Askz−1 + TickSize
(resp. MidPricez < Bidz−1 −TickSize), where TickSize = 0.01 USD.
Refinitiv
|Returni,t| (%)
Absolute value of return for firm i in year t is computed as the percentage return
over the period between managers’ initial and updated forecast dates.
CRSP
InversePi,t (1/$)
Inverse price for firm i in year t is computed as the yearly average of monthly
inverse price (1/price) for firm i in year t.
CRSP
Spreadi,t (%)
Relative spread for firm i in year t is the yearly average of the monthly relative
spread for firm i in year t. Monthly relative spread is computed as the
difference between closing ask and bid prices for each month divided by the
midpoint of closing ask and bid prices.
CRSP
ln(MVi,t)
Natural logarithm of the market value for firm i in year t.
CRSP
V olumei,t (÷106)
The total volume of shares traded for firm i in year t.
CRSP
TAi,t (÷106)
Total asset for firm i in year t.
CRSP
BTMi,t
Book-to-market ratio firm i in year t.
CRSP
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

41
Table 2
Summary statistics
This table reports the summary statistics (mean, median, and standard deviation) of main and supplementary model
variables across all firms/stocks. Panel A reports the summary statistics for the main model variables and Panel B reports
the supplementary variables. For the definitions and calculations of variables refer to Table 1. The units of variables
are in parentheses following the variable names in the first column and the number of firm-year observations for each
variable is in the last column.
Panel A: Main model variables
Mean
Median
Std. dev.
N
CAPEXi,t (%)
5.92
3.72
6.75
51,581
CAPEXRNDi,t (%)
11.02
7.43
11.56
51,581
CHGASSETi,t (%)
12.94
5.40
36.50
51,581
ROAi,t (%)
9.09
11.15
14.88
51,581
SGi,t (%)
5.61
4.95
21.30
51,581
Qi,t
1.95
1.48
1.43
51,581
QTi,t
11.17
6.84
13.58
51,581
CFi,t (%)
9.71
10.07
12.50
51,581
ln(Asset)i,t
6.42
6.28
2.00
51,581
INSi,t (%)
0.56
0.59
1.23
51,581
INSTRi,t
0.26
0.24
0.12
51,581
∆Accuracyi,t (%)
4.37
0.00
12.31
1,540
EDGARi,t (÷105)
0.66
0.33
1.62
30,605
Panel B: Supplementary variables
ESPi,t (%)
-3.43
0.33
97.57
40,689
PrivateInfoi,t
0.01
0.00
0.01
31,126
Insideri,t (%)
6.41
0.20
671.63
40,299
RESi,t (%)
6.20
5.16
4.37
38,135
Analysti,t
7.93
5.58
7.07
39,842
KZi,t
-0.19
0.05
5.01
45,239
CTi,t
37.97
26.73
30.69
10,665
OddLoti,t (%)
35.38
34.71
13.41
10,665
LAOi,t (÷105)
0.15
0.06
0.41
1,450
|Returni,t| (%)
2.47
1.48
2.83
1,540
InversePi,t (1/$)
0.15
0.06
0.34
30,605
Spreadi,t (%)
0.69
0.20
1.25
30,605
ln(MVi,t)
13.32
13.25
1.97
30,605
V olumei,t (÷106)
1.21
0.27
3.81
30,605
TAi,t (÷106)
12.73
4.36
20.17
1,540
BTMi,t
0.47
0.39
0.33
1,540
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

42
Table 3
AT and investment-to-price sensitivity: OLS
This table reports the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity using the
following ordinary least squares (OLS) model:
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2QT i,t + β3Qi,tQT i,t + δ1CF i,t + δ2 ln(Asseti,t) + δ3INSi,t + δ4INSTRi,t + εi,t
where Ii,t+1 is the investment of firm i in year t + 1. In columns (i), (ii), and (iii) investment is respectively defined
as the capital expenditures divided by lagged total assets (CAPEXi,t+1), the capital expenditures plus R&D expenses
divided by lagged total assets (CAPEXRNDi,t+1), and the annual change in total assets divided by lagged total assets
(CHGASSET i,t+1). Across all specifications, Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price (Tobin’s Q), QT i,t is the yearly
AT proxy, CF i,t is the firm’s cash flow, ln(Asseti,t) is the natural logarithm of the firm’s total assets, INSi,t is the
fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding, INSTRi,t is institutional investors’ turnover. All versions
of models include both firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively). The standard errors used to compute the
t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. *, **, and *** denote the significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to Table 1.
CAPEXi,t+1
CAPEXRNDi,t+1
CHGASSET i,t+1
Qi,t
0.878***
(31.84)
1.848***
(36.59)
9.940***
(37.87)
QT i,t
-0.057***
(-10.90)
-0.037***
(-4.78)
-0.384***
(-9.92)
Qi,tQTi,t
0.039***
(11.20)
0.037***
(7.19)
0.359***
(13.37)
CFi,t
0.040***
(16.37)
0.034***
(7.21)
0.099***
(4.26)
ln(Asseti,t)
-1.250***
(-30.04)
-3.035***
(-43.02)
-15.826***
(-44.90)
INSi,t
0.014
(1.02)
-0.001
(-0.03)
0.187
(0.97)
INSTRi,t
-0.954***
(-5.28)
-0.921***
(-3.42)
-1.632
(-1.28)
N obs.
51,581
51,581
51,581
R2
9%
16%
18%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

43
Table 4
AT and investment-to-price sensitivity: DiD
This table reports the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity using the
following differences-in-difference (DiD) model:
Ii,t+1 = αi + β1Qi,t + β2Eventi,t + β3Treatmenti,t + β4Eventi,tTreatmenti,t + β5Qi,tEventi,t+
β6Qi,tTreatmenti,t + β7Qi,tEventi,tTreatmenti,t + δ1CFi,t + δ2 ln(Asseti,t) + δ3INSi,t + δ4INSTRi,t + εi,t
where Ii,t+1 is the investment of firm i in year t + 1. In columns (i), (ii), and (iii) investment is respectively defined
as the capital expenditures divided by lagged total assets (CAPEXi,t+1), the capital expenditures plus R&D expenses
divided by lagged total assets (CAPEXRNDi,t+1), and the annual change in total assets divided by lagged total assets
(CHGASSET i,t+1). Across all specifications, Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price (Tobin’s Q), Eventi,t is a dummy
variable set to zero before the autoquote introduction and one afterward, Treatmenti,t is a dummy variable set to
one for NYSE-listed firms and zero for NASDAQ-listed firms, CF i,t is the firm’s cash flow, ln(Asseti,t) is the natural
logarithm of the firm’s total assets, INSi,t is the fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding, INSTRi,t
is institutional investors’ turnover. All versions of models include firm fixed effect (αi). The standard errors used to
compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. The sample includes NYSE- and NASDAQlisted stocks only and the sample period is from 2001 to 2005. *, **, and *** denote the significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to Table 1.
CAPEXi,t+1
CAPEXRNDi,t+1
CHGASSET i,t+1
Qi,t
0.798***
(12.65)
1.999***
(13.93)
8.494***
(11.92)
Eventi,t
0.555***
(2.84)
1.853***
(4.99)
4.889***
(2.62)
Treatmenti,t
1.469
(0.97)
11.215**
(2.29)
134.234*
(1.75)
Eventi,tTreatmenti,t
-0.453
(-1.46)
-1.614***
(-3.13)
-2.343
(-0.94)
Qi,tEventi,t
-0.246***
(-3.20)
-0.747**
(4.24)
-1.300
(-1.47)
Qi,tTreatmenti,t
0.852**
(4.45)
-0.353
(-1.23)
-0.090
(-0.06)
Qi,tEventi,tTreatmenti,t
0.448***
(2.88)
1.356***
(4.79)
1.956
(1.51)
CFi,t
0.039***
(8.10)
0.057***
(5.74)
0.277***
(5.37)
ln(Asseti,t)
-0.960***
(-9.16)
-3.263***
(-16.38)
-18.623***
(-17.94)
INSi,t
3.883***
(7.08)
3.175***
(3.44)
22.781***
(4.83)
INSTRi,t
0.448
(0.91)
0.545
(0.69)
0.640
(0.18)
N obs.
8,515
8,515
8,515
R2
11%
18%
19%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

44
Table 5
AT and investment-to-price sensitivity: 2SLS IV
This table reports the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity using the
following two-stage instrumental variable approach (2SLS IV) model:
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2d
QT i,t + β3Qi,td
QT i,t + Controls + εi,t
where Ii,t+1 is the investment of firm i in year t + 1 defined as the capital expenditures divided by lagged total assets
CAPEXi,t+1, Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price, and d
QT i,t is the predicted value of AT proxy using different
instrumental variables in the first stage. In Model 1, d
QT i,t is the yearly average of the predicted daily AT proxy QT i,d
using the model QT i,d = αi + γd + β1Autoquotei,d + Controls∗+ εi,d, where αi is firm and γd is day fixed effects,
Autoquotei,d is a dummy variable set to zero before the autoquote introduction and one afterward, and Controls∗are
the first lag values of inverse price, trading volume, relative spread, natural logarithm of market value, and the absolute
value of price changes. In Model 2, we predict the yearly AT proxy d
QT i,t using the average QT by stock i’s size quartile
group (AvgQTi,t) as an instrumental variable. In Model 3, we predict the yearly AT proxy d
QT i,t using the lagged QT
(QTi,t−1) as an instrumental variable. In Model 4, the instrumental variables are AvgQTi,t and QTi,t−1. Across all
specifications, we include the firm’s cash flow (CF i,t), the natural logarithm of the firm’s total assets (ln(Asseti,t)), the
fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding (INSi,t), and institutional investors’ turnover (INSTRi,t)
as control variables. All models include both firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively). The standard errors
used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. In Model 1, the sample includes
NYSE-listed stocks only and the sample period is from 2001 to 2005. In Models 2, 3 and 4, we use the full sample (19962019). *, **, and *** denote the significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables
refer to Table 1.
Model 1
Autoquotei,d
Model 2
AvgQTi,t
Model 3
QTi,t−1
Model 4
AvgQTi,t and QTi,t−1
Qi,t
1.020***
(7.28)
0.624***
(15.77)
1.064***
(32.49)
0.822***
(27.90)
d
QT i,t
-0.116***
(-4.59)
-0.146***
(-13.91)
-0.053***
(-9.08)
-0.061***
(-9.43)
Qi,t d
QTi,t
0.007**
(2.04)
0.048***
(9.74)
0.033***
(10.89)
0.032***
(9.84)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N obs.
4,669
51,581
45,114
45,114
R2
13%
10%
9%
9%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

45
Table 6
Revelatory Price Efficiency: AT and manager’s forecast accuracy
This table reports the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on managers’ forecast accuracy using the following
model:
∆Accuracyi,t = αi + γt + β1|Returni,t| + β2QT i,t−1 + β3∆|Returni,t|QT i,t−1 + Controls + εi,t
where ∆Accuracyi,t is the manager’s forecast accuracy of firm i in year t, |Returni,t| is the absolute value of return
of firm i’s stock in year t (computed as the percentage return over the period between managers’ initial and updated
forecast dates), QT i,t−1 is the yearly AT proxy, and Controls are the fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding (INSi,t), the institutional investors’ turnover (INSTRi,t), book-to-market ratio (BMT i,t), total asset (TAi,t),
and volume (V olumei,t). In column (i), we exclude QT i,t−1 and |Returni,t|QT i,t−1 from the above model, whereas in
column (ii) we include them. All versions of models include both firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively.
The standard errors used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. *, **, and ***
denote the significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to Table 1.
(i)
(ii)
|Returni,t|
0.356***
(3.07)
0.320**
(2.75)
QT i,t−1
-0.120*
(-1.85)
|Returni,t|QTi,t−1
0.005*
(1.72)
INSi,t
0.802
(0.22)
0.893
(0.24)
INSTRi,t
-3.093
(-0.70)
-3.102
(-0.71)
BMTi,t
5.228***
(2.92)
5.413***
(3.01)
TAi,t
-0.118***
(-3.59)
-0.112***
(-3.39)
V olumei,t
2.355
(1.29)
2.230
(1.22)
N obs.
1,540
1,540
R2
2.5%
2.8%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

46
Table 7
Revelatory Price Efficiency: AT and non-robot EDGAR downloads
This table reports the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on the non-Robot EDGAR downloads using the
following model:
EDGARi,t+1 = αi + γt + β1QT i,t + Controls + εi,t
where EDGARi,t+1 is the non-robot EDGAR downloads, QT i,t is the yearly AT proxy, and Controls are the inverse
price (InverseP i,t), the relative spread (Spreadi,t), the natural logarithm of market value (ln(MV i,t)), the trading volume (V olumei,t), the absolute value of price changes (∆Pricei,t), the fraction of institutional holdings to total shares
outstanding (INSi,t), and the institutional investors’ turnover (INSTRi,t). The number of non-robot EDGAR downloads is measured using Ryans (2017). In column (i), AT is measured using QT i,t based on the full sample period
(1996-2019) and in column (ii), AT is measured using the predicted values of QT i,t(d
QT i,t) by the Autoquote instrument (as defined in Table 5) based on the truncated sample period (2001-2005). All versions of models include both
firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively). The standard errors used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets)
are double clustered by firm and year. *, **, and *** denote the significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. For the
detailed definitions of variables refer to Table 1.
(i) Full sample
QTi,t
(ii) Autoquote sample
d
QT i,t
QTi,t
0.003***
(10.63)
0.006***
(5.60)
InversePi,t
0.130**
(2.49)
0.003
(0.08)
Spreadi,t
0.018***
(2.61)
0.005
(1.16)
ln(MV )i,t
0.207***
(8.80)
0.042**
(2.21)
V olumei,t
0.041***
(3.14)
0.013
(0.64)
∆Pricei,t
0.194**
(2.20)
0.023*
(1.61)
INSi,t
-0.004
(-1.15)
-0.007
(-0.36)
INSTRi,t
0.146***
(3.53)
-0.163***
(-4.96)
N obs.
30,605
3,250
R2
4%
1.9%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

47
Table 8
Revelatory Price Efficiency: Cross-sectional analysis
This table presents the results for the estimation of the cross-sectional impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity
using the following model:
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2QT i,t + β3Dh + β4Qi,tQTi,t + β5Qi,tDh + β6QTi,tDh + β7Qi,tQT i,tDh + Controls + εi,t,
Ii,t+1 is the investment of firm i in year t + 1 defined as the capital expenditures divided by lagged total assets
CAPEXi,t+1, Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price, QT i,t is the yearly AT proxy, and Dh is a dummy variable that is
equal to one if the value of a given measure is above the 75th percentile of that measure across all other stocks each year.
In columns (i) to (v), Dh is respectively determined based on the fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding (INSi,t), the variance of returns driven by private information (PrivateInfoi,t), relative spread (Spreadi,t),
trading volume (V olumei,t), and the amount of earning surprises (ESP i,t). Controls are CF i,t, ln(Asseti,t), INSi,t
(excluded in column (ii)) and INSTRi,t. All models include both firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively).
The standard errors used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. *, **, and ***
denote the significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to Table 1.
(i)
Dh = INSi,t
(ii)
Dh = PrivateInfoi,t
(iii)
Dh = Spreadi,t
(iv)
Dh = V olumei,t
(v)
Dh = ESPi,t
Qi,t
0.887***
(26.82)
0.848***
(21.43)
0.770***
(25.78)
0.835***
(23.98)
0.853***
(27.61)
QTi,t
-0.054***
(-9.76)
-0.045***
(-5.95)
-0.059***
(-7.69)
-0.044***
(-7.63)
-0.065***
(-8.87)
Dh
0.602***
(3.67)
-0.099
(-0.70)
-1.443**
(-9.84)
1.014**
(5.78)
-0.265**
(-2.08)
QTi,tQi,t
0.037***
(10.02)
0.027***
(5.32)
0.037***
(7.96)
0.030***
(7.79)
0.044***
(9.82)
Qi,tDh
-0.076
(-1.54)
-0.004
(-0.07)
0.018
(0.26)
-0.085*
(-1.65)
0.052
(1.12)
QTi,tDh
-0.069***
(-3.18)
-0.024*
(-1.79)
0.039***
(3.56)
-0.135***
(-4.88)
-0.034**
(-2.43)
QTi,tQi,tDh
0.027**
(2.40)
0.025***
(2.71)
-0.019**
(-2.53)
0.056***
(4.05)
0.024***
(2.70)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N obs.
51,581
31,126
46,136
46,136
40,450
R2
10%
10%
9.7%
9.4%
10%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

48
Table 9
AT and investment-to-price sensitivity: Latency arbitrage
This table reports the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity using the
following ordinary least squares (OLS) model:
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2QT i,t + β3Qi,tQT i,t + β4LAOi,t + β5Qi,tLAOi,t
+ β6QTi,tLAOi,t + β7Qi,tQTi,tLAOi,t + Controls + εi,t
where Ii,t+1 is the investment of firm i in year t + 1, Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price, QT i,t is the yearly AT
proxy, and LAOi,t is the number of latency arbitrage opportunities for stock i in year t. In columns (i), (ii), and (iii)
investment is respectively defined as the capital expenditures divided by lagged total assets (CAPEXi,t+1), the capital
expenditures plus R&D expenses divided by lagged total assets (CAPEXRNDi,t+1), and the annual change in total
assets divided by lagged total assets (CHGASSET i,t+1). Controls are the firm’s cash flow (CF i,t), the natural logarithm of the firm’s total assets (ln(Asseti,t)), the fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding (INSi,t),
and institutional investors’ turnover (INSTRi,t). All models include both firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively). The standard errors used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. *, **,
and *** denote the significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to Table
1.
CAPEXi,t+1
CAPEXRNDi,t+1
CHGASSET i,t+1
Qi,t
0.868***
(6.77)
1.722***
(8.15)
5.834***
(6.35)
QT i,t
-0.121***
(-4.00)
-0.055
(-1.37)
-0.842***
(-3.12)
Qi,tQTi,t
0.075***
(4.23)
0.030
(1.20)
0.553***
(3.41)
LAOi,t
2.536***
(3.69)
3.344***
(2.82)
9.971*
(1.77)
Qi,tLAOi,t
-0.389**
(-2.56)
-0.628***
(-2.05)
-1.183
(-0.80)
QTi,tLAOi,t
0.139**
(0.98)
0.262
(1.29)
0.059
(0.05)
Qi,tQTi,tLAOi,t
-0.110**
(-2.06)
-0.158**
(-2.10)
-0.270
(-0.67)
CFi,t
0.038***
(2.10)
0.079**
(2.50)
0.336***
(2.96)
ln(Asseti,t)
-0.865***
(-3.10)
-2.864***
(-6.96)
-13.543***
(-5.45)
INSi,t
-0.069
(-0.11)
2.058
(1.60)
9.718*
(1.78)
INSTRi,t
-0.056
(-0.06)
-2.778
(-1.61)
-5.481
(-0.56)
N obs.
1,468
1,468
1,468
R2
18%
27%
20%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

49
Table 10
AT and investment-to-price sensitivity: MIDAS
This table presents the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity using the
following model:
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2MIDASAT i,t + β3Qi,tMIDASAT i,t + Controls + εi,t
where Ii,t+1 is the investment of firm i in year t + 1 defined as the capital expenditures divided by lagged total assets CAPEXi,t+1, Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price, MIDASAT i,t is the yearly AT proxy obtained from the
SEC’s MIDAS data. In column (i), MIDASATi,t is the cancel-to-trade ratio (CTi,t) and in column (ii), it is the oddlot trade rate (OddLoti,t). Controls are the firm’s cash flow (CF i,t), the natural logarithm of the firm’s total assets
(ln(Asseti,t)), the fraction of institutional holdings to total shares outstanding (INSi,t), and institutional investors’
turnover (INSTRi,t). All versions of models include both firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively). The
standard errors used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. *, **, and *** denote
the significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to Table 1.
(i)
MIDASATi,t = CTi,t
(ii)
MIDASAT i,t = OddLoti,t
Qi,t
0.420***
(6.50)
0.407***
(5.14)
MIDASAT i,t
-0.008**
(-2.14)
0.019***
(2.80)
Qi,tMIDASATi,t
0.008***
(3.57)
0.005**
(2.13)
CFi,t
0.033***
(7.87)
0.033***
(7.90)
ln(Asseti,t)
-1.081***
(-9.03)
-1.240***
(-10.28)
INSi,t
0.234
(0.81)
0.199
(0.72)
INSTRi,t
-0.511**
(-2.01)
-0.567**
(-2.22)
N obs.
10,665
10,665
R2
6%
6%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

50
Table 11
AT and operating performance: Ranking approach
This table presents the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on the firms’ future operating performance using
the following model:
OPi,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Rankingi,t + β2Qi,t + Controls + εi,t
where OP i,t+1 is the performance of firm i in year t + 1, Rankingi,t ∈(0, 100) represents the percentile of the degree
of AT for firm i in year t, and Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price (Tobin’s Q). In columns (i) and (ii), Rankingi,t
is determined based on the actual QTi,t in the full sample (1996-2019) and in columns (iii) and (iv), Rankingi,t is
determined based on the predicted QTi,t (d
QT i,t) in the autoquote sample using autoquote as an instrument (2001-2005).
Across all specifications, Controls are CF i,t, ln(Asseti,t), INSi,t, INSTRi,t and the lagged value of the respective
operating performance (OP i,t). All versions of models include both firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively).
The standard errors used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. *, **, and ***
denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to Table 1.
Full sample
Autoquote sample
(i)
ROAi,t+1
(ii)
SGi,t+1
(iii)
ROAi,t+1
(iv)
SGi,t+1
Rankingi,t
0.005**
(2.38)
0.029***
(5.80)
0.057***
(3.28)
0.213***
(4.37)
Qi,t
0.946***
(15.61)
2.801***
(25.19)
1.314***
(5.43)
1.886***
(5.03)
CFi,t
-0.015*
(-1.67)
-0.069***
(-4.99)
-0.024
(-0.90)
-0.181**
(-4.09)
ln(Asseti,t)
-0.818***
(-10.54)
-4.367***
(-24.64)
-0.522***
(-2.73)
-1.559**
(-2.41)
INSi,t
0.004
(0.77)
0.257***
(4.40)
0.236
(0.31)
6.847***
(3.35)
INSTRi,t
0.521
(1.48)
-0.926
(-1.09)
0.732
(0.76)
1.166
(0.43)
ROAi,t
0.455***
(39.32)
-
0.492***
(12.59)
-
SGi,t
-
0.025**
(2.49)
-
0.010
(0.53)
N obs.
51,581
51,581
4,669
4,669
R2
9%
16%
30%
2%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

51
Table 12
AT and operating performance: Portfolio approach
This table presents the results for the estimation of the impact of AT-driven investment-to-price sensitivity on the portfolio’s future operating performance using the following model:
OPz,t+1 = αz + γt + β1βz,t + β2Qz,t + Controls + εz,t
where OP z,t+1 is the performance of portfolio z in year t + 1 and βz,t is the AT-driven CAPEX-to-price sensitivity of
portfolio z at time t, and Qz,t is the average Tobin’s Q for portfolio z in year t. To obtain βz,t for each portfolio-year,
we first split the sample into deciles each year based on the interaction variable, Qi,tQTi,t. We then run year-by-year
investment regressions for each portfolio to obtain the interaction coefficient for each of the 10 portfolios each year. In
columns (i), performance is defined as one year ahead return on assets (ROAi,+1) and in columns (ii), performance
is defined as one year ahead sales growth (SGi,t+1). Across all specifications, Controls are the average cash flow
(CF z,t), the average logarithm of the total assets (ln(Assetz,t)), the average fraction of institutional holdings to total
shares outstanding (INSz,t), the average turnover of institutional investors (INSTRz,t), and the lagged dependent
variable (OP z,t) for portfolio z at time t. All versions of models include both portfolio and year fixed effects (αz and γt,
respectively). The standard errors used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by portfolio and
year. *, **, and *** denote significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to
Table 1.
(i)
ROAz,t+1
(ii)
SGz,t+1
βz,t
0.217***
(2.76)
0.165
(1.23)
Qz,t
-2.24***
(-9.33)
-1.551**
(-2.48)
CFz,t
0.908***
(13.46)
0.366**
(2.06)
ln(Assetz,t)
1.373***
(5.21)
-0.252
(-0.55)
INSz,t
-1.262
(-0.70)
0.291
(0.09)
INSTRz,t
-15.523***
(-3.88)
-6.623
(-0.88)
ROAz,t
0.080**
(2.37)
-
SGz,t
-
0.788***
(16.94)
N obs.
240
240
R2
67%
88%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed

52
Table 13
AT and investment-to-price sensitivity: Additional controls
This table reports the results for the estimation of the impact of AT on the investment-to-price sensitivity using the
following ordinary least squares (OLS) model:
Ii,t+1 = αi + γt + β1Qi,t + β2QT i,t + β3Qi,tQT i,t + δ1CF i,t + δ2 ln(Asseti,t)
+ δ3INSi,t + δ4INSTRi,t + δ5Controli,t + δ6Qi,tControli,t + εi,t
where Ii,t+1 is the investment of firm i in year t + 1 defined as the capital expenditures divided by lagged total assets CAPEXi,t+1, Qi,t is the firm’s normalized stock price, and QT i,t is the yearly AT proxy. The other explanatory
variables are the firm’s cash flow (CF i,t), the natural logarithm of the firm’s total assets (ln(Asseti,t)), the fraction of
institutional holdings to total shares outstanding (INSi,t), institutional investors’ turnover (INSTRi,t), and Controli,t
and Qi,tControli,t. From column (i) to (iv), Controli,t is respectively given by Insideri,t (insider volume rate), RESi,t
(return around earnings announcements), Analysti,t (analysts’ coverage), and KZi,t (Kaplan-Zingales metric). All
versions of models include both firm and year fixed effects (αi and γt, respectively). The standard errors used to compute the t-statistics (in brackets) are double clustered by firm and year. *, **, and *** denote the significance at 10%, 5%,
and 1%, respectively. For the detailed definitions of variables refer to Table 1.
(i)
Insideri,t
(ii)
RESi,t
(iii)
Analysti,t
(iv)
KZi,t
Qi,t
0.826***
(27.71)
0.852***
(20.86)
0.844***
(20.35)
0.874***
(29.99)
QT i,t
-0.047***
(-7.98)
-0.056***
(-9.81)
-0.057***
(-8.58)
-0.058***
(-10.35)
Qi,tQTi,t
0.033***
(8.62)
0.038***
(10.30)
0.038***
(9.15)
0.040***
(10.89)
CFi,t
0.038**
(14.00)
0.038***
(14.01)
0.041***
(15.32)
0.036***
(13.46)
ln(Asseti,t)
-1.191***
(-25.96)
-1.194***
(-24.24)
-1.204***
(-24.70)
-1.237***
(-27.37)
INSi,t
0.009
(0.96)
0.008
(0.98)
0.012
(1.00)
0.009
(0.94)
INSTRi,t
-0.708***
(-3.50)
-1.065***
(-5.01)
-0.775***
(-3.55)
-1.016***
(-5.22)
Controli,t
-0.000
(-0.24)
-0.011
(-0.98)
0.020*
(1.92)
-0.066***
(-5.98)
Qi,tControli,t
0.000
(0.21)
0.000
(0.01)
-0.001
(-0.34)
0.010***
(4.68)
N obs.
40,299
38,135
39,842
45,239
R2
9%
9%
10%
10%
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4445114
Preprint not peer reviewed
