Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336
Subscription, submission, and other info:
www.iospress.nl/journal/algorithmic-finance
Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
James E. Schmitz
Algorithmic Finance (2012), 1:2, 157-181 
DOI: 10.3233/AF-2011-012
Abstract, HTML, PDF, and Enhanced Content:
http://algorithmicfinance.org/1-2/pp157-181
Aims and Scope   Algorithmic Finance is a high-quality academic research journal that seeks to bridge computer science and
finance, including high frequency and algorithmic trading, statistical arbitrage, momentum and other algorithmic portfolio
management strategies, machine learning and computational financial intelligence, agent-based finance, complexity and market
efficiency, algorithmic analysis on derivatives, behavioral finance and investor heuristics, and news analytics.
Managing Editor
Philip Maymin, NYU-Polytechnic Institute
Deputy Managing Editor
Jayaram Muthuswamy, Kent State University
Advisory Board
Kenneth J. Arrow, Stanford University
Herman Chernoff, Harvard University
David S. Johnson, AT&T Labs Research
Leonid Levin, Boston University
Myron Scholes, Stanford University
Michael Sipser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Richard Thaler, University of Chicago
Stephen Wolfram, Wolfram Research
Editorial Board
   Associate Editors
Peter Bossaerts, California Institute of Technology
Emanuel Derman, Columbia University
Ming-Yang Kao, Northwestern University
Pete Kyle, University of Maryland
David Leinweber, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Richard J. Lipton, Georgia Tech
Avi Silberschatz, Yale University
Robert Webb, University of Virginia
   Affiliate Editors
Giovanni Barone-Adesi, University of Lugano
Bruce Lehmann, University of California, San Diego
 
Unique Features of the Journal   Open access: Online articles are freely available to all. No submission fees: There is no cost to
submit articles for review. There will also be no publication or author fee for at least the first two volumes. Authors retain copyright:
Authors may repost their versions of the papers on preprint archives, or anywhere else, at any time. Enhanced content: Enhanced,
interactive, computable content will accompany papers whenever possible. Possibilities include code, datasets, videos, and live
calculations. Comments: Algorithmic Finance is the first journal in the Financial Economics Network of SSRN to allow comments.
Archives: The journal is published by IOS Press. In addition, the journal maintains an archive on SSRN.com. Legal: While the journal
does reserve the right to change these features at any time without notice, the intent will always be to provide the world's most freely
and quickly available research on algorithmic finance. ISSN: Online ISSN: 2157-6203. Print ISSN: 2158-5571.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336
Algorithmic Finance 1 (2011) 157–181
157
DOI 10.3233/AF-2011-012
IOS Press
Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic
markets
James E. Schmitz
Barclays Capital Inc., New York, NY, USA1
E-mail: james.schmitz@gmail.com
Abstract. The Iowa Electronic Markets are small, real-money ﬁnancial markets designed to aggregate information about future
events. The market microstructure of these markets is studied and a market making model is developed to provide liquidity for
one set of securities offered by this exchange. A computer program was created to employ the market making model and proﬁt
from the market’s inefﬁciencies. Using invested capital, the system traded 34% of the total market volume and achieved a Sharpe
ratio of 9.9. This paper reveals the details of how this algorithmic trader worked to show how it functioned and the value it added
to the Iowa Electronic Markets.
Keywords: Prediction markets, algorithmic trading, market making, Iowa electronic markets, market microstructure.
1. Introduction
The Iowa Electronic Markets (IEM) are small, realmoney ﬁnancial markets run by the Henry B. Tippie
College of Business at the University of Iowa. The
values of the securities that trade in these markets are
linked to the outcome of real world events, such as
political elections. The purpose of these markets is
to serve as an educational tool for students to learn
about ﬁnancial markets and how information is priced
into security prices. Researchers also use these markets
to study market efﬁciency and the ability of market
prices to aggregate the collective information of its
participants.
One of the most popular markets the IEM offered
in 2008 was a market based on the winner of the U.S.
Presidential election. Both in theory and in reality,
the prices of the securities in this market rose and
fell based on the aggregate opinion of the market
participants. It is this market that is the focus of this
paper.
1Disclaimer: The views I express in this research paper are my
own and were developed before starting at my current position and
do not necessarily reﬂect those of my current employer or my fellow
employees.
A computer program was created to function as a
market maker by trading in this market and providing
liquidity to other market participants. This market
maker can be called an “electronic liquidity provider”
or an “algorithmic trader”. Computer programs that
proﬁtably trade securities without human interaction
are mysterious to many because those involved in
their creation and operation are reluctant to share their
proprietary information. Algorithmic trading systems
can be very lucrative, so there is a rational aversion to
sharing information about how they work. Algorithmic
trading can also be controversial, and the beneﬁt it
provides to ﬁnancial markets and human traders is the
source of much debate.
Duetotherelativelysmallsizeandacademicnatureof
theIEM,therearefewerreasonstokeeptheinformation
about how this algorithmic trader worked conﬁdential.
All of the details about how this system functioned
are disclosed in this paper in order to promote a more
informed discussion about the beneﬁts of algorithmic
trading and its impact on ﬁnancial markets. This
research paper shares the quantitative methodology the
system used to make trading decisions, examines the
trading results, and discusses the inﬂuence it had on the
efﬁciency of this market.
2158-5571/11/$27.50 c⃝2011 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

158
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
2. Literature review
The Iowa Electronic Markets are the focus of
extensive research. Berg et al. (2008) studied the
predictive ability of these ﬁnancial markets and their
accuracy at predicting the outcome of the vote-share
of political elections. They characterized the IEM as
a unique market that is different from the highly
complex ﬁnancial markets modern society depends
on and the stylized markets created by researchers in
a laboratory. The securities in the IEM have ﬁnite
horizons upon which the terminal value is revealed,
enabling researchers to measure how well the ﬁnal
outcome was predicted by market prices. Berg et al.
found that the average poll error for a group of
15 elections was 1.91%. The average market error
for the same elections was 1.49% or 1.58%, using
the market price as of midnight on election eve or
the volume weighted average price of all trades in
the week before the election. Forsythe et al. (1992)
investigated the relationship between market prices
and election poll results and found no evidence that
market price changes were preceded by changes in poll
results. Instead, they argued that traders are able to
independently interpret the meaning of an event and
react quickly with market trades without depending on
opinion polls for guidance.
IEM researchers can survey trader preferences
and biases to understand how they inﬂuence trader
behavior. Forsythe et al. also investigated the judgment biases and preferences of individual traders
by conducting telephone and mail surveys of all
market participants. The two biases studied were
the “assimilation-contrast effect,” causing a trader’s
preference for an outcome to inﬂuence their interpretation of information concerning the likelihood
of that outcome, and the “false consensus effect,”
causing traders to overestimate the portion of the
voter population that shares their views. They found
signiﬁcant evidence of both judgment biases, but
argued that the market performed well in spite of the
prevalence of biased traders because of the actions of
subset of “marginal traders.” These marginal traders
differed from “average traders” in that they were less
prone to judgment biases and traded the securities
at prices very close to the equilibrium price. They
acted as arbitrageurs and proﬁted by trading with the
biased supporters of both candidates. The marginal
traders earned higher median returns of 9.6% as a
result, compared to 0.0% for the non-marginal traders.
The researchers found that the marginal traders were
able to do this by more correctly identifying when
important events happened and when they did not.
They showed that if market prices were rising (falling),
the marginal traders were buying (selling) if there was
important news events and selling (buying) if there
was not.
Another analysis of IEM prices and market efﬁciency was conducted by Berg and Rietz (2010). These
researchers studied prediction markets with contracts
dependent on the monthly prices of Microsoft stock
or ﬁnancial indices. They employed a logit model to
estimate the true probabilities of different outcomes
and compared them to the market prices. They
found that the market prices were efﬁcient for short
time horizons, but for long horizons there was an
overconﬁdence bias causing the market to overprice the most likely outcomes and under-price the
least likely outcomes. This contrasts with studies of
racetrack betting, where bettors overpay for the least
likely outcomes. The researchers speculated that this
is because of the ability of IEM traders to short sell
securities, which is not found in racetrack betting. Berg
and Rietz then backtested a trading strategy that buys
the under-priced securities and short sells the overpriced securities. They found that they could achieve
monthly returns in the range of 0.31% and 1.2%,
depending on the investor’s level of risk aversion.
They also discovered that they could achieve higher
returns by building a model that factors in the current
price of the stock or index. A trader employing
this model could have achieved monthly returns in
the range of 0.8% to 2.31%. Since including the
additional information improved the strategy’s returns,
the prediction markets could not have been fully
efﬁcient.
An analysis of market efﬁciency of the online
betting exchange operated by tradesports.com was
conducted by Borghesi (2007). The researcher studied
bets placed on the outcome of National Football
League (NFL) sporting events. Borghesi found that
before the start of a game, average contract prices
did not differ signiﬁcantly from asset values, but after
the start of a game and before contract expiration,
contract prices were signiﬁcantly overpriced for lower
priced securities. This contrasts the results of Berg
and Rietz (2010) but is consistent with studies of
racetrack betting. Borghesi suggested the mispricings
were caused by the relatively large information shocks
that occur after scoring events during the game and a
reluctance or difﬁculty in selling or shorting contracts.
Borghesi found that the most signiﬁcant mispricings
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
159
took place immediately after scoring events and
proposed several trading strategies to exploit the
inefﬁciencies.
A second analysis of market efﬁciency of the
betting exchange tradesports.com was conducted by
Tetlock (2008). The researcher studied the relationship
between liquidity and prediction accuracy of securities
linked to the outcome of ﬁnancial and sporting events.
Tetlock found that increased liquidity did not reduce
deviations between security prices and event outcomes, and that in some cases increased liquidity was
actually associated with increased price deviations.
Liquidity was measured using bid-ask spread size,
market depth and cumulative trading volume. Similar
to the results of Borghesi (2007), Tetlock found that
low priced securities were overpriced and high priced
securities were underpriced. The researcher suggested
two reasons for these characteristics about this market.
The ﬁrst is that in this market, limit order traders had
the tendency to buy the lower priced securities and
sell the higher priced securities. These limit orders
were ﬁlled by market orders, so the market orders also
had different buy-sell imbalances for the low and high
priced securities. Tetlock also observed that during
periods of high information, limit orders had negative
expected returns. This suggests that in this market the
limit order traders were naively providing liquidity to
the market, which could have slowed down market
prices’ response to new information.
Gil and Levitt (2007) studied a different online
betting exchange operated by intrade.com and also
found market inefﬁciencies. They analyzed bets placed
on the outcomes of 2002 World Cup matches and
found that although market prices increased rapidly
after goals were scored, the prices continued to
increase for the next 10-15 minutes. Gil and Levitt
also found that on average there were negative returns
for bets placed on the match favorites and that there
was an advantage to market participants who were
willing and able to be short sellers. In addition, the
researchers examined the behavior of market makers
in these markets. They found that on average the
market makers earned negative returns. About 30%
of the market makers’ total losses came from trades
made in the minute before and after a goal was scored,
suggesting that the other market participants were
able to take advantage of new information before
market makers were able to change their bid and ask
prices.
Berg and Rietz (2006) discussed the Iowa Electronic
Markets and the presence of computer programs
employing algorithmic trading strategies. They disclosed that they ﬁrst became aware of the presence
of algorithmic traders in the 2000 and 2004 elections,
but acknowledged that there may have been earlier
algorithmic traders that were unknown to them. In
the 2004 election there was one algorithmic trader
that was involved in 21% of the total units traded
in the winner-takes-all market. They wrote that some
computer programs seemed to be taking advantage
of arbitrage opportunities and made positive proﬁts.
Others seemed to be using price-movement strategies.
Berg and Rietz also talked about news events and
the speed at which market prices reacted to relevant
information. They presented anecdotal evidence of
trader reactions before ofﬁcial announcements of key
campaign events. Additionally, Berg and Rietz (2006)
discussed large orders and market impact. Like more
complex markets, prices were impacted by large orders
but the effects diminished rather quickly. The markets
were robust to manipulation. If a trader did attempt to
manipulate prices, the price would revert to the premanipulation levels. Since the market prices seem to
accurately predict future events, it does not seem that
they are being successfully manipulated. The authors
pointed out that this does not rule out the possibility of
short term manipulation.
The potential for market manipulation in the Iowa
Electronic Markets and other political markets was
researched by Rhode and Strumpf (2008). In addition
to the IEM, they studied tradesports.com and organized betting that took place on Wall Street between
the years 1880 and 1944. In each case Rhode and
Strumpf found that the political markets were robust
to manipulation and that prices could not be distorted
beyond short time periods. If prediction markets are
vulnerable to manipulation it would challenge the
assertion that they have signiﬁcant predictive ability.
Politically motivated market participants have an
incentive to manipulate the prices of political markets
if the prices can also inﬂuence voters and the outcome
of an election. Historical records indicate that during
the years the political betting markets were active on
Wall Street, claims of price manipulation and staged
bets were common. Nevertheless, the markets still
had high predictive ability and any public claims
of market manipulation were not followed by large
permanent changes in prices. A more recent claim of
price manipulation took place before the 2004 election
in the tradesports.com presidential market. In that
market the contract for one candidate sharply declined
on two occasions. Afterwards it was rumored that one
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

160
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
large investor was responsible for the price moves and
was attempting to manipulate the price and inﬂuence
the outcome of the election. It is unknown if these
allegations are true, but in any case market prices had
returned to their pre-decline levels within an hour and
any manipulation that may have taken place had failed.
Finally, Rhode and Strumpf experimented in the IEM
before the 2000 U.S. Presidential election by making
large random trades in an attempt to manipulate prices.
They found that after each attempted manipulation,
prices would revert to the pre-manipulation levels in a
few hours. As a result, they determined that the IEM is
robust to manipulation.
Oliven and Rietz (2004) discussed IEM market
structure and investigated traders’ efﬁcient and inefﬁcient trading practices. As will be explained in section
3.1, the market is structured in such a way that there are
always two ways for a price-taking trader to achieve
a desired position. For example, to buy a security,
the trader can either buy the desired security, or they
can buy all the securities in a bundled transaction
and then sell the undesired securities. Either way the
end position is the same, but the execution costs can
be different because of small differences in prices.
An efﬁcient trader will always rationally choose to
minimize execution costs. In this situation, Oliven and
Rietz described a failure to make the rational decision
a “price-taking violation of individual rationality.”
Traders who submit limit orders can also behave
irrationally. If a trader sends a limit order that presents
a potential arbitrage opportunity to other traders, that
trader is committing a “market-making violation of
individual rationality.” These violations of rationality
create opportunities for more efﬁcient traders to make
excess proﬁts.
Brahma et al. (2010) explored inventory-based
and information-based market making models for
prediction markets. They studied an inventory based
market making model developed by Hanson (2007)
that is commonly used in prediction markets. They
developed a new Bayesian information-based market
making model and compared the two models in
simulated trading and a laboratory market with student
traders. The researchers found that in simulations the
Bayesian market maker was superior to the inventory
based model both in proﬁtability and average error
from the simulated true value but not for maximum
drawdown. They developed a unique way to create
an experimental market in a laboratory to test the
two market makers simultaneously and got similar
results as the simulations. Brahma et al. pointed
out that although a liquidity providing market maker
risks losing to better informed or smarter traders,
smart market making algorithms may be able to
exploit human trader errors or overconﬁdence. The
algorithmic trading system developed in this paper
attempts to do just that.
Das (2008) studied market makers and their effects
on markets and price movements. He analyzed this
from the perspective of how to design a market
making algorithm and how market makers inﬂuence
price dynamics. He built a market making model
based on the work of Glosten and Milgrom (1985)
that tries to estimate the true value of the security
from the information conveyed in the trades and sets
prices based on this estimate. In simulated trading, he
showed that competition among market makers leads
to faster price discovery and smaller spreads. Das
argued that the presence of market makers improves
market quality.
3. Mechanics of the Iowa electronic markets
3.1. Market prices
This ﬁnancial market had two securities: one
representing the Democratic candidate (DEM), Barack
Obama, and the other representing the Republican
candidate (REP), John McCain. There were no explicit
transaction costs from trading these securities in this
market. At maturity, each security pays $1 if the
security’s candidate wins and $0 if the candidate loses.
For these securities, a win is when the candidate
captures more votes than his opponent as reported by
The New York Times three days after the election and
is not based on the electoral college. Since there can
be only one winner, the total payout of both securities
at maturity is guaranteed to be equal to $1. To avoid
arbitrage, the value of the two securities together must
also be equal to $1 for all times before maturity,
ignoring any discount functions. In addition, the price
movements must be inversely correlated because when
the value of one security goes up, the other must go
down. Therefore, although there are two securities, this
market has only one risk factor and one real asset.
Buying one security is the same as selling the other.
In this paper, when the term “securities” is used, it
is referring to the two securities representing the two
candidates, and when the term “asset” or “market
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
161
asset” is used, it is referring to the one true asset that
is traded in this market. A long position in the market
asset is deﬁned as a long position in the Democratic
candidate and a short position in the Republican
candidate, and a short position in the market asset is
the opposite.
The IEM provides three pieces of price information
for each security; the bid price, the ask price, and
the last trade price. The minimum tick size for all
prices is one tenth of a penny. Unlike many other
ﬁnancial markets, last trade size, bid size, and ask
size are not disclosed. This poses unique challenges
to an electronic market maker and to any researcher
studying the microstructure of this market.
Since there are two securities that are by deﬁnition
inversely correlated, it simpliﬁes things to invert the
price of one of them so it is comparable to the other.
For example, if these are the market prices:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.572
0.602
REP
0.424
0.450
Subtracting the REP bid-ask prices from 1 yields the
bid-ask prices for REPinv:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.572
0.602
REPinv
0.550
0.576
REPinv has the same market exposure as DEM. Notice
that the REP bid price determines the REPinv ask price,
and the REP ask price determines the REPinv bid price.
An important feature of this market is the exchange
allows market participants to buy and sell “bundles”
of securities with the exchange itself for a fair price of
$1. A bundle is a set of securities representing all of
the available securities in the market; in this case, the
DEM and REP securities. This is much like a creation or
redemption of an ETF in the stock market, but without
a fee. This allows a trader two alternatives to trade into
a position: they can either buy the one security they
want or they can exchange their money for bundles and
then sell the other undesired security. The end result
will be the same.
Since there are two mechanisms for trading the same
asset, the market asset’s true bid and ask prices must
be identiﬁed. The asset’s bid price is the maximum of
the DEM and REPinv bid prices and the asset’s offer price
is the minimum of the DEM and REPinv offer prices:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.572
0.602
REPinv
0.550
0.576
If a trader wanted to trade in this market it would be
efﬁcient and rational for them to only trade using the
asset’s true bid and ask prices. These two prices make
up what can be considered to be the “good spread” and
the other two prices make up the “bad spread.”
Spreads
Bid
Ask
Good spread
0.572
0.576
Bad spread
0.550
0.602
It would be inefﬁcient for a trader to use a market
order to buy the market asset on the bad offer or
sell the market asset at the bad bid. Nevertheless, this
happened frequently. Doing so would be considered
a “price-taking violation of individual rationality,” as
discussed in Oliven and Rietz (2004). The researchers
found that in the 1992 Presidential election, 37.7% of
market orders made this error. This is consistent with
estimates of the frequency of these violations taken
from the algorithmic trader’s own trading data.
For the market making efforts described in this
paper, the current value of the market asset is
deﬁned as the midquote of the good spread. This was
considered to be the market asset’s efﬁcient price. In
the above example, the efﬁcient price is 0.574. This
price can be used to value the DEM and REP securities.
The value of the DEM security is 0.574 and the value
of the REP security is 0.426. In both cases this happens
to be closer to the bid side than the ask side of the
displayed DEM and REP security spreads. This method
is more accurate than simply looking at the midquote
of each individual security. Since there is only one
asset in this market, the order books of both securities
should always be considered together.
3.2. Market activity
Figure 1 shows several plots of market activity
during the time of this research project. The upper
subplot graphs the daily price movements of the
market asset’s efﬁcient price, as deﬁned in section 3.1.
The second subplot shows the daily percent volatility
of the market asset price, calculated with a 7 day
rolling window and measured in 15 minute intervals.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

162
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
Market asset price ($)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Algorithmic trader begins trading
Clinton concedes to Obama
Democratic convention ends
Republican convention ends
Sarah Palin’s Katie Couric interview
Election day
Volatility (% per day)
0
Average spread (pennies)
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Good spread
Bad spread
Average daily market value ($)
0
500
1500
2500
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Total market
Algorithmic trader
Fig. 1. Four plots of market activity. The upper subplot shows the market asset’s price movements with signiﬁcant political events annotated.
The other three plots show the daily percent volatility, average good and bad spread sizes, and average daily market activity in dollars, all
calculated with a 7 day rolling window.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
163
The third shows the time weighted average good
and bad spread sizes calculated with a 7 day rolling
window. The last subplot shows the 7 day moving
average of market activity, measured in dollars. A few
signiﬁcant political events are annotated on the charts
to show the effect they had on price, volatility and
volume.
Itshouldbenotedthatthe“WinnerTakesAll”market
was not the only political ﬁnancial market offered by
the Iowa Electronic Markets. Two others are political
markets based on the Democratic and Republican
nominations. The securities in those markets reached
maturity when their respective party’s conventions
ended, and at that time money ﬂowed into the accounts
of traders who held the securities representing Obama
and McCain. Some of that capital was reinvested in
“Winner Takes All” securities, explaining the surge
in market activity when the conventions ended. This
may also partially explain the price ﬂuctuations around
the time of the conventions. Volatility also increased
noticeably around the time of the conventions. This
makes sense as there was more information about
the candidates being revealed every day as the time
remaining before the election decreased.
The trading system began collecting data in late
February while the model and the infrastructure to
implement this project were being developed. The
system was operating in a limited test mode by April
and was fully operational by May. Table 2 shows
that before the conventions, the algorithmic trader was
44% of the market volume. After the conventions the
market and the system became much more active but
its percent of market share declined. This happened
partially because of capital limitations and position
limits built into the algorithmic trader.
3.3. Arbitrage
In this market it is possible for arbitrage opportunities to arise. One way this can happen is when a trader
commits what Oliven and Rietz deemed a “marketmaking violation of individual rationality.” This
occurs when a trader adds a limit order to one of the
order books that causes the good spread to become
crossed. A crossed market is when the bid price
exceeds the ask price. For example, in this market:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.572
0.602
REP
0.424
0.450
A bid of 0.580 on the DEM security would result in
these spreads:
Spreads
Bid
Ask
Good spread
0.580
0.576
Bad spread
0.550
0.602
Notice the good spread is now crossed.
A more rational trader that intended to buy the
DEM security could have bought a bundle from the
exchange and sold the REP security at the bid price of
0.424, leaving a long position in the DEM security. The
trader could have saved 0.004 per share and gotten the
trade ﬁlled immediately. But if they don’t realize this
possibility, the displayed market will become:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.580
0.602
REP
0.424
0.450
The arbitrage opportunity is to sell both the DEM
and REP securities at their respective bid prices and
then buy bundles by trading with the exchange. This
is proﬁtable because the pair of securities can be sold
at a price of 1.004 and bought back from the exchange
with a bundled transaction for 1 dollar. The exchange
has a special market order for buying and selling
bundles using the sum of the displayed bid or ask
prices that ensures equal numbers of each security are
traded. After selling bundles using one of these market
orders, the new displayed market could hypothetically
become:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.580
0.602
REP
0.416
0.450
For this example, assume that the size of the REP
0.424 bid order is smaller than the DEM 0.580 bid
order. When both bids are hit by the bundle market
order, the REP bid of 0.424 is eliminated but the DEM
bid remains. Since the previous REP bid is now gone,
the new REP bid is the next order in its order book.
It may seem trivial but it is actually important for
the efﬁciency of this market to have at least one
market participant who monitors the prices for this
situation and acts accordingly. If this didn’t happen
the the two security prices would not maintain the
proper inverse price relationship. Also, the method of
determining the market asset’s price discussed in this
paper is undeﬁned when the good spread is crossed.
The arbitrage opportunity would have to be eliminated
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

164
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
to determine the midquote and the market maker’s
view of the market asset value.
A second arbitrage opportunity involves providing
liquidity to the bad spread and taking liquidity from
the good spread. For example, in the current state of
the example market:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.580
0.602
REP
0.416
0.450
The good and bad spreads are:
Spreads
Bid
Ask
Good spread
0.580
0.584
Bad spread
0.550
0.602
A trader could place a buy order for the market
asset for a price of anything less than 0.580 and a
sell order for the market asset for any price more than
0.584. This would correspond to a sell order for the
REP security at a price above 0.420 and a sell order for
the DEM security at a price above 0.584. If either of the
trader’s sell orders were lifted, they can immediately
sell the other security at its bid price to eliminate the
risk of the position. One ﬂaw with this strategy is that
since the order sizes are not visible in this market,
the trader wouldn’t know how many shares they would
be able to sell by hitting the bids. This would force the
trader to estimate the order book sizes. Sometimes the
estimates would be too large, resulting in a position
that could not be liquidated proﬁtably. Because of this
problem, this strategy doesn’t work as well as it would
in another market with visible order sizes.
3.4. Market gaming
The absence of displayed order sizes in this market
creates the potential for traders to game this market
or behave in a way that frustrated the system’s
ability to determine the efﬁcient price of the market
asset. The problem is a limit order for one share
placed in the bid or ask order books appears to other
market participants to be identical to a limit order
for a larger size. Although it is possible that the
traders who placed one share orders had little capital
and only wanted to trade one share, one can also
speculate that the traders were attempting to alter other
market participants’ perception of current prices with
small orders. It is clear that traders placed one share
orders with some frequency because sometimes those
market participants would also inadvertently create
an arbitrage opportunity by committing a marketmaking violation of individual rationality. When
the algorithmic trader tried to exploit the resulting
arbitrage opportunity, it would trade only one bundle.
About 10% of the system’s 1,267 arbitrage attempts
resulted in a trade of only one bundle, indicating that
the smaller order for the two securities was for one
share.
It is unclear what traders’ motivations are for doing
this. One possible explanation is that it is a trader’s
attempt to draw more favorably priced orders to the
opposite side of the order book they intend to trade.
For example, if a trader wanted to sell the DEM security
but thought the spread was too large, they could
narrow the spread with a buy order for one share and
hope that this inﬂuences another trader’s view of what
the current market price is for that security. The second
trader may then place a larger buy limit order at a price
that is equal to or better than the one share order. Once
that happens, the ﬁrst trader could remove their one
share order and sell the DEM security at the improved
price.
This is a different kind of market manipulation than
what was discussed in Berg and Rietz (2006), but it is
still important. Clearly this behavior can only have a
short term effect and cannot impact the market’s ability
to aggregate information or predict the outcome of an
election. Nevertheless, it does have an effect on the
short term microstructure of this market. Even if it is
not considered manipulation of market prices, it can
manipulate the actions of other market participants,
particularly the actions of the electronic market maker
described in this paper.
4. Market making
Consider a market maker that is willing to alter
its own portfolio away from its current holdings in
exchange for some compensation for bearing the risk
of a new portfolio. The compensation comes from
the size of the spread earned on each trade, which
is the difference between the execution price and the
efﬁcient price of an asset. The risk comes from the
potential of the altered portfolio to decline in value
relative to the desired portfolio.
When an uninformed market maker trades with
potentially informed traders, the compensation the
market maker earns on each trade will be partially
diminished by an adverse price movement from the
market impact of the counter-party’s trade. The market
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
165
impact is a result of the information content of the
trade, or in other words, the counter-party’s informed
view of the correct value of the security. A market
maker needs to demand extra compensation to make
up for the adverse selection associated with the
information asymmetry between itself and liquidity
demanders. It should be noted that a computer program
functioning as a market maker does not necessarily
have to be uninformed. A computer program could
be created to get information by monitoring prices
on other betting websites such as intrade.com or
by parsing news headlines. The computer program
discussed in this paper, however, will be uninformed. It
will know nothing about the meaning of the securities
it is trading or the election. Most (if not all) of the
traders the market maker trades with will be humans
who can interpret the events of the political process
associated with an election. Many of those traders will
be biased and make mistakes as discussed in Oliven
and Rietz (2004), but in aggregate they will be more
informed than a computer program and will be able to
predict security price movements in a way a computer
program cannot.
The market maker’s risk of a new position is a
function of the volatility of its undesired holdings and
the expected time for that position to be offset by a
later trade. If a market maker were to provide liquidity
to a trader by buying a certain amount of an asset, it can
expect that some time later it will sell the same asset
to another trader, offsetting the risk of the earlier buy
trade. During the time the market maker is waiting for
the offsetting trade, it faces the risk that the price will
move. The unrealized proﬁt earned from the spread
on the ﬁrst trade can potentially be reduced or turn
into a loss. The market maker needs to ﬁnd an optimal
balance between the proﬁt earned from the spread
when providing liquidity and its aversion to the risk of
the undesired portfolio holdings.
To develop the market making model, consider an
exponential utility function to evaluate changes in
wealth, W:
U(W) = −e−λW ,
λ > 0
(1)
Assume that W is distributed normally with a mean
of µ and a variance of σ2. The expectation of U(W)
is then given by:
EU(W) =
1
σ
√
2π
∞
Z
−∞
−e−λW e−(W −u)2
2σ2
dW
(2)
By re-arranging the terms and employing calculus,
one can reduce equation 2 to:
EU(W) = −e−λ(µ−λσ2
2
)
(3)
Maximizing the expected utility of changes in
wealth W is then equivalent to maximizing the
expression
µ −λσ2
2
(4)
In other words, the exponential utility function
is equivalent to the mean variance utility function
when changes in wealth are normally distributed. We
can then write the market making model’s utility
function as:
U(W) = E[W] −λ
2 Var[W]
(5)
This equation can be used to evaluate the utility
of the change in wealth W
from one trade of
X shares earning a spread of s per share. This
utility function was also used by Berg and Rietz
(2010) to develop a trading strategy to exploit the
overconﬁdence bias in IEM prices. Use of this utility
function is justiﬁable in the case where the distribution
of W is normally distributed and constant absolute risk
aversion (CARA) is desired. Without any prior data to
study, it is reasonable to assume that the distribution of
W will be normal. It is desirable for the market maker
to exhibit CARA so it does not change its afﬁnity for
risk when it has a long or short position in an asset and
the asset price, and therefore the market maker’s net
wealth, changes.
The expected increase in wealth from the trade
is E[W] and the variance of the wealth increase is
Var[W]. The constant value λ is the risk aversion
parameter. By adjusting λ, the market maker can
control how much it demands to be compensated for
accepting a given level of risk. This utility function
is useful for evaluating the trade-off between the
expectation of proﬁts from providing liquidity to
other market participants and aversion to the risk of
undesired positions.
The expected increase in wealth comes from the
spread earned on each share traded, minus the market
impact from the information content of the new trade.
The market impact of the new trade will also affect
the value of the current undesired position, either
positively or negatively. For example, if an informed
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

166
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
trader sells an asset to a market maker, the market
impact of the trade will cause the price to decline
slightly. If the market maker had a long position before
the trade, that market impact will have a negative
impact on that position. If instead the market maker
had a short position, the decline in price will have a
positive impact on the value of the position.
The market maker can estimate the expected
increase in wealth when it buys a security on its bid
price or sells at its ask price:
E[W] = s|X| −G(Z)(X + A −D)
(6)
In this equation, Z is the total size of the counterparty’s trade, which may be partly or completely ﬁlled
by the market maker. A is the market maker’s current
position before the trade and D is the desired position,
making the difference A −D the current undesired
position. X is the potential alteration to the market
maker’s portfolio, which will be positive (negative)
when the market maker is buying (selling). The
market maker’s per-share compensation for altering its
portfolio is the spread s and the total compensation
s|X| is positive when buying or selling. The function
G(Z) is a function modeling the permanent impact of
the trade. Deﬁning Ppost as the market asset’s efﬁcient
price sufﬁciently far enough into the future after
the trade that the temporary impact has completely
decayed and P as the price immediately before the
trade, the function G(Z) becomes an estimate of the
price change Ppost −P:
G(Z) = Ppost −P
(7)
According to Huberman and Stanzl (2004), the
function G(Z) must be linear in trade size to enforce a
“no arbitrage” condition on the market. Any non-linear
function implies market participants can construct a
trading pattern that buys and sells securities and earns
risk-free proﬁts. The linear market impact model is
Ppost −P
P
= γZ
(8)
Market impact is then a linear function of the
constant γ. Deﬁning Y = Z −X as the estimated size
of the trade ﬁlled by other market participants at the
same price, the market impact function G(Z) becomes
G(Z) = γP(X + Y )
(9)
and the estimate of the expected proﬁt from a buy or
sell trade is:
E[W] = s|X| −γP(X + Y )(X + A −D) (10)
The variance of the expected increase in wealth
comes from the variance of changes in the undesired
position value, including the new position X. The
market making model can estimate the variance of net
wealth as:
Var[W] = (σ
√
tP(X + A −D))2
(11)
The variable P is the efﬁcient price of the market
asset, so the quantity P(A −D + X) is the value of
the new undesired position measured in dollars. Notice
that X can increase or decrease the variance of the
market maker’s position, depending on the value of
A −D. The parameter σ is the estimated one-day
volatility of the market asset and t is the expected time
in days the market maker will hold the position before
receiving an offsetting trade. Volatility scales by the
square root of time.
Substituting Equations 10 and 11 into equation 5
yields:
U(W) = sX −γP(X + Y )(A −D + X)
−λ
2 (σ
√
tP(A −D + X))2
(12)
To ﬁnd the optimal number of shares the market
maker would be willing to buy or sell at a price earning
a spread of s, simply calculate the ﬁrst derivative of
U(W), set the result equal to zero, and solve for X.
The optimal number of shares for the market maker
to be willing to buy on the bid or sell at the offer
becomes:
Xbid = max
"
0, s −γP(Y + A −D) −λσ2tP 2(A −D)
2γP + λσ2tP 2
#
(13)
Xask = max
"
0, s −γP(Y −A + D) + λσ2tP 2(A −D)
2γP + λσ2tP 2
#
(14)
Here, the result is enclosed in the max function to
prevent the market maker from attempting to trade a
negative number of shares on the bid or at the ask. The
model can yield a negative number when |A −D| is
large.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
167
To make use of the model, the market maker needs
to estimate parameter values from market data and
choose a value for the risk aversion parameter λ.
Estimating σ is straightforward. Due to the lack of
transparency regarding trade sizes, the t, Y and γ
parameters can only be approximated in advance by
observing average market volumes, asset prices and
the average number of trades per day. Later, after
the market maker has been operating for a reasonable
period of time, the parameters can be calibrated using
the market maker’s own trading history. The risk
aversion parameter λ is more difﬁcult because there is
no “correct” value that can be calculated. It can only
be set based on risk preferences and tolerance for the
volatility of the algorithmic trader’s net wealth.
It would be prudent for the market maker to
continuously re-estimate the parameters to adapt to
changing market conditions. Table 1 shows the range
of parameter values used by the market maker during
its participation in this market. The market maker also
needs to determine a mechanism for determining the
value of the efﬁcient asset price P. This is calculated
as the midquote of the good spread.
The model can be explored by ﬁxing the parameter
values and adjusting one parameter at a time to gain
intuition about how the model works. If the market
maker’s valuation of the efﬁcient price P is ﬁxed to
0.5, the market maker would be willing to buy or sell
the asset at prices below or above 0.5, respectively.
The spread s earned on the trade is then the difference
between any price and 0.5. The number of shares the
market maker would be willing to buy or sell at any
price can be calculated using formulas 13 and 14.
Figure 2 plots the size of the limit orders the market
maker would place in the IEM order books to buy or
sell the market asset at different prices. This plot can
be interpreted in two ways. For a given price, the
plot shows the number of shares the market maker
is willing to trade at that price. Alternatively, for
given limit order size, the plot shows how much
compensation earned from the spread the market
Table 1
Market Making Parameters
Parameter
Min Value
Max Value
σ
1% per day
3% per day
t
0.083 days
0.25 days
Y
75 shares
150 shares
γ
2.5e-5 shares−1
5.0e-5 shares−1
λ
6 day / $
10 day / $
maker would require if a limit order of that size were
to be ﬁlled and alter its asset holdings.
In Figure 2, notice the market maker is willing
to trade in larger sizes when the proﬁt opportunity
is larger. When its current undesired position A−D
equals 0, the size of its orders are equal for equal sized
spreads earned from either buying or selling. This is
not the case when the market maker has a long position
in the asset. It becomes a more aggressive seller and
less aggressive buyer, as expressed by the larger sell
orders and smaller buy orders for the same prices. This
is because the market maker’s risk aversion makes
it reluctant to further increase its position but more
willing to reduce its position. It is demanding more
compensation for a trade that moves its portfolio
further away from its desired portfolio but is willing
to accept less compensation for a trade that moves its
portfolio closer to its desired portfolio.
Figure 3 ﬁxes A−D to 0 but adjusts the risk
aversion parameter λ. This plot shows that an increase
in risk aversion causes the market maker to be
less willing to buy or sell the market asset at
the same prices. The market maker is demanding
more compensation to accept the same level of risk.
Increasing the volatility parameter σ has a similar
effect, as shown in Figure 4. Figure 5 shows that
increasing t has a similar effect as well. A larger t
value means the market maker expects to hold on to
the undesired risky position for a longer period, and its
risk aversion compels it to demand more compensation
for doing so.
Adjusting the market impact parameter γ has a
much different effect on the market maker’s trading
behavior. As illustrated in Figure 6, when γ increases,
the range of prices at which the market maker is
not willing to trade a single share increases. This
may be viewed as the minimum spread at which the
market maker is willing to accept for any trade as
compensation for the information asymmetry between
itself and the more informed market participants. It is
important that the model has this feature. Otherwise,
it would be willing to trade a small number of shares
at prices that earned minimal spreads. Those trades
would frequently result in losses because the market
impact of the counter-party’s trade would prevent the
market maker from later receiving an offsetting trade
that results in a proﬁt.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

168
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
0.490
0.495
0.500
0.505
0.510
0
20
40
60
80
100
Price at which the market maker buys or sells (market asset price= 0.500)
Size of limit orders to place in bid or ask order books
Market maker buys
Market maker sells
A − D = 0 shares
A − D = 20 shares
λ = 8 day/$
σ = 2%/day
t =3 hours
Y =100 shares
γ = 2.5e−5 shares−1
Fig. 2. Plot of the number of shares the market maker would be willing to trade at different prices when the undesired position A−D is adjusted,
assuming the market asset value is 0.5. Below an asset price of 0.5 the chart shows the number of shares placed on the bid and above 0.5 the
chart shows the number of shares placed at the offer.
0.490
0.495
0.500
0.505
0.510
0
20
40
60
80
100
Price at which the market maker buys or sells (market asset price=0.500)
Size of limit orders to place in bid or ask order books
Market maker buys
Market maker sells
λ= 8 day/$
λ = 10 day/$
σ =2%/day
t = 3 hours
A−D = 0 shares
Y=100 shares
γ = 2.5e−5 shares−1
Fig. 3. Plot of the number of shares the market maker would be willing to trade at different prices when the risk aversion parameter λ is adjusted,
assuming the market asset value is 0.5. Below an asset price of 0.5 the chart shows the number of shares placed on the bid and above 0.5 the
chart shows the number of shares placed at the offer.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
169
0.490
0.495
0.500
0.505
0.510
0
20
40
60
80
100
Price at which the market maker buys or sells (market asset price= 0.500)
Size of limit orders to place in bid or ask order books
Market maker buys
Market maker sells
σ = 2%/day
σ = 3%/day
λ = 8 day/$
σ =3 hours
A − D = 0 shares
Y =100 shares
γ = 2.5e−5 shares−1
Fig. 4. Plot of the number of shares the market maker would be willing to trade at different prices when the volatility parameter σ is adjusted,
assuming the market asset value is 0.5. Below an asset price of 0.5 the chart shows the number of shares placed on the bid and above 0.5 the
chart shows the number of shares placed at the offer.
0.490
0.495
0.500
0.505
0.510
0
20
40
60
80
100
Price at which the market maker buys or sells (market asset price= 0.500)
Size of limit orders to place in bid or ask order books
Market maker buys
Market maker sells
t = 3 hours
t = 4 hours
λ =8 day/$
σ =2%/day
A −D =0 shares
Y =100 shares
γ =2.5e−5 shares−1
Fig. 5. Plot of the number of shares the market maker would be willing to trade at different prices when the holding period parameter t is adjusted,
assuming the market asset value is 0.5. Below an asset price of 0.5 the chart shows the number of shares placed on the bid and above 0.5 the
chart shows the number of shares placed at the offer.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

170
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
0.490
0.495
0.500
0.505
0.510
0
20
40
60
80
100
Price at which the market maker buys or sells (market asset price=0.500)
Size of limit orders to place in bid or ask order books
Market maker buys
Market maker sells
γ =2.5e−5 shares−1
γ =5.0e−5 shares−1
λ =8 day/$
σ = 2% /day
t =3 hours
A − D = 0 shares
Y =100 shares
Fig. 6. Plot of the number of shares the market maker would be willing to trade at different prices when the market impact parameter γ is
adjusted, assuming the market asset value is 0.5. Below an asset price of 0.5 the chart shows the number of shares placed on the bid and above
0.5 the chart shows the number of shares placed at the offer.
5. Implementation
A computer program was built that had the ability
to continuously monitor price and position data in
the Iowa Electronic Markets and send market orders
and limit orders to the exchange. This computer
program had the ability to interact with the same
website the human traders use as their trading interface
by sending and receiving HTTP requests. Using
this interface, the computer program could exploit
arbitrage opportunities and employ the market making
model developed in this paper to provide liquidity to
other market participants.
The market making algorithm was implemented to
observe the bid and ask prices set by other market
participants every 15 seconds and determine how
many shares it would be willing to trade at those same
prices using Equations 13 and 14. It only placed limit
orders at prices equal to the displayed bid and ask
prices. By doing this, the algorithm was consistently
“joining” other market participants on the bid or the
ask and was not narrowing the bid-ask spread. This
is different from a market maker that will “step in
front” of other orders and narrow the bid-ask spread by
placing buy (sell) limit orders at prices that are higher
(lower) than those placed by other market participants.
Since this market making algorithm was dependent
on other market participants to determine the efﬁcient
price and the market does not present order book
information beyond the best bid or best ask prices,
stepping in front of other orders would obfuscate the
algorithm’s view of the efﬁcient price and make it
more difﬁcult for it to function.
Sometimes the bid and ask prices of the good spread
would be equal, making the market “locked.” In a
locked market the bid price and ask price of the
good spread are both equal to the midquote price, and
therefore the market making algorithm’s view of the
efﬁcient price. If at that time the market maker had
a long or short position in the market asset and was
willing to trade at the good spread’s bid or ask prices,
it was essentially willing to earn a spread of zero on a
trade. It is clear from Figure 2 that this could happen.
When that happened, the system could also send a
market order to trade the other security immediately
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
171
instead of waiting for another market participant to ﬁll
its order. The algorithmic trader was programmed to
do this in a locked market to try to exhaust a long
or short position. This is the only time it would use
market orders.
Finally, the implementation of the market making
algorithm included position limits to protect it from
suffering too great of a loss if the price were to move
quickly in one direction. In this market the price was
guaranteed to reach $0 or $1 by the market’s termination date so there was always the possibility of a large
loss from an adverse price move. The position limits
also made sure the system had some un-utilized capital
available to take advantage of arbitrage opportunities
as they became available.
6. Results
The algorithmic trader started with an initial investment of $150 and earned a proﬁt2 of $547.83. Almost
every week (and day) was proﬁtable, with an average
daily return of 0.76%. There was one serious drawdown on the day before the election, November 3rd,
when the system lost $44.84 due to a technical problem
with the implementation. No other day had a loss of
more than $0.50. The annualized Sharpe ratio over the
full period of operation was 9.9.
Table 2 shows the trading activity and market
share measured in dollars, shares and percent. Most
likely the trading system was the most active market
participant during the duration of this research project.
2The invested capital and all the proﬁts were donated to charity.
The amount of activity is reported for the entire time
the system was in operation and broken down into
relevant periods. The period before the ﬁrst party
convention is separated from the period during and
after the conventions because of the large increase
in market volumes. The period right before the
election is also segmented because of the unique price
movements that occurred at that time.
The algorithmic trader earned $241.27 from its
arbitrage strategy and $293.92 from its market making
strategy. It also earned $12.64 from discretionary
positions. The system’s ability to take discretionary
positions (by setting parameter D in Equations 13 and
14) was not used until the day before the election.
For research purposes it was considered desirable for
the algorithmic trader to operate with as little human
intervention as possible. On the other hand, it was
thought that the system might suffer a large loss at
election time due to an adverse price movement or
that it might not be able to function correctly. Due to
this concern, the discretionary position functionality
was used to protect its proﬁts with a long position
in the market asset. Surprisingly, this was largely
unnecessary. Not only did the system earn a proﬁt on
election day, it was also able to earn a proﬁt providing
two sided markets on the day after election day as
well, when the winner of the election became common
knowledge.
The upper plot in Figure 7 shows the cumulative
proﬁts of the market making and arbitrage strategies.
It also shows the small proﬁt from discretionary
positions right before the election. Notice in the upper
chart that there was a proﬁt surge around the time
of the party conventions. Most of this was from the
Table 2
Trading Volumes and Market Share by time period. Dollars traded and shares traded are the the total notional or shares traded in each time
period. This table excludes bundled transactions to create or redeem securities for $1.
Algorithmic Trader
Total Market
% Market Share
Full Period 4/15-11/7
Dollars Traded ($)
70,376.04
187,721.49
37%
Shares Traded
140,911
418,008
34%
Pre-Convention 4/15-8/24
Dollars Traded ($)
19,571.27
43,692.85
45%
Shares Traded
38,703
88,220
44%
Post-Convention 8/25-10/20
Dollars Traded ($)
37,635.20
106,489.07
35%
Shares Traded
74,916
228,846
33%
Election Time 10/21-11/4
Dollars Traded ($)
12,363.90
33,137.59
37%
Shares Traded
26,225
94,386
28%
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

172
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
Cumulative profit ($)
0
200
400
600
Algorithmic trader begins trading
Clinton concedes nomination to Obama
Democratic convention ends
Republican convention ends
Katie Couric interview
Election day
Total profit
Market making profit
Arbitrage profit
Discretionary positions
Cumulative trading activity
0
1000
2000
3000
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Market maker trades
Arbitrage attempts
Fig. 7. Plots of trading activity. The upper subplot shows the cumulative proﬁts from discretionary positions and the market making and arbitrage
strategies. The lower subplot shows the cumulative number of arbitrage attempts and market making trades.
arbitrage strategy. On one day during the Democratic
convention the algorithmic trader earned over $25
from arbitrage alone. There was also a sustained
increase in the rate at which proﬁts were earned around
the time of the party conventions, which corresponds
to the increase in market activity shown in Figure 1.
The technical problem the computer program
suffered on the day before the election affected its
ability to correctly communicate limit prices to the
exchange through the web interface when the price
of the REP security dropped below $0.10. The system
began trading at prices that were different from what
it intended, resulting in a large loss of capital. The
market impact of these trades affected the security
prices, which recovered quickly once the problem was
corrected.
The lower plot in Figure 7 shows the cumulative
activity of the two strategies. The system made a
total of 1267 arbitrage attempts, 1264 of which were
proﬁtable. Three attempts resulted in a small loss
because one leg of the arbitrage disappeared before
the market order was executed. This could have
been because of random market activity or from an
electronic competitor for arbitrage opportunities. The
market making strategy made a total of 2443 trades
and provided liquidity with 76.5% of its volume. The
remainder of its trades were market orders to exhaust
undesired positions when the good spread was locked.
The daily performance statistics are presented in
Table 3. Results for the full period of operation and
relevant sub-periods are shown. The total performance
statistics of all of the system’s activity is in the ﬁrst
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
173
Table 3
Daily performance results by time period. “All Returns” results are actual trading results from discretionary positions and the market making
and arbitrage strategies. “Buy & Hold Benchmark” results are simulated returns assuming capital was only invested in the DEM security instead
of being used for trading strategies. Other results are calculated returns for each strategy with the proﬁts from other strategies removed.
Market Making
Market Making
Arbitrage
Buy & Hold
All Returns
& Arbitrage
Only
Only
Benchmark
Full Period 4/15-11/7
Average
0.76%
0.75%
0.53%
0.47%
0.31%
Std Dev.
1.46%
1.46%
1.24%
1.10%
1.94%
Min
−6.22%
−6.39%
−9.76%
0.00%
−8.18%
Median
0.30%
0.29%
0.22%
0.09%
0.08%
Max
11.60%
11.60%
6.06%
10.01%
9.89%
Sharpe*
9.91
9.80
8.19
8.15
3.11
Pre-Convention 4/15-8/24
Average
0.61%
0.61%
0.35%
0.38%
0.08%
Std Dev.
1.26%
1.26%
0.84%
0.98%
1.24%
Min
−0.14%
−0.14%
−0.72%
0.00%
−3.78%
Median
0.18%
0.18%
0.09%
0.04%
0.00%
Max
8.07%
8.07%
6.05%
6.85%
5.83%
Sharpe*
9.21
9.21
7.90
7.36
1.28
Post-Convention 8/25-10/20
Average
1.26%
1.26%
1.15%
0.73%
0.69%
Std Dev.
1.67%
1.67%
1.26%
1.45%
2.75%
Min
0.00%
0.00%
−0.23%
0.00%
−8.18%
Median
0.75%
0.75%
0.78%
0.27%
0.58%
Max
11.60%
11.60%
6.06%
10.01%
6.47%
Sharpe*
14.41
14.41
17.39
9.59
4.77
Election Time 10/21-11/4
Average
0.26%
0.16%
−0.09%
0.40%
0.98%
Std Dev.
1.91%
1.87%
2.73%
0.32%
3.02%
Min
−6.22%
−6.39%
−9.76%
0.01%
−2.48%
Median
0.41%
0.41%
0.38%
0.40%
0.00%
Max
2.48%
1.64%
2.10%
1.17%
9.89%
Sharpe*
2.58
1.62
−0.64
24.42
6.18
* The Sharpe ratio is annualized assuming 365 days a year.
column. The second column shows the performance
statistics with the discretionary positions removed.
The “buy and hold benchmark” shows simulated
returns assuming the capital was only invested in
the DEM security3 instead of being used for the
algorithmic trading strategies. The other columns
show the performance of either the market making
or arbitrage strategies with the proﬁts from all other
activity removed.
It is clear from this table that the algorithmic
trader had higher returns and a higher Sharpe
ratio than a trader with advance knowledge of the
3The Democratic candidate won the 2008 Presidential election.
election outcome would have been able to achieve.
It would have been very difﬁcult for a human trader
focused on campaign news to achieve superior trading
results. Employing this algorithmic trading strategy
is less risky and has higher investment returns than
attempting to interpret political news events and
predict the outcome of the election.
Table 3 also shows the increase in proﬁtability in
the post-convention period. The Sharpe ratio increased
from 9.2 before the conventions to 14.4 after. Much
of the increase is due to an increase in spread proﬁts,
to be discussed in more detail later. The table also
shows much poorer results for the two week period
right before the election. This is largely due to the large
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

174
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
Table 4
Daily residual returns by time period. Residual returns calculated with the simulated “Buy & Hold” strategy as the benchmark. “All Returns”
results are actual trading results from discretionary positions and the market making and arbitrage strategies. Other results are calculated returns
for each strategy with the proﬁts from other strategies removed.
All Residual
Market Making
Market Making
Arbitrage
Returns
& Arbitrage
Only
Only
Full Period 4/15-11/7
Average
0.44%
0.43%
0.22%
0.16%
Standard Deviation
2.38%
2.40%
2.33%
2.17%
Min
−7.62%
−8.73%
−11.16%
−9.34%
Median
0.26%
0.26%
0.17%
0.08%
Max
11.86%
11.86%
9.84%
8.79%
Information Ratio*
3.54
3.43
1.79
1.37
Pre-Convention 4/15-8/24
Average
0.53%
0.53%
0.26%
0.29%
Standard Deviation
1.72%
1.72%
1.53%
1.50%
Min
−4.21%
−4.21%
−5.33%
−4.66%
Median
0.32%
0.32%
0.17%
0.09%
Max
11.86%
11.86%
9.84%
6.97%
Information Ratio*
5.85
5.85
3.29
3.74
Post-Convention 8/25-10/20
Average
0.57%
0.57%
0.47%
0.04%
Standard Deviation
3.27%
3.27%
3.14%
3.08%
Min
−5.86%
−5.86%
−6.32%
−6.45%
Median
0.19%
0.19%
0.19%
−0.04%
Max
10.39%
10.39%
9.43%
8.79%
Information Ratio*
3.34
3.34
2.83
0.27
Election Time 10/21-11/4
Average
−0.72%
−0.82%
−1.07%
−0.57%
Standard Deviation
3.34%
3.56%
4.08%
3.03%
Min
−7.62%
−8.73%
−11.16%
−9.34%
Median
0.34%
0.34%
0.23%
0.16%
Max
3.12%
3.12%
2.96%
3.07%
Information Ratio*
−4.10
−4.38
−4.99
−3.60
* The Information Ratio is annualized assuming 365 days a year.
loss from the technical problem on the day before the
election.
Residual performance statistics using the simulated
“buy and hold” returns as the benchmark are presented
in Table 4. This table shows statistics for the returns
in excess of the benchmark returns for each day.
Interestingly, the information ratio (IR)4 for the preconvention period is higher than the IR for the postconvention period. This is because the Sharpe ratio
for the buy & hold benchmark is higher for the post4The information ratio is calculated in the same manner as
the Sharpe ratio except it uses the residual returns instead of the
actual returns. The residual returns are the actual returns minus the
benchmark returns.
convention period, as shown in Table 3. The IR for
the two week period before the election is negative
because of the technical problem.
The market making proﬁts were further analyzed
using an approach similar to the analysis done by
Menkveld (2011). The net proﬁt π in any time interval
is the average net cash ﬂow, assuming it starts and ends
with no position:
π =
T
X
t=1
−∆ntPt
(15)
In this equation, Pt is the transaction price and
nt is the net inventory position at time t. The
equation can be rewritten to decompose the market
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
175
making algorithm’s revenue into a spread proﬁt and a
positioning proﬁt:
π =
T
X
t=1
nt−1∆pt + |∆nt|st
(16)
where pt is the midquote price and st is the
effective half spread |Pt −pt|. The positioning proﬁt
is then nt−1∆pt and the spread proﬁt is |∆nt|st. In
other words, the spread proﬁt is the proﬁt the market
making algorithm earns from buying at prices less than
the efﬁcient price and selling at prices higher than
the efﬁcient price. The positioning proﬁt is the proﬁt
the algorithm earns from favorable price movements
of its current asset holdings.
Figure 8 shows the cumulative decomposed market
making proﬁts. The ﬁgure shows that the cumulative
positioning proﬁt was negative. In fact, the daily
positioning proﬁt was positive on only 16% of the
trading days. In the three week period before the
election, the daily positioning proﬁt was positive on
only one day. This was expected and is the result of the
information asymmetry between the algorithmic trader
and the human market participants. The system was
continuously holding losing positions but was able to
do so proﬁtably because the spread proﬁts exceeded
the positioning losses. It was able to accomplish this by
not holding any position long enough to (on average)
allow the positioning loss to exceed the proﬁt earned
on the spread.
Table 5 shows statistics on the daily decomposed
market making proﬁts, broken down by time period.
The average positioning proﬁt was negative but the
maximum positioning proﬁt was positive, indicating
that sometimes the market making algorithm proﬁted
from price movements. The average spread proﬁt was
positive and exceeded the average positioning loss
in every period except for the period right before
the election. The spread proﬁt was non-negative for
every day except for the day before the election when
Cumulative profit ($)
−200
0
200
400
600
Algorithmic trader begins trading
Clinton concedes nomination to Obama
Democratic convention ends
Republican convention ends
Katie Couric interview
Election day
Market making profit
Positioning profit
Spread profit
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Fig. 8. Decomposition of the cumulative proﬁts from the market making strategy. The positioning proﬁt is the proﬁt or loss from being long or
short the market asset when the price changed. The spread proﬁt is the proﬁt from earning the spread. The market making proﬁt is the sum of the
positioning proﬁt and the spread proﬁt.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

176
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
Table 5
Daily decomposition of the proﬁts from the market making strategy by time period. The positioning proﬁt is the proﬁt or loss from being long or
short the market asset when the price changed. The spread proﬁt is the proﬁt from earning the spread. The total proﬁt is the sum of the positioning
proﬁt and the spread proﬁt.
Positioning Proﬁt ($)
Spread Proﬁt ($)
Total Proﬁt ($)
Full Period 4/15-11/7
Min
−19.405
−27.773
−47.178
Median
−0.080
0.695
0.417
Max
0.348
18.253
17.005
Average
−0.790
2.210
1.420
Standard Deviation
2.058
4.363
4.469
Pre-Convention 4/15-8/24
Min
−3.494
−0.003
−1.470
Median
−0.025
0.273
0.181
Max
0.348
14.130
10.636
Average
−0.158
0.808
0.650
Standard Deviation
0.406
1.782
1.558
Post-Convention 8/25-10/20
Min
−10.383
0.000
−0.767
Median
−0.700
3.622
2.447
Max
0.197
18.253
17.005
Average
−1.573
5.342
3.769
Standard Deviation
2.286
4.940
4.060
Election Time 10/21-11/4
Min
−19.405
−27.773
−47.178
Median
−1.306
3.186
1.825
Max
−0.112
17.495
9.832
Average
−3.494
2.921
−0.573
Standard Deviation
5.070
9.662
13.139
the system suffered a technical problem. Also notice
that the increased proﬁtability in the post-convention
period is largely due to the increased spread proﬁts
from market making.
Table 6 shows statistics on the market making
algorithm’s volume. Trades where the system provided
liquidity and took liquidity are analyzed separately.
The trades where the algorithmic trader took liquidity
are the trades that took place when the good spread
was locked and the system used a market order to
exhaust an undesired position. Trades that provided
liquidity are broken down further to show the volume
that traded on the good and bad spreads. The volume
that traded on the bad spread exceeds the volume that
traded on the good spread, indicating that the majority
of the spread proﬁt in Table 5 was from traders that
committed price taking violations of rationality and
traded on the bad spread. Refer to Figure 1, which
shows that the average size of the bad spread is
about 1.6 pennies, whereas the average size of the
good spread is about 0.5 pennies. It is clear from
Equations 13 and 14 that the market making algorithm
would be willing to trade in larger sizes when the
spread size increased, so it makes sense that the system
would trade the majority of its volume on the bad
spread to maximize its proﬁts.
Table 7 shows statistics on the daily arbitrage
proﬁts. As expected, the proﬁts were positive every
day, with proﬁtability increasing during and after the
party conventions when market volume increased.
7. Discussion
7.1. Market structure
The structure of the Iowa Electronic Markets
helped shape the proﬁt opportunities available to
the algorithmic trading application developed in this
paper. Since this market had two securities but only
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
177
Table 6
Market making strategy’s trading volume decomposed by time period. The Good Spread and Bad Spread Volumes are for trades where the
market making algorithm traded with limit orders, providing liquidity on either the good or bad spreads. The Provide Volume is for all trades
where the algorithm provided liquidity. The Take Volume is for all trades where the system traded with market orders, taking liquidity. This table
excludes the 2038 shares traded as a result of the technical problem that occurred on the day before the election.
Good Spread
Bad Spread
Volume
Volume
Provide Volume
Take Volume
Full Period 4/15-11/7
Total Shares
9,834
34,585
44,419
13,650
Avg. Shares Per Day
47.51
167.08
214.58
65.94
Percent
16.94%
59.56%
76.49%
23.51%
Trade Count
424
1,452
1,876
567
Avg. Trade Size
23.19
23.82
23.68
24.07
Pre-Convention 4/15-8/24
Total Shares
1,284
7,390
8,674
3,215
Avg. Shares Per Day
9.73
55.98
65.71
24.36
Percent
10.80%
62.16%
72.96%
27.04%
Trade Count
91
440
531
219
Avg. Trade Size
14.11
16.80
16.34
14.68
Post-Convention 8/25-10/20
Total Shares
4,991
19,999
24,990
7,424
Avg. Shares Per Day
87.56
350.86
438.42
130.25
Percent
15.40%
61.70%
77.10%
22.90%
Trade Count
170
697
867
231
Avg. Trade Size
29.36
28.69
28.82
32.14
Election Time 10/21-11/4
Total Shares
3,559
6,821
10,380
2,429
Avg. Shares Per Day
237.27
454.73
692.00
161.93
Percent
27.79%
53.25%
81.04%
18.96%
Trade Count
163
297
460
102
Avg. Trade Size
21.83
22.97
22.57
23.81
one real asset, it was possible for traders to trade
inefﬁciently and commit market-making and pricetaking violations of rationality. If there was only one
security this would not be possible. The algorithmic
trader proﬁted from these violations of rationality.
All of the algorithmic trader’s arbitrage proﬁts were
the result of traders who committed market making
violations of rationality. Table 6 shows that the
majority of the market maker’s trades that provided
liquidity to other traders were on the bad spread. This
means that those liquidity takers were committing
price-taking violations of rationality. If they had traded
more efﬁciently on the good spread the market maker’s
proﬁts and volume would have been lower.
It is easy to criticize the traders who committed
violations of rationality, but the structure of the market
actually made it difﬁcult to be rational. Consider the
case of a trader with $100 who wants to invest the full
amount in the DEM security. If these are the market
prices:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.572
0.578
REP
0.424
0.450
The rational trading decision is to buy bundles and
sell the REP security, not buy the DEM security. The
good spread is constructed with the DEM and REP bid
prices, so buying the DEM security on the offer price
would be a violation of rationality.
Imagine that the trader buys 100 bundles for $100
and sells 100 REP securities at the bid price of 0.424.
The trader now has 100 DEM securities and $42.40.
The trader has not yet invested the full amount in the
DEM security so the trader must now buy 42 bundles
and continue to sell REP securities at the bid price of
0.424. But this time, imagine that the trader can only
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

178
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
Table 7
Daily Arbitrage proﬁt by time period. The arbitrage proﬁt is the
risk-free proﬁt earned from trading pairs of securities at prices above
or below $1.
Arbitrage Proﬁt($)
Full Period 4/15-11/7
Min
0.000
Median
0.195
Max
25.651
Average
1.166
Standard Deviation
2.617
Pre-Convention 4/15-8/24
Min
0.000
Median
0.064
Max
13.377
Average
0.718
Standard Deviation
1.913
Post-Convention 8/25-10/20
Min
0.000
Median
0.872
Max
25.651
Average
2.167
Standard Deviation
3.831
Election Time 10/21-11/4
Min
0.035
Median
1.525
Max
4.379
Average
1.527
Standard Deviation
1.181
sell 20 REP securities before the REP 0.424 bid order
is depleted. The trader now has 142 shares of the DEM
security, 22 shares of the REP security, and $8.88. If
these are the new market prices:
Security
Bid
Ask
DEM
0.572
0.578
REP
0.418
0.450
The trader would be committing a price-taking
violation of rationality by continuing to sell the REP
security. Because of the market impact of the previous
trade, the good spread is now constructed with the DEM
bid and offer prices. In this situation the rational trader
should proceed by ﬁrst selling 22 bundles and then
buying the DEM security.
After selling the bundles for $22 the trader now
has 120 shares of the DEM security and $30.88. If the
trader is able to buy 53 DEM securities on the offer
price of 0.578, the trader would have achieved the
desired position after a total of 6 transactions. More
transactions would be required if 53 DEM securities
were not available for sale at that price.
Compare the trader described above with a trader
who willingly commits a price-taking violation of
rationality and is able to buy 173 DEM securities on the
offer price of 0.578. The less rational trader made one
transaction and had execution costs that are only $0.24
higher than the rational trader. Small improvements in
execution costs may not motivate all traders to trade as
efﬁciently as they can.
The above scenario is realistic, particularly for
traders with larger accounts who are more likely to
not ﬁnd sufﬁcient liquidity and impact prices. It is
easy to understand why a trader would accidentally or
intentionally commit a violation of rationality in this
market.
A structural change to the IEM that would eliminate
these problems is the addition of phantom orders.
With phantom orders, limit orders for the DEM and
REP securities would be mirrored in each other’s
order books. If a trader attempted to trade with a
phantom order in one order book, the exchange would
automatically execute a bundled transaction and trade
the other security. The concept of a good spread and
a bad spread would be eliminated because the spreads
for each security would be equivalent. This would
simplify the number of transactions needed to short
securities and trade without violations of rationality. In
addition, this would lower traders’ execution costs.
7.2. Comparison with other markets
Although the algorithmic trader was successful and
proﬁtable, it is questionable how well the market
making model described in Equations 13 and 14 would
work in a more developed ﬁnancial market like the
modern equity or bond markets. The basic concept
would still be valid but most likely it would need to
be modiﬁed to be applied successfully. An electronic
market maker would likely need to trade many
securities simultaneously and manage risk across the
entire portfolio. The risk model in equation 11 could be
replaced with a model that estimates the risk of a group
of securities. Two possibilities are a factor model or
a covariance matrix based model. The market impact
model in equation 9 could be replaced with a different
statistical model that predicts short term movements
of the efﬁcient price. Also, a market maker would
need to have more sophisticated logic to handle order
placement across multiple trading exchanges and make
decisions about if it should place limit orders at prices
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
179
equal to the best bid or offer, at a price better or worse
than the current best bid or offer, or not at all. It would
be important to minimize the amount of trading done
with informed counterparties.
Another important point is that the counterparties
a market maker would be trading with in the modern
equity or bond markets would be more sophisticated
that the traders found in the IEM. Often counterparties
would be other algorithms looking to accumulate
large positions over an extended period of time. The
market maker could experience larger positioning
losses before it could ﬁnd another counterparty to
trade with to offset its position. This is very different
from the counterparties found in the IEM, who would
typically trade in short bursts and would make buy
and sell decisions that were largely uncorrelated with
the trading decisions of previous market participants.
Also, the algorithms would trade more efﬁciently and
would rarely make the equivalent of any “violations of
individual rationality.”
The arbitrage strategy described in section 3.3 could
work in any modern ﬁnancial market that has multiple
securities with identical risk exposure. Instead of
either buying or selling pairs of securities in bundled
transactions, a very fast trading system could buy and
sell a pair of securities, netting a small proﬁt without
any risk exposure. If a pair of securities with identical
risk exposure could be found that had different sized
spreads, an electronic trader could employ the second
arbitrage strategy described in section 3.3. This would
work because the sizes of the orders in the order
books would be visible. It would be necessary to
have a very fast trading system because most modern
ﬁnancial markets already have many electronic traders
employing strategies similar to the arbitrage strategies
described herein. A new electronic trader would either
need to be faster than its competitors or more creative
about how the strategies are applied.
The arbitrage strategy could also be employed
on baskets of securities instead of two individual
securities. As long as the basket of securities had
the correct risk exposure, the strategy would still be
proﬁtable. This concept is the foundation of index
arbitrage.
7.3. Beneﬁts of an electronic market maker
Another important question is if the Iowa Electronic
Markets beneﬁted from the presence of an electronic
market maker. This can be evaluated using the same
approach used in the literature to examine market
efﬁciency and average or marginal traders.
Oliven and Rietz (2004) discussed the concepts
of price taking and market making violations of
rationality. By construction, the algorithmic trader
described in this paper never committed either of
these violations. It is reasonable to assert that the
market beneﬁted from a market participant that traded
a signiﬁcant amount of volume and never made
either of these mistakes. The computer program
was also incapable of judgment biases such as the
“assimilation-contrast effect” or the “false-consensus
effect” described in Forsythe et al. (1992). It also could
not have an overconﬁdence bias, as discussed in Berg
and Rietz (2010).
Oliven and Rietz (2004) argued that markets can
be efﬁcient despite the presence of biased market
participants because a few unbiased arbitrageurs
would eliminate the effects of the biased traders.
Forsythe et al. (1992) suggested that there were some
traders who did not have any judgment biases and
proﬁted from acting as arbitrageurs. These unbiased
traders would sell a security to the biased supporters
of the associated candidate and would buy the security
from biased supporters of the other candidate. This
is precisely what the algorithmic trader described in
this research paper did. The computer program did
not know which candidate was going to win the
election or which traders held unbiased views about
the future outcome of the election. The only thing that
mattered was that supporters of both candidates placed
market orders for their candidate’s securities at around
the same time. The market making algorithm would
arbitrage one biased trader’s views against another,
and make a proﬁt as a result.
Forsythe et al. also discussed news events and
argued that marginal traders would be able to correctly
assess the relevance or irrelevance of news events and
would consistently buy or sell securities appropriately.
A marginal trader would recognize relevant news
and proﬁt from the foreseen price changes. This is
one criterion where the algorithmic trader cannot be
considered marginal. Because this system could not
interpret news, it was never able to foresee price
changes and failed to achieve a positioning proﬁt
on 84% of the trading days and all but one of the
trading days in the three weeks before the election.
The system was never able to identify when important
news events happened and when they did not. This was
not a problem. Since there were always biased traders
who also failed to correctly interpret news events, the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

180
J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
market making algorithm was able to earn a spread
proﬁt that exceeded the positioning loss the majority
of the time.
Another way the algorithmic trader cannot be
considered to be a marginal trader and did not aid in
the efﬁciency of the market has to do with the technical
problem that affected the system on the day before
the election. The technical problem is a frustrating
blemish on an otherwise successful venture. When
evaluating the market making model in Equations 13
and 14, the data for that day can be excluded5 because
that data does not represent what the model can
achieve. When evaluating the presence of algorithmic
traders in the Iowa Electronic Markets, this event
cannot be ignored. Technical problems are part of the
reality of algorithmic trading and it is only ﬁtting
that this problem happened here. The possibility or
actuality of an electronic trader behaving irrationally
or nonsensically is one way electronic traders are not
marginal traders and negatively affect the market’s
ability to aggregate information and predict future
events.
Unfortunately this problem happened on the day
before the election, a day some researchers use to
derive the market’s ultimate decision of what the
election outcome will be. Thankfully it appears that
market prices recovered very quickly. This rapid
recovery is a testament to the robustness of the Iowa
Electronic Markets and its ability to compensate for a
mistake of one temporarily irrational trader.
7.4. Future research
New securities linked to political events, including
the 2012 U.S. Presidential election, are constantly
being made available for trading in the Iowa Electronic
Markets. The availability of proﬁt opportunities and
the information contained in this research paper means
it is likely there will be more competition for the
potential proﬁts. This competition will make the
market more efﬁcient and a better aggregator of
information. An increase in electronic market making
and more sophisticated market making strategies will
result in more liquidity, smaller spreads, and less
market impact for trades. More arbitrageurs will also
5Except for Table 6, every table and ﬁgure in this paper analyzing
the algorithmic trader’s proﬁtability included the data for that day.
Table 6 analyzes the market making strategy’s trading volume with
the erroneous trades removed.
create more competition for arbitrage opportunities.
As a result, failed arbitrage attempts will become a
more frequent occurrence.
More competition for trading proﬁts in the Iowa
Electronic Markets means employing the strategies
documented in this paper may not be as successful
in the 2012 election market as they were in the
2008 election market. It will be more challenging to
achieve the same proﬁt and Sharpe ratio, but the Iowa
Electronic Markets will beneﬁt from this increased
competition. It is this process of competition through
technological and quantitative innovation that causes
markets to evolve and continue to become more
efﬁcient.
8. Acknowledgments
I
would
like
to
thank
Ritesh
Bansal,
Jacek
Janczewski, Petter Kolm, Lee Maclin, Philip Maymin,
Jeff Miller, Georgios Petropoulos, Wolfgang Ruess
and William White for helpful comments and suggestions. I would also like to thank an anonymous referee
for their insight and meaningful comments. Any errors
are strictly my own.
Finally, I would like to thank Jim Gatheral, Lee
Maclin, and Nassim Taleb, whose love of mathematics
and ﬁnance inspired me to pursue this research project.
References
Berg, J.E., Rietz, T.A., 2006. The Iowa electronic
markets: stylized facts and open issues. In: Hahn,
R., Tetlock, P. (Eds.), Information Markets: A
New Way of Making Decisions. AEI/Brookings
Center for Regulatory Studies, pp. 142–169. http://
tippie.uiowa.edu/iem/research/abstracts/bergrietz_
2006.html, http://www.bibsonomy.org/bibtex/2be8
d70fcfb118a63cc71fc1815869826/cgz.
Berg, J.E., Rietz, T.A., 2010. Longshots, overconﬁdence and efﬁciency on the Iowa electronic markets.
Working Paper, Tippie College of Business, University of Iowa. http://tippie.uiowa.edu/iem/research/
abstracts/bergrietz_2002.html,
http://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1645062.
Berg, J.E., Forsythe, R., Nelson, F.D., Rietz, T.A.,
2008. Results from a dozen years of election futures markets research. In: Plott, C.R., Smith, V.L.
(Eds.), The Handbook of Experimental Economics
Results.
Elsevier
Science,
Amsterdam.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336

J.E. Schmitz / Algorithmic trading in the Iowa electronic markets
181
forthcoming. http://tippie.uiowa.edu/iem/research/
abstracts/bergforsythenelsonrietz_2008.html, http://
econpapers.repec.org/bookchap/eeeexpchp/5-80
.htm.
Borghesi, R., 2007. Price biases in a prediction market:
NFL contracts on tradesports. J. Prediction Markets.
1 (3), 233–253(21). University of Buckingham
Press.
http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/
ubpl/jpm/2007/00000001/00000003/art00005.
Brahma, A., Das, S., Magdon-Ismail, M., September
2010. Comparing prediction market structures, with
an application to market making. ArXiv e-prints.
Das, S., 2008. The effects of market-making on price
dynamics. In: Proceedings of the 7th International
Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems – Volume 2. International Foundation
for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Estoril, Portugal.
Forsythe, R., Nelson, F., Neumann, G.R., Wright, J.,
1992. Anatomy of an experimental political stock
market. Am. Econ. Rev. 82 (5), 1142–1161.
American Economic Association. http://www.jstor
.org/discover/10.2307/2117471?uid=3739832&
uid=2129&uid=2&uid=70&uid=4&uid=3739256&
sid=21100835301151.
Gil, R., Levitt, S.D., 2007. Testing the efﬁciency
of markets in the 2002 World Cup. J. Prediction
Markets. 1, 255–270. http://ideas.repec.org/a/buc/
jpredm/v1y2007i3p255-270.html.
Glosten, L.R., Milgrom, P.R., 1985. Bid, ask and
transaction prices in a specialist market with
heterogeneously informed traders. J. Financ. Econ.
14 (1), 71–100. Elsevier, http://ideas.repec.org/a/
eee/jﬁnec/v14y1985i1p71-100.html.
Hanson, R., 2007. Logarithmic market scoring rules
for modular combinatorial information aggregation.
J. Prediction Markets. 1 (1), 3–15. http://ideas.repec
.org/a/buc/jpredm/v1y2007i1p3-15.html.
Huberman, G., Stanzl, W., 2004. Price manipulation
and quasi-arbitrage. Econometrica. 72 (4), 1247–
1275. The Econometric Society. http://www.jstor
.org/discover/10.2307/3598784?uid=3739832&
uid=2129&uid=2&uid=70&uid=4&uid=3739256&
sid=21100835301151.
Menkveld, A.J., 2011. High frequency trading and the
New-Market makers. EFA 2011 Paper.
Oliven, K., Rietz, T.R., 2004. Suckers are born but
markets are made: individual rationality, arbitrage,
and market efﬁciency on an electronic futures market. Manag. Sci. 50 (3), 336–351. INFORMS Institute for Operations Research and the Management
Sciences
(INFORMS),
Linthicum,
Maryland,
USA c⃝2004.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
1014288.
Rhode, P.W., Strumpf, K., 2008. Manipulating political
stock markets: a ﬁeld experiment and a century
of observational data. http://www.unc.edu/∼cigar/
strumab.htm.
Tetlock, P.C., May 1, 2008. Liquidity and prediction market efﬁciency. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=929916.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1593336
