WORKING
PAPER
No. 14-11
APRIL 2014
AN ANALYSIS OF GLOBAL HFT REGULATION
Motivations, Market Failures, and Alternative Outcomes
by Holly A. Bell and Harrison Searles
The opinions expressed in this Working Paper are the authors’ and do not represent
official positions of the Mercatus Center or George Mason University.

About the Authors 
 
Holly A. Bell 
Affiliated Scholar 
Mercatus Center at George Mason University 
Associate Professor 
University of Alaska Anchorage 
hollybell@me.com 
 
Harrison Searles 
MA Fellow 
Mercatus Center at George Mason University 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Market events like the “flash crash” of 2010 and Michael Lewis’s claims that markets are 
“rigged” have brought increased scrutiny on high-frequency trading (HFT), triggering calls for 
aggressive regulation. While there are several empirically demonstrated benefits of HFT, 
including improved liquidity and reduced transaction costs, the current arguments against HFT 
are largely qualitative in nature. This paper provides a qualitative analysis of global HFT 
regulation designed to identify regulatory motivations, determine whether they suggest a market 
failure attributable exclusively to HFT, and distinguish the implications of regulations for 
markets and their stakeholders. Our study finds that regulatory goals fall into two broad 
categories: (1) shared (or market integrity) goals and (2) divergent (or fairness) goals. We find 
little evidence for the existence of a market failure that requires additional aggressive regulation, 
or suggesting that government intervention will improve market integrity or “fairness” better 
than the market and existing regulation already have. 
 
JEL codes: D530, G10, G180 
 
Keywords: high-frequency trading, financial market regulation, global financial market 
regulation, regulatory outcomes, financial market integrity, fairness in financial markets, market 
failures, manipulative market practices, stock market, market efficiency, informational market 
efficiency, emerging high-frequency trading markets, market liquidity 
 
 

	  
	  
3
An Analysis of Global HFT Regulation: 
Motivations, Market Failures, and Alternative Outcomes 
Holly A. Bell and Harrison Searles 
 
High-frequency trading (HFT) has come under scrutiny over the past several years as the 
media, legislators, and regulators around the world have raised concerns about the potential 
market risks associated with HFT and with algorithmic trading in general. But are existing and 
proposed regulations designed to correct a market failure attributable to HFT? Or, like the first 
people who experienced the steam engine and its then-inconceivable speed of 30 mph, are 
individuals and institutions concerned they will be harmed in some way by market speeds they 
cannot comprehend? 
The release of Michael Lewis’s (2014) new book, Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt, and 
his claims that markets are “rigged” have brought increased attention to HFT and calls for 
additional regulation to ban HFT strategies, but Lewis paid little attention to the market benefits 
of HFT. The book and subsequent 60 Minutes story appear to be primarily designed to convince 
traders to use the new Investors Exchange (IEX) established by individuals in the story. These 
accounts fail to mention several issues. First, the book and 60 Minutes story demonstrate that 
markets are not rigged. Brad Katsuyama, head of IEX, developed an algorithm to neutralize one 
HFT strategy and has also developed a competing trading venue. If markets were truly rigged, 
neither would be possible. Second, the accounts fail to mention that IEX is a “dark pool”—an 
exchange that trades away from central exchanges so that other markets do not see large block 
trades, preventing price shocks—a controversial practice in and of itself. Finally, the book and 
60 Minutes story do not mention that high-frequency traders will be allowed to trade on the 

	  
	  
4
platform, but IEX is “building in extra cable lengths to slow down some transactions” in an 
effort to reduce the effectiveness of high-frequency traders by eliminating some of their 
competitive strategies (Javers, 2014). 
Finally, along with failing to mention the benefits of HFT to all investors, the author has 
also failed to analyze the potential downsides to additional HFT regulation in global markets. 
This paper explores the global HFT regulatory environment, examines the regulatory motivations 
set forth by legislators and regulators, and looks at outcomes of existing regulation and potential 
downfalls of proposed regulation. One question to consider when reading this paper is, Do 
additional regulatory policies designed to curb or eliminate HFT and algorithmic trading lead to 
less complexity and better market outcomes than a competitive market that allows for competing 
algorithms and alternative trading platforms? 
This paper is not designed to substantiate the benefits of HFT that others have empirically 
demonstrated. These benefits include improved liquidity, lower transaction costs, price 
synchronization, greater overall market speed, more efficient price discovery, reduced impacts of 
volatility, and increased availability of direct market access (Gerig, 2012; Hendershott & 
Riordan, 2009; Brogaard, 2010; Brogaard, Hendershott & Riordan, 2010; Hasbrouck & Saar, 
2010; Hendershott, Jones & Menkveld, 2011; Hendershott & Riordan, 2012; Menkveld, 2012). 
Based on previous research, we assume that these benefits exist and that they are advantageous 
to all investors, not just the large HFT firms Lewis (2014) claims “rig” the market. The 
advantages include reduced trading costs, better investment performance for long-term investors, 
and giving small and retail investors an advantage they have not had before: the ability to trade 
what they want, when they want due to narrow bid–offer spreads and a market with a small 
average trade size (Asness & Mendelson, 2014). 

	  
	  
5
Nor is the purpose here to defend or condemn HFT per se. Rather, we qualitatively 
analyze existing and proposed regulations to address the following questions: 
1) Are there broad classifications of motivations or regulatory purposes that emerge from a 
comprehensive review of global HFT regulation? 
2) If so, are these motivations or purposes consistent with the need for regulatory 
intervention to remedy market failures associated exclusively with HFT? 
3) Will regulation be effective at resolving perceived problems, and/or are alternative 
outcomes possible? 
While the literature cited has quantitatively identified the benefits of HFT, many 
criticisms of HFT that drive calls for regulation are qualitative: these include financial market 
quality and complexity, lack of social benefit, and qualitative risk control for externalities. This 
paper addresses a gap in the literature by providing a qualitative analysis of HFT regulation 
designed to identify latent social issues and structures motivating regulatory efforts, a 
categorization of regulatory goals, and a discussion of their implications for markets and their 
stakeholders. We are not trying to address all concerns about HFT and algorithmic trading that 
all parties have raised, only to address those that legislators and regulators have raised in their 
proposed regulation and to derive broad themes and potential outcomes. 
The first section of this paper provides a global overview of the HFT regulatory 
environment, in particular existing and proposed HFT regulation and emerging HFT markets. It 
also explores the purposes of the regulation and the market indices the regulation is intended to 
influence. The second section determines broad classifications of motivations or regulatory 
purposes, examines whether these suggest a market failure attributable exclusively to HFT, and 
evaluates whether regulation will be effective or whether alternative outcomes are possible. 

	  
	  
6
1. A Survey of the Global HFT Regulatory Environment 
This section provides an overview of proposed and existing global HFT regulation. We have 
attempted to highlight the regulation’s stated purposes as regulators have put them forth as well 
as the regulation’s primary provisions. More in-depth information on specific regulations is 
available in the appendices. Table 1 (page 24) summarizes the global regulatory environment for 
developed HFT markets. 
Some of the most aggressive existing and proposed regulation exists in the European 
Union and its member states, with the United States evolving toward regulatory proposals that 
are increasingly similar to those in Europe. Meanwhile, Asia is generally supporting the growth 
of HFT, with Japan and Singapore most aggressively seeking to create environments conducive 
to HFT. There are also four emerging HFT markets—Russia, Brazil, Mexico, and New 
Zealand—that desire to improve liquidity and attract capital by creating HFT-capable market 
environments. Of the four, Russia and Mexico appear best positioned to attract HFT. 
 
The European Union 
In 2012, HFT represented approximately 39 percent of the value of stocks traded in Europe. This 
number has been relatively unchanged since 2009 (World Federation of Exchanges, 2013). The 
EU operates as a “single market” system in which all member states work within the same 
regulatory framework. To that end, the EU has established the Markets in Financial Instruments 
Directive (MiFID), designed to be the basis for member state regulations. 
MiFID, adopted in 2007 and amended in 2008 and 2010, serves as a regulatory guide for 
investor transactions by stock markets, trading systems, and investment firms and requires 
member states to standardize the rules governing investment services and activities. It allows 

	  
	  
7
firms to be regulated in their home states, but once approved by the European Commission, firms 
may provide services in any member state through a “passport” program. There are also 
requirements for pre- and post-trade transparency designed to minimize the effects of market 
fragmentation by EU members trading across multiple markets in multiple countries (European 
Commission 2007 & 2011a). 
While MiFID provided a general structure to guide EU members in more traditional stock 
exchanges, the MiFID II draft is designed to target both high-frequency traders (HFTs) and 
algorithmic trading in general. The initial draft, described here, has been voted on, but the final 
draft has not yet been released, so the specific regulations may differ from those described here, 
yet their purpose remains the same. 
According to the 221-page MiFID II (European Commission, 2011b) the directive’s 
general purpose is to “level the playing field” (p. 5). The regulation requires HFTs to provide 
“organizational safeguards” both internally and for those offering market access to HFTs. 
Safeguards include requiring venues to ensure the resiliency of trading platforms, to work with 
“competent authorities” in the oversight and monitoring of HFT activities, and to adopt 
appropriate risk controls to mitigate disorderly trading (pp. 7–8). Appendix A contains specific 
details of the proposed regulation. 
The proposed European Union financial transaction taxes (FTTs) may also have a 
significant impact on HFTs. The latest amendments to the proposed FTTs (European Parliament, 
2013) indicate that firms that provide liquidity using modern trading technology—which 
includes, but is not limited to, HFTs—will be required to pay the tax on both successfully 
executed transactions and order cancelations. This rule would discourage price discovery by 
HFTs. If regulators implement such a tax, it will wipe out HFTs’ operations in EU markets. 

	  
	  
8
According to the European Parliament (2012b), 11 countries—Austria, Belgium, Estonia, 
France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Spain—agreed to participate 
in an FTT as of December 2012. 
Several member states are attempting to get ahead of the EU’s MiFID II and FTTs by 
establishing their own HFT regulation. Not all member states agree with the EU initiative, and 
while EU policy recommends that member states not establish regulations that are more stringent 
than EU policies, some member states appear to be moving away from the EU’s standards, 
creating a fragmented EU regulatory environment. It may be difficult for the EU to enforce a 
“single market” passport system if member states bypass this process through their own 
regulations. The following sections detail the member state initiatives. 
 
Germany 
Germany has moved beyond regulatory proposals to enacting HFT-specific regulation. When the 
Bundestag passed the German High Frequency Trading Act of 2013 
(Hochfrequenzhandelsgesetz) in February 2013 (Gesetz zur Vermeidung, 2013; Eurex, 2013a; 
Eurex, 2013c; Schuster & Dreibus, 2013), HFT represented approximately 40 percent of German 
exchange transactions (Kindermann, 2013). The act requires HFTs to register with the Federal 
Financial Supervisory Authority, more commonly known in Germany by its abbreviation BaFin 
(for Bundesanstalt für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht), and requires them to obtain licenses as 
banks or financial trading institutions consistent with the German Banking Act. This licensing 
requirement preempts the reforms of the EU’s MiFID and applies to anyone trading directly or 
indirectly on a German regulated market, regardless of the trader’s location. The creation of a 
German license for HFT lays the groundwork for German passport-style regulation in the spirit 

	  
	  
9
of MiFID, but does not allow other EU countries to trade in Germany without a German-issued 
passport. (Cleary Gottlieb, 2013). 
The purposes of the High Frequency Trading Act in Germany have been described as (a) 
increasing the stability and integrity of German financial markets, (b) minimizing market risks, 
(c) preventing market manipulation, (d) closing a regulatory gap, and (e) protecting long-term 
investors (Kindermann, 2013). As a result of the regulation, at least one firm, Cologne 
Independent Traders, has announced it will close due to the “significant” burden (Cave, 2013). 
There is widespread, growing concern that uncertainty about post-regulation liquidity in 
Germany is going to drive traders elsewhere in search of more certain and reliable liquidity 
(German HFT, 2014). 
Supervisors at BaFin and the Exchange Supervisory Authority are allowed to request 
descriptions of trading strategies or parameters and are permitted to deny the use of any 
algorithmic trading strategy they believe is undesirable (Eurex, 2013c; Schuster & Dreibus, 
2013). The regulation requires exchanges to determine an appropriate order-to-trade ratio, to 
develop a minimum tick size, and to charge a fee for excessive system usage, including 
amendments and cancelations of orders, and it requires traders to flag each order generated by an 
algorithm (Eurex, 2013b). 
In addition, the exchange must ensure “that orderly price discovery is granted even in 
situations of large price fluctuations” (Eurex 2013c, p. 3). Algorithmic traders must develop and 
maintain risk-management processes and procedures and must document all algorithms used. 
The regulation also more clearly defines “market abuse” as disrupting or delaying the trading 
system, making it difficult for others to determine actual purchase or sale orders, and creating 
false or misleading signals (Schuster & Dreibus, 2013). 

	  
	  
10
United Kingdom 
TABB Group, a research and strategic advisory firm, estimates that high-frequency trading 
represents approximately 36 percent of UK stock-market transactions (Credit Suisse, 2012). A 
2010 report by the London Stock Exchange Group indicated HFT represented 33 percent of 
order-book executions by number of trades and 32 percent by value traded (London Stock 
Exchange Group, 2010). Government authorities in Europe first called for restrictions designed 
to facilitate the “extinction” of HFT in 2012 in response to the 2012 US “flash crash” and 
collapse of Knight Capital due to a faulty algorithm (Ross, Fitzgibbon & Mathiason, 2012). 
Recent fines imposed on Panther Energy Trading LLC by the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority 
(FCA), the U.S. Commodities Futures Trading Commission, and the Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange for deliberately manipulating commodities markets have led to increased calls to 
“curb” HFT in the UK (Wessing, 2013; Jones & McCrank, 2013). 
The UK Treasury, which commissioned a study on HFT, opposes the eradication of HFT 
in Europe. The report (Foresight 2012) found that technology is an important aspect of financial 
market innovation and new market services; that computer-based trading that includes HFT 
improves liquidity, reduces transaction costs, and makes market pricing more efficient; and that 
there is no direct evidence that HFT increases volatility. The report concluded that “it is highly 
desirable” that any new policies or market regulation preserve the benefits of HFT, and any new 
policies or regulations should be evidenced-based and consider the associated risks and benefits. 
The report did propose the monitoring of computer-based trading and the development of safety 
mechanisms. Based on the report, the UK Treasury stated it believed the benefits of HFT 
outweighed the current risks. 

	  
	  
11
However, immediately following the July 2013 fines of Panther Energy Trading LLC, the 
Business, Innovation and Skills Committee of the UK House of Commons responded by 
proposing the implementation of an FTT on high-frequency trading of publicly listed stocks. 
According to Taxation (2013a), “the Committee called for a financial transaction tax to be set 
‘. . . at a level which is the average profit made on a high-frequency trade in the UK’” (para. 3). 
The purpose of the proposed regulation seems to be the eradication of HFT in the UK, 
even though regulators recognized the benefits of HFT. To justify the committee’s position, the 
UK secretary of state for business, innovation and skills commissioned a report on the UK equity 
markets (Kay, 2012). The report’s purpose was to “review activity in UK equity markets and its 
impact on the long-term performance and governance of UK quoted companies” (p. 9). The 
report found that “short-termism” is a problem and that the UK legislature should promote “longtermism” in equity markets. The report describes high-frequency trading as emerging as “an 
aspect of a broader trend which favours trading over trust relationships” (p. 39), but it does not 
place significant blame for the trend toward short-termism on HFT. It finds there has been a shift 
from “owning” to “trading” stock in the market as a whole (Kay, 2012; Penny, 2013). 
However, the House of Commons Business, Innovation and Skills Committee Third 
Report of Session 2013–14 from July 16, 2013 (House of Commons, 2013), focused on HFT as 
a problem of short-termism that needed to be resolved. Support for an HFT transaction tax 
emerged in this work. These efforts are moving forward despite the testimony of economist 
and professor John Kay, chair of the Review of UK Equity Markets and Long-Term Decision 
Making, whom the committee hired to study UK financial markets hoping to confirm their 
negative perceptions of HFT and justify their proposed financial transaction tax. Kay testified 
before the Business, Innovation and Skills Select Committee on February 5, 2013, that “the 

	  
	  
12
existence of high-frequency trading is not something that one could say is very supportive of 
longterm decision making in British business, [but] I concluded quite quickly that it is not the 
principal issue and problem” (p. Ev 14). In fact, Kay’s report (2012) made no 
recommendations for high-frequency trading, in part because he found HFTs do not own a 
large proportion of British stocks. 
Alternatively, EBS, a private foreign-exchange platform owned by ICAP PLC, is 
currently implementing one market solution to the concerns about HFT in the UK. EBS plans to 
modify the way in which orders are processed in an effort to take away the advantages of HFTs. 
Prior to the new rule, EBS had a first-in, first-out processing routine within which the first firm 
to place its order would be the first to have it cleared. This process, practiced by most 
exchanges, gives those with the fastest technology an edge in order processing. The modified 
system will organize orders into bundles ranked by who was first to put in the order. A 
computer program will then randomly select the sequence of individual order processing from 
the bundle of orders that came in earliest. While there remains an incentive to be one of the first 
to submit an order, the modified system eliminates the incentive to be the first. A spokeswoman 
for EBS told the BBC that the motivation for reform was “about creating a fairer marketplace” 
(BBC, 2013; Iosebashvili, 2013). However, it appears to be designed to address the public 
relations problem associated with HFT in the UK rather than a market failure. It remains to be 
seen whether the race to be among the first rather than the first will have any impact on slowing 
HFT, as there still remain strong incentives to gather information quickly. If additional 
aggressive regulation is implemented simultaneously, it may be difficult to determine the 
impact of any individual change. 
 

	  
	  
13
France 
In 2012, France implemented a package of FTTs that impose taxes on HFT and other financial 
transactions (see Rosenman, 2012). In an effort to make HFT unprofitable, the package included a 
“non-transaction” tax of 0.01 percent on modified or canceled stock orders exceeding 80 percent of 
all orders transmitted in a month. HFTs will be subject to the tax if they “transmit, modify, or 
cancel their orders within a half a second” (Rosenthal, 2012). This tax is in addition to a 0.20 
percent transaction tax on purchased shares of French companies with market capitalizations of at 
least €1 billion (≈ $1.32 billion) (Rosenman, 2012; Rosenthal, 2012; Gide Loyrette Nouel, 2012). 
More recently, France has updated its banking laws in a way that appears to bring its 
regulatory environment closer to that of the EU proposal. It seeks to provide a separation 
between “useful” and “speculative” financial activities in the economy (see Séparation, 2013). 
According to Voigt (2013), 
A lot of details are still uncertain but it appears that firms using “traitement automatisé” 
(automated processing) are now required by that law to register with the French regulator. 
Those firms must have an audit trail for each order sent to the market and store that audit 
trail, together with details of all the algos involved, for a certain period of time. 
 
The purpose of the FTTs that include HFT appears to be first getting investors to hold 
local companies for longer periods (not unlike the UK’s desire for “owners” rather than 
“traders”). France’s additional goals appear to be to minimize order-to-trade ratios and, like 
Germany, to avoid the EU’s “passport” rules associated with MiFID by creating its own 
registration system. A final goal looks to bring France in line with the EU directive by 
maintaining audit trails and records of algorithmic strategies. 
The short-term impact so far of France’s FTTs has been to significantly decrease market 
liquidity. France’s share of European equity turnover has been reduced from 23 percent in 2011 
to an estimated 12.85 percent in 2013 (The Trade, 2013). 

	  
	  
14
North America 
While HFT originated in the United States, its prevalence and profitability in North America has 
been declining since 2009. To date, the United States has largely exercised restraint in reining in 
HFT, but the regulatory climate is changing. The Canadian government has implemented a 
financial transaction tax and executed an alternative trading system that taxes away HFT profits. 
	  
United States 
In 2014, HFT in the United States is expected to account for approximately 48.5 percent of 
exchange trade volume. This percentage represents a steady decline from HFT’s peak of 61 
percent in 2009, resulting in a drop in profitability for high-frequency traders from $7.2 billion in 
2009 to an anticipated $1.3 billion in 2014, according to TABB Group (Bell, 2013; Bogard, 
2014; Tabb, 2014). A report on high-frequency trading completed by the World Federation of 
Exchanges found that one reason for this drop is that exchanges have adapted to the HFT 
environment and have started to provide “faster, more transparent and more efficient” market 
structures that disrupt informational asymmetries that had previously existed. They have also 
“enacted many safeguards to ensure orderly markets” and the integrity of exchanges in which 
HFT takes place (World Federation of Exchanges, 2013). The report also concluded that while 
the substantial majority of empirical research has concluded that HFT has had measurable 
beneficial impacts on a variety of core market quality metrics, including tighter spreads, 
increased liquidity, more efficient price formation, reduced transaction costs for market 
users and lower market volatility . . . critics have focused on qualitative issues concerning 
fairness and systemic risk (p. 4). 
 
The desires for “fairness,” market stability, formal regulation for existing market integrity 
practices utilized by traders and exchanges, and income redistribution appear to be driving 
factors in US regulatory efforts. A complex array of regulation is under consideration in the 

	  
	  
15
United States to meet these goals. First, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) 
has issued a Concept Release, which proposes several potential areas of regulation for both highfrequency and automated traders in general, including pre-trade controls, post-trade controls, 
system safeguards, mandatory registration and reporting, and efforts to standardize order types. 
(Detailed information on the CFTC Concept Release is available in Appendix B.) The proposed 
CFTC regulations attempt to create formal regulation and standardization for practices that 
traders and exchanges already engage in voluntarily as part of their risk-management strategies. 
Second, then-representative Edward J. Markey proposed the PROTECT Act in 2013. 
PROTECT stands for “Protection from Rogue Oil Traders Engaging in Computerized 
Trading.” The bill would amend the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. 1 et seq.) to include 
requirements for all futures traders using HFT to (1) register as high-frequency traders with the 
CFTC, (2) test all computer programs and algorithms used for HFT, (3) document system 
safeguards, and (4) implement standardized reporting. It would also ban the purchase and sale 
“through the same or different accounts the same commodity contract, agreement, or 
transaction, unless the simultaneous purchases and sales are of a minimis quantity and are 
reported to the Commission” (pp. 2–3). 
Third, utilizing its ability to self-regulate, CME Group Inc. (CME) has submitted a plan 
to the CFTC that will do a better job of detecting “wash trades”—the practice of buying shares 
from one broker while selling them through another—a practice already banned under US law, 
but difficult to detect. While the CFTC asked CME to reconsider its original plan, it has been 
resubmitted to the CFTC for approval and may be implemented at a later date (CME Group, 
2013; Brush, 2013; Polansek, 2013; Leising, 2013). IntercontinentalExchange is exploring 
similar efforts to detect and curb wash trading (Trindle & Bunge, 2013). 

	  
	  
16
A fourth regulatory effort, the SEC’s Regulation Systems Compliance and Integrity rule 
(Regulation SCI) (Securities and Exchange Commission, 2013), is designed to replace the 
current Automation Review Policy as virtually all equity trading in the United States utilizes 
some form of automation. The new rule would require exchanges and any traders using 
computerized trading systems, including HFTs, “to establish written policies and procedures 
reasonably designed to ensure that their systems have levels of capacity, integrity, resiliency, 
availability, and security adequate to maintain their operational capability and promote the 
maintenance of fair and orderly markets, and that they operate in the manner intended” (p. 3). It 
would also require regularly scheduled testing of systems, continuity and disaster recovery plans, 
and system redundancy. It would require SCI entities to report on system events and take 
corrective action if they occur. Like the CFTC proposal, Regulation SCI essentially creates 
regulatory mandates for market integrity processes that traders and exchanges are already 
engaging in (Melendez, 2013; Walter, 2013a). 
In addition to Regulation SCI, the SEC also implemented the Market Access Rule (Rule 
15c3-5) in 2011, requiring brokers and dealers to have risk controls for market access (Ziliak & 
Brown, 2013). The SEC also recently introduced the Market Information Data Analytics System 
(MIDAS) that has allowed regulators to better monitor market activity and that determines root 
causes of flash crashes and other market phenomena. The MIDAS system has allowed the SEC 
to fill a huge institutional technology gap between traders and regulators that has caused many to 
call for regulatory action when no empirical data on causes of specific market phenomena exist. 
Bannister, 2013; Michaels & Mamudi, 2013; Walter, 2013b). 
Finally, two proposed pieces of legislation seek to impose financial transaction taxes. The 
Inclusive Prosperity Act (2013), proposed by Representative Keith Ellison, would place a 0.5 

	  
	  
17
percent sales tax on the trading of derivatives, stocks, bonds, and other financial instruments. Its 
two purposes are to generate $300 billion per year in tax revenue and to limit high-frequency 
trading (Inclusive Prosperity Act, 2013; Can the HR 1579, 2013). 
Similar to the Inclusive Prosperity Act, the Wall Street Trading and Speculators Tax Act 
(2013), proposed by Senator Tom Harkin and Representative Peter DeFazio, would place a 0.03 
percent tax on the sale of stocks, bonds, and other securities by banking and financial firms. 
There would be no tax on individual consumers. 
 
Canada 
According to the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC), HFT in 
Canada is estimated to account for approximately 34 percent of trades, 24 percent of value, and 
16 percent of volume. This represents a decline in HFT from 2011 when the numbers were 42 
percent, 32 percent, and 22 percent, respectively (The Globe and Mail, 2013; Pinnington, 2013; 
Shecter, 2013). The Canadian Securities Administrators (CSA) have approved regulation, subject 
to ministerial approval, on electronic trading. The purpose of National Instrument 23-103 
Electronic Trading (2013) is to “address the risks to Canadian markets related to the speed and 
automation of electronic trading, including the risks related to [direct electronic access]” 
(Canadian Securities Administrators, 2013, para. 2). 
In particular, the regulation requires risk management and supervisory controls, 
including documentation of those controls, and requires that automated systems do “not 
interfere with fair and orderly markets” (National Instrument 23-103, 2013, p. 4). Additionally, 
exchanges must provide immediate access to market information and not permit the execution 
of orders for exchange-traded securities that exceed price and volume thresholds that regulators 

	  
	  
18
or exchanges can set. Market participants must be able to cancel, vary, or correct trades that are 
clearly erroneous. 
Simultaneously, the IIROC, a self-regulatory authority that sets industry standards and 
shared rules of conduct under the CSA’s oversight, released its Universal Market Integrity Rules 
(UMIR) (Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada, 2013). The UMIR are 
designed to be aligned with the CSA regulations described previously. The IIROC has also 
started collecting trading data with its Surveillance Technology Enhancement Platform (STEP) 
that will allow a more data-driven approach to policy recommendations (Sussman, 2013). And as 
of April 1, 2012, the IIROC implemented message-processing and trade-volume fees based on 
trades and order submissions, cancelations, and modifications. The purpose is to recover a 
portion of its costs (IIROC, 2012; Malinova, Park & Riordan, 2013). 
The Royal Bank of Canada, mutual fund conglomerates IGM and CI Financial, pension 
fund PSP Investments, and international banks ITG and Barclays are creating a competing 
market, called Aequitas, designed to curb HFT. The new market will eliminate rebates for HFTs 
and make HFT strategies unprofitable through a combination of trading fees and “speed bumps.” 
It will also cap the execution priority of designated market makers in an attempt to limit their 
ability to crowd out others. The goal, similar to that of the UK, is to encourage more long-term 
ownership of stocks. The new exchange is expected to launch early in 2015 (CBC, 2013; 
D’Antona Jr., 2014a; Kwan, 2013; Lam & Alexander, 2014; Sharo, 2014; Sharp & Rocha, 2013). 
 
Asia-Pacific 
Several parts of the Asia-Pacific region are taking a different approach to HFT than Europe and 
North America by encouraging its growth. Much of the HFT taking place in Asia is the result of 

	  
	  
19
US and European firms establishing the technology in the region in an effort to expand their global 
presence as the United States and EU consider implementing regulatory restrictions on HFT. 
	  
Japan 
In Japan, HFT accounted for approximately 45 percent of trading volume in 2011 (Grant, 2011). 
Direct, high-speed trading routes between Japan and Singapore and the Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange were established in March 2014 (KVH Co. Ltd. 2014). 
In 2010, the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) launched the Arrowhead Trading System to 
remove existing capacity constraints and accommodate the order-response time and informationdistribution speeds required for low-latency algorithmic trading, reducing speeds from 2–3 
seconds to 3 milliseconds. The more efficient system decreased trading costs by as much as 36 
percent during early 2010. It also keeps transaction data in its memory, and triply redundant 
servers providing robust data integrity process these data in parallel. The system is designed to 
support HFT in particular and has allowed the TSE to introduce colocation services. According 
to Yuichiro Yamamoto, manager of the TSE IT Development Department, the Arrowhead 
system allows the TSE to “monitor and manage traffic on each participant’s gateway server,” 
thereby increasing transparency, and lets it apply a “fixed maximum limit to each gateway in 
terms of orders per second so as to prevent message flooding” (Webb, 2010). The new trading 
system has increased HFT volume on the TSE to approximately 50 percent of volume, making it 
equivalent to US and European markets, according to Ko Nakayama, director of the Financial 
Markets Department at the Bank of Japan. Rather than attempting to regulate away HFT, Japan 
has embraced it while monitoring it and putting systemic limitations in place (Fangqin, 2010; 
Fujitsu, 2010; Markets Media, 2013; Webb, 2010; World Federation of Exchanges, 2013). 

	  
	  
20
Singapore 
Singapore has also embraced HFT in derivatives trading, with approximately 30 percent of 
derivatives trading volume attributed to HFT on the Singapore Exchange (SGX). Due to a stamp 
duty of $0.20 per $100 of the value of shares transferred, the percentage of equities trading using 
HFT in Singapore is near zero. While SGX launched a new, faster trading engine called “Reach” 
in 2012, it may still be difficult to attract new HFTs due to the stamp duty. However, Singapore 
is considering offering rebates to HFTs that will make trading there more affordable. It has also 
installed ultralow latency routes to the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to increase HFT (Burgos, 
2013; Ho, 2013; Inland Revenue Authority of Singapore, 2013; Kingsley, Phadnis & Stone 2013; 
Kok, 2012; Kuen, 2013; KVH Co. Ltd., 2014). 
 
Hong Kong 
The Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission reports that approximately 20 percent of 
volume comes from HFT (Kingsley, Phadnis & Stone, 2013). Relatively low HFT volumes are 
due, in part, to a 0.1 percent stamp tax on securities transactions (GovHK, 2013). Hong Kong has 
taken a somewhat cautious approach to HFT even while undertaking a major technology upgrade 
to Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing (HKEx). The lack of HFT opportunities in Hong Kong 
has recently caused some firms to consider a move to India, which is establishing itself as the 
world’s fastest-growing derivatives market. However, GETCO, one of the world’s largest highfrequency trading firms, entered the Hong Kong market in 2012 as Dutch rival IMC was leaving. 
Charles Li, chief executive of HKEx, describes a desire to maintain “speed bumps” in the HFT 
arena in Hong Kong (Cave, 2012; Futures & Options World, 2013). 

	  
	  
21
A consultation study conducted by the Securities and Futures Commission (2012) on the 
regulation of electronic trading resulted in several recommendations that HFTs will implement in 
Hong Kong in 2014. Among the new “Code of Conduct” policies, HFTs must implement 
policies and procedures to control and supervise orders, manage and supervise the “design, 
development, deployment and operation of the electronic trading system,” ensure adequate 
security, reliability, and capacity, and keep detailed records of all aspects of the trading system 
including audit logs. Service providers must monitor for and prevent erroneous orders and 
identify any orders or trading activities post-trade that may be “manipulative” or “abusive” in 
nature. All systems need to be tested at least once per year with adequate recordkeeping 
maintained for at least two years, and risk management controls must be in place (King & Wood 
Mallesons, 2013; Securities and Futures Commission, 2013). 
 
China 
Algorithmic traders are beginning to enter China as regulatory and tax structures have driven 
traders out of other markets and into developing countries. The CME Group anticipates 
significant influx in China, Singapore, Malaysia, South Korea, and Indonesia as new regulations 
are implemented in Europe. China recently began centrally clearing over-the-counter derivatives, 
which provides a more attractive environment for HFT in the derivatives market as it can reduce 
credit risk and provide increased liquidity and transparency (Chitkara, 2013). China does have a 
stamp duty on stock trading that has fluctuated between 0.1 and 0.3 percent in recent years; 
however, the government has been willing to eliminate it completely—at least temporarily—to 
encourage investment, as it did in 2008 (Bloomberg News, 2013; China Knowledge, 2013; 
Taxation, 2013b; Reuters, 2008). Unstable tax rates may be discouraging HFTs, but with costs 

	  
	  
22
rising in other countries, China could attract HFTs by lowering or eliminating its taxes. Ronald 
Gould, then-CEO of Asia Pacific, Chi-X Global, sees additional challenges before HFT will be a 
significant part of Chinese markets, including development of a regulatory and user environment 
that supports change and encourages innovation and significant technological development 
(Gould, 2010). There also remain complex rules for foreign investors in China that may dissuade 
some from moving algorithmic trading and HFT to Chinese markets (see Robinson, Egbert, Tao 
& Lovel, 2013). 
China is moving somewhat slowly into algorithmic trading in general, and the HFT 
speeds found in other markets do not exist there (Grant, 2012). Discussions about HFT as it 
relates to China generally appear to be referring to algorithmic trading as a whole and not to 
trading at high speeds and holding securities for milliseconds. In 2012, Song Liping, general 
manager of the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, said, “China is not ready for HFT” (Nan, 2012, para. 
5). (In this case, he is referring to high-speed trading, not algorithmic trading.) 
The “flash spike” that occurred when Everbright Securities sent 26,082 erroneous buy 
orders directly to the Shanghai Stock Exchange on August 16, 2013, may cause China to 
consider more aggressive monitoring and controls of algorithmic trading. The China Securities 
Regulatory Commission (CSRC) found significant flaws in Everbright’s information-technology 
and risk-control systems. The CSRC has already announced it will scrutinize all 110 brokerages 
operating in China and will be inspecting all systems (Junli, 2013; Miller & Wildau, 2013; Yu, 
2013). While the trading systems are undergoing broad scrutiny, shortly after the “flash spike,” 
the CSRC ordered Everbright “to suspend lead-underwriting of any new debt financing 
instruments of non-financial enterprises in the country’s interbank bond market, after an 
unrelated trading mistake—this one caused by human error—resulted in a trading loss of $32 

	  
	  
23
billion” (Miller & Wildau, 2013, Mercrtsoft Software section, para. 7 ). This additional problem 
suggests there may not be a systemic algorithmic trading problem, but rather procedural and risk 
management problems, at Everbright. 
 
Australia 
HFT in Australia currently accounts for approximately 22–27 percent of daily trading volumes 
(Australian Securities and Investments Commission, 2013c; Kingsley, Phadnis & Stone 2013). 
Australia recently imposed market integrity rules on high-frequency traders. Its goals are to 
“improve transparency and integrity of crossing systems and strengthen the requirements for 
market participants to deter market manipulation” (Australian Securities & Investments 
Commission, 2013a). The rules for HFT are designed to minimize “manipulative trading” and 
noise in the form of frequently placing, canceling, or amending orders with thresholds 
determined by market operators (see Australian Securities & Investments Commission, 2013b). 
While Australian regulatory authorities have established new rules to harmonize and 
more specifically describe what constitutes manipulative trading (Australian Securities and 
Investments Commission, 2013d), a study by the Australian Securities & Investments 
Commission (ASIC) determined that HFT was not a threat to Australian markets and led to a 
rejection of previous proposals to implement a pause of 500 milliseconds for small orders of 
$500 or less. According to ASIC’s report, “some of the commonly held negative perceptions 
about high-frequency trading are not supported by our analysis of Austrian markets” (Australian 
Securities and Investments Commission, 2013c, p. 6; Alembakis, 2013; Pearce, 2013). 

	  
	  
24
Table 1. HFT Regulation Summary for Developed HFT Markets 
E	  =	  Existing	  regulation;	  P	  =	  Proposed	  regulation	  
Country/region	  
Regulation	  
Purpose	  
EU	  
P:	  Risk	  controls;	  report	  algorithmic	  strategies	  to	  regulators;	  audit	  trail;	  negotiated	  market-­‐making	  agreements	  
designed	  to	  provide	  market	  liquidity	  regardless	  of	  market	  conditions;	  controls	  for	  direct	  market	  access;	  500	  
millisecond	  hold	  times	  (believed	  to	  be	  struck	  from	  final	  proposal);	  circuit	  breakers;	  algorithmic	  testing;	  max	  
OTR;	  minimum	  tick	  size;	  ability	  to	  cancel	  erroneous	  orders;	  creation	  of	  volume	  and	  price	  thresholds;	  financial	  
transaction	  taxes	  on	  executed	  and	  canceled	  orders	  
“Level	  the	  playing	  field,”	  
government	  revenue	  
Germany	  
E:	  Registration	  with	  BaFin;	  licensing;	  ability	  to	  deny	  use	  of	  any	  algorithmic	  trading	  strategy;	  OTR;	  minimum	  
tick	  size;	  fee	  for	  order	  amendments	  and	  cancelations;	  flagging	  of	  algorithmic	  orders;	  risk	  management	  
processes	  and	  procedures;	  documentation	  of	  algorithms;	  clarification	  of	  market	  abuse	  definition	  
Market	  integrity,	  fairness	  
UK	  
P:	  Financial	  transaction	  tax	  set	  at	  the	  average	  HFT	  profit	  
Reduce	  trading,	  control	  market	  
outcomes,	  remove	  behavioral	  
factors	  in	  markets	  to	  obtain	  social	  
optimality,	  fairness	  
France	  
E:	  Financial	  transaction	  tax	  of	  0.01%	  on	  modified	  or	  canceled	  orders	  that	  exceed	  80%	  of	  all	  orders	  or	  are	  
executed	  within	  half	  a	  second;	  0.20%	  transaction	  tax	  on	  French	  companies	  with	  market	  cap	  of	  at	  least	  €1B;	  
registration	  with	  French	  regulators;	  audit	  trails;	  documentation	  of	  algorithms	  
Reduce	  trading,	  discourage	  
“speculative”	  financial	  activities	  
and	  encourage	  “useful”	  ones	  
United	  States	  
P:	  Pre-­‐trade	  controls;	  post-­‐trade	  controls;	  system	  safeguards;	  mandatory	  registration	  and	  reporting;	  
standardized	  order	  types;	  testing	  of	  algorithms;	  documented	  evidence	  of	  capacity,	  integrity,	  resiliency,	  
availability,	  and	  security	  adequate	  to	  maintain	  operational	  capability;	  scheduled	  testing;	  continuity	  and	  
disaster	  recovery	  plans;	  system	  redundancy;	  financial	  transaction	  taxes	  
Fairness,	  market	  stability,	  income	  
redistribution,	  creating	  formal	  
regulation	  for	  existing	  market	  
integrity	  practices	  utilized	  by	  
traders	  and	  exchanges	  
Canada	  
E:	  Message	  processing	  and	  trade	  volume	  fees	  on	  trades	  and	  order	  submissions,	  cancelations,	  and	  
modifications	  
P:	  Risk	  management	  and	  supervisory	  controls;	  price	  and	  volume	  thresholds;	  cancelation	  and/or	  modification	  
of	  erroneous	  orders	  
Government/regulator	  income	  
generation,	  market	  integrity	  
Japan	  
E:	  Monitoring;	  systemic	  limitations	  
Encourage	  HFT	  growth,	  lower	  
transaction	  costs	  
Singapore	  
E:	  Stamp	  duty	  of	  $0.20	  per	  $100	  of	  value	  for	  equities	  
P:	  Stamp	  duty	  rebates	  for	  HFTs	  
Encourage	  HFT	  growth	  
Hong	  Kong	  
P:	  Code	  of	  conduct;	  control	  and	  supervision	  of	  orders;	  management	  and	  supervision	  of	  design,	  development,	  
deployment,	  and	  operation	  of	  electronic	  trading;	  provision	  of	  adequate	  security,	  reliability,	  and	  capacity;	  
required	  recordkeeping	  including	  audit	  logs;	  post-­‐trade	  controls;	  required	  testing	  schedule;	  risk	  management	  
controls	  
Market	  integrity,	  discourage	  HFT	  
growth	  
China	  
E:	  Stamp	  duty	  on	  equities	  fluctuating	  between	  0.1%	  and	  0.3%	  
Discourage	  HFT	  
Australia	  
E:	  Recent	  market	  integrity	  rules	  banning	  manipulative	  trading	  practices	  
Market	  integrity	  

	  
	  
25
2. Emerging HFT Markets 
Several countries are looking for ways to improve their liquidity, market quality, depth of book, 
and spreads and are using the trend toward curbing HFT in Europe and the United States as an 
opportunity to attract HFT to their markets. These markets have been described as having a 
“second mover advantage,” as they will be able to develop systems and procedures that will 
avoid many of the problems other markets have experienced. They also benefit from having 
more centralized markets, making some problematic HFT strategies ineffective (High-frequency 
traders, 2013; Timms, 2013). Next, we describe the aggressive steps four countries are taking to 
increase HFT in their markets. 
 
New Zealand 
New Zealand is actively seeking ways to increase algorithmic trading and in particular HFT. 
According to Sean Hughes, then–chief executive of the Financial Markets Association (FMA), 
regulator of New Zealand Markets (NZX), “the NZX is largely populated by small players and 
it’s largely illiquid,” and HFT could add the liquidity the market needs. To this end, the FMA 
is recommending fee reductions and is undergoing a review of the New Zealand markets to 
seek other ways to attract and incentivize HFT (Australian Legal Business, 2013). These 
changes are ongoing so it is too early to determine whether New Zealand will be a significant 
HFT destination. 
 
Brazil 
HFT currently represents approximately 10 percent of total market volume in Brazil, but the 
country is actively trying to attract HFTs by upgrading market technology. The BM&FBovespa 

	  
	  
26
stock exchange moved from open trading pits to electronic trading networks in 2009 and is 
taking the next steps to support algorithmic trading. It added a new computer system called 
“Puma” that will support high-speed traders, and order execution times have been cut from 30 
milliseconds nearly down to 1 millisecond. It has also put in place messaging limits designed to 
disrupt high order cancelation rates, and it already has transparency practices in place to make it 
easy for regulators to track the “life cycle” of a trade. To facilitate HFT and encourage growth in 
the sector, Brazil removed its 6 percent financial transaction tax, but there remain some 
complexities associated with the tax structure on equities that may not yet make Brazil an HFT 
destination of choice (Horch & Popper, 2013; Timms, 2013). 
 
Russia 
With a new low-latency connection between Moscow and London with a sub-40-millisecond 
round trip, Russia is continuing to embrace a move to algorithmic trading and HFT. The goal is 
to increase liquidity and open Russia’s exchanges to international trading firms. The Moscow 
Exchange estimates HFT to be 40 percent of total trading volume, but expects this figure to rise 
significantly. Other estimates put HFT at 25 percent of equity volume and 35 percent of 
derivatives. To help prevent harmful market consequences from an influx of HFT, Russia has put 
pre-trade controls in place that prevent erroneous orders (Kilburn, 2011; Murray, 2013; O’Hara, 
2013; Puaar, 2013; Timms, 2013). 
There is evidence that trading volumes in the foreign exchange (FX) market are growing 
overall as a result of low latency trading in Russia. Average daily volumes across all FX 
instruments on the Moscow Exchange rose 25 percent during 2012. Average daily volumes grew 
40 percent for dollar-ruble swaps longer than overnight during the first nine months of 2012 (The 

	  
	  
27
hammer, 2013). In February 2014, the Exchange Council of the Moscow Exchange 
recommended moving forward with developing a unified collateral and margining system, as 
well as a single trading and clearing platform for all markets. These initiatives, in addition to 
establishing a task force to promote algorithmic trading on the Moscow Exchange, are designed 
to further increase the presence of HFT in Russia (Moscow Exchange, 2014). Tim Bevan, 
managing director at BCS Prime Brokerage, describes the Russian market as attractive to HFT 
due to risk-return or benefit-cost factors, as it has become much easier to enter the Russian 
market as a high-frequency trader in recent years (High-frequency traders, 2013). 
 
Mexico 
The Mexican Stock Exchange operated by BMV Group is the second largest exchange in Latin 
America and also an emerging HFT market. The exchange has invested more than $20 million in 
technology over the past two years to attract HFTs, increasing daily trade capacity from 75,000 
in 2005 to 3.9 million in 2013. Mexico is unique because it is the only country in Latin America 
that allows dark pools—trading of large blocks of equities away from the central exchanges so 
they do not cause price shocks in public exchanges—making it more attractive as an HFT 
destination. To avoid potential market problems, foreign HFT firms cannot connect directly to 
the exchange, but must go through a local broker (Rodier, 2011; Rogow, 2013; Timms, 2013). 
 
3. Discussion: Motivations, Alternative Outcomes, and Market Efficiency 
The following strategies and goals associated with proposed and existing regulations appear 
repeatedly throughout the literature reviewed: 
• Level the playing field; create fairness. 

	  
	  
28
• Create formal regulatory requirements for market-integrity practices that exchanges and 
traders already engage in voluntarily. 
• Require adequate safeguards for firms offering direct market access to HFTs. 
• Maintain orderly markets and price discovery. 
• Minimize volatility due to overreactions to market information or market “problems.” 
• Ensure regulators’ ability to monitor HFTs’ market activity; maintain transparency. 
• Ensure that HFTs continue to provide liquidity regardless of market conditions. 
• Ensure adequate and effective testing of algorithms. 
• Reduce order-to-trade ratios. 
• Increase market stability and integrity; minimize market risk; protect investors; improve 
investor confidence. 
• Discourage short-term trading and encourage and protect long-term investing. 
• Improve competitiveness in financial markets. 
• Curb or eliminate HFT; slow down the speed of trading. 
• Generate tax revenue. 
Not all countries share all these goals, but together these strategies encompass a broad spectrum 
of market regulatory intervention. 
 
Classifications of Regulatory Purpose 
Our first two qualitative research question asked, (1) Are there broad classifications or regulatory 
purposes that emerge from a comprehensive review of global HFT regulation? (2) If so, are these 
motivations or purposes consistent with the need for additional regulatory intervention to remedy 
market failures associated exclusively with HFT? Our review of the global HFT regulatory 

	  
	  
29
environment found two broad classifications or motivations of regulatory purposes: (1) shared 
(or market integrity) goals, and (2) divergent (or “fairness”) goals. The following sections 
describe these goals in depth. 
While the goals are generally qualitative in nature, there is little evidence to suggest they 
are related to a market failure associated exclusively with HFT. We consider a market failure to 
exist in informationally efficient financial markets when securities prices do not fully reflect all 
available information in an efficient manner. A broader definition of market failure in this 
context could include the market’s inability to transfer ownership of securities (a good) 
efficiently or its inability to process information (a service) efficiently. One key to identifying a 
financial market failure is determining whether there is another possible market outcome in 
which one market participant can be made better off without making someone else worse off. A 
market failure can also exist when a change in the market environment occurs and the market 
fails to adequately adjust. The risk of a market failure is greater when the interests of the 
involved parties—in this case, exchanges, traders, and regulators—are not compatible. The 
following sections address more specific discussions of market failures. 
 
Shared (or Market Integrity) Goals 
Several of the regulatory goals listed previously are at low risk of being associated with a market 
failure because all parties generally have compatible goals. Exchanges, traders, and regulators all 
agree that financial markets should be secure, reliable, and orderly to enable effective price 
discovery and limit market manipulation and abuses. No market participant ultimately has 
anything to gain in an unstable or chaotic market. While HFTs may trade more actively and have 
greater opportunities for profits during times of relative volatility, no reasonable market 

	  
	  
30
participant desires to create extreme volatility or introduce inadequately tested algorithms into 
the marketplace. In these cases there are significant market incentives to self-regulate. There also 
already exist regulations and voluntary market integrity practices that help to control these 
factors. Some examples of how the market and its participants are managing these shared goals 
along with existing regulation include the following: 
• circuit breakers  
• limit-up/limit-down controls 
• controlled and monitored sponsored market access programs 
• improved algorithms that sort through and ignore “noise,” and algorithms that neutralize 
HFT strategies 
• market systems with pre- and post-trade controls that detect erroneous orders 
• the implementation of the MIDAS system by US regulators and of STEP in Canada to 
improve market monitoring 
• the emergence of non-HFT exchanges 
• IPO test runs by the New York Stock Exchange 
• voluntary market surveillance 
• the self-reporting and subsequent repairing of system loopholes (see Bell, 2013; 
McCrank, 2013; D’Antona, 2014b; Patterson & Hope, 2014) 
Serious problems with market integrity, reliability, extreme volatility, or out-of-control 
algorithms related to HFT are also not widespread; nor are they caused by a failure of the market 
to execute trades or to adequately reflect all available information in the price of a security. One 
challenge facing high-frequency traders is that even when market events are not directly related 
to HFT, the media often assigns cause to HFT due to a widespread lack of understanding of what 

	  
	  
31
HFT is and how it operates within markets. One recent example involved journalists and 
academics using the NASDAQ “flash freeze”—caused by a connection problem with its 
securities information processor—as an opportunity to declare HFT dangerous to markets and 
the source of all disruptions (see Kimball, 2013; Najarian, 2013; Watts & Reklaitis, 2013), even 
though the problem was not directly related to HFT. Such commentators also perpetuate the 
myth that HFT caused the “flash crash” when the CFTC and SEC’s report emphatically stated 
otherwise (Commodity Futures Trading Commission & Securities & Exchange Commission, 
2010; Ackerman, 2013; Lynch, 2013). 
The reality of financial markets is that they are going through a major structural 
transformation to an all-electronic marketplace. At the same time, market speeds have increased, 
stressing systems that are not always designed to handle them. This issue is not associated 
exclusively with HFT, as market speeds overall are increasing at a time when HFT is declining 
in the US and European marketplaces. Yet academics, journalists, and regulators are subject to 
the same propensity to overreact to the most recent information and events as the market 
participants they criticize. They do this while ignoring the fact that, overall, markets are 
functioning well, technical issues are being resolved as they emerge, and the transition to faster, 
automated market systems is moving forward, making HFT a less competitive strategy. 
At a recent Brookings Institute–sponsored forum, Gregg E. Berman, associate director of the 
Office of Analytics and Research at the SEC, made similar assertions. He does not believe that 
the market overall is “broken,” but that the debate on market structure is, particularly the 
assertion that high-frequency trading, algorithms, and market complexity and fragmentation are 
harming the market. He states, “In spite of what you read everywhere, in spite of what many 
market participants say, and in spite of what many jurisdictions and other regulators might say 

	  
	  
32
about the equity markets, they’re not broken” (Brookings Institute, 2014, p. 9). Berman bases his 
statement on the fact that 5 billion to 6 billion shares continue to be efficiently and effectively 
traded every day with an extremely low failure rate. Unfortunately, it is only the rare failure that 
makes the news, thereby perpetuating the broken debate on market structure. 
HFT and algorithmic trading in general enhance markets’ ability to execute trades and to 
rapidly reflect available information in the prices of securities. These benefits have been 
manifested in improved liquidity, lower transaction costs, price synchronization, greater overall 
market speed, more efficient price discovery, reduced impacts of volatility, and increased 
availability of direct market access (Gerig, 2012; Hendershott & Riordan, 2009; Brogaard, 2010; 
Brogaard, Hendershott & Riordan, 2010; Hasbrouck & Saar, 2010; Hendershott, Jones & 
Menkveld, 2011; Hendershott & Riordan, 2012; Menkveld, 2012). As the velocity of information 
within society as a whole has sped up due to electronic communications and other factors, 
financial markets have adjusted by increasing their speed for everyone, not just HFTs, also 
indicating that a market failure does not exist. 
Adding regulations to accomplish shared goals where participants are already engaging in 
cooperation and self-regulation assumes there is an alternative Pareto-optimal outcome that 
insiders (exchanges and traders) are not identifying and that a benevolent external third party 
must identify. The lack of apparent market failure associated with the shared goals does not 
support this assertion and creates a risk of government failure. Technology challenges will 
always be an issue in a computerized market environment, but market stakeholders are working 
to install safeguards to minimize market disruptions. 
Efforts to create formal, one-size-fits-all regulation for practices that traders and 
exchanges already engage in voluntarily or in cooperation with regulators imply the desire to 

	  
	  
33
impose sanctions when there is an unintentional technological or other type of problem with 
trading systems or practices. Sanctions diminish the incentive to publicly self-report, as firms 
may try to evade detection to avoid fines. Additionally, they discourage private investment in 
system and risk-mitigation innovations and create significant implementation delays, as changes 
would require new regulation or exceptions. 
Some participants will engage in manipulative market practices with or without HFT, but 
since most countries already have regulations that prohibit manipulative trading practices, the 
rational approach is for exchanges, traders, and regulators to continue to work together to 
maintain and improve the self-regulation of shared goals. 
 
Divergent (or Fairness) Goals 
Where the discussion of compatible self-interest becomes more difficult is in the areas of a “level 
playing field,” “fairness,” slowing down the speed of trading, reducing order-to-trade ratios, 
minimizing market risk, requiring the continuous operation of algorithms to provide liquidity 
regardless of market conditions, discouraging short-term trading while encouraging long-term 
investing, generating tax revenue and/or redistributing income, creating formal regulation for 
market integrity practices that traders and exchanges are already engaging in, and significantly 
“curbing” or eliminating HFT. In these areas all parties do not agree on the goals or on how to 
achieve them. Many of these goals are not new or exclusive to HFT, so are not necessarily 
consistent with the need for regulatory intervention. They are essentially normative value 
judgments about what market outcomes should be based on subjective ideals of social optimality. 
They lead us to consider our third research question: Will regulation be effective in resolving 
perceived problems and/or are alternative outcomes possible? 

	  
	  
34
Market critics often cite concerns about the need to level the playing field or improve 
fairness as reasons to impose regulation. In fact, the divergent goals listed are more accurately 
described as nonmarket strategies regulators wish to implement to minimize or eliminate HFT 
issues and/or general market phenomena perceived as “unfair.” The issue of perceptions of 
fairness is a motivating factor in many regulatory arguments against HFT and against free 
markets more generally. 
Fairness is not an unusual theme in market discussions. As Angel and McCabe (2010) 
state, “the words ‘fair,’ ‘unfair,’ or ‘fairness’ are mentioned 130 times in the recently passed 
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act” (p. 3; Dodd-Frank, 2010). One 
difficulty with this basis for regulation is determining what constitutes “fairness” in a market and 
how to determine what perceived factors associated with “unfairness” are directly related to 
HFT. Unique strategies to outperform competitors, short-term asymmetric information, 
overreactions and overcorrections, flash crashes, market noise, and concerns about market 
integrity have been topics of discussion as long as there have been markets (see Bell, 2013). 
Since these arguments are not new, they raise concerns about the desire to utilize HFT as an 
excuse to manipulate market outcomes more broadly. 
One problem with the issue of fairness is how it is defined and from whose perspective it 
is viewed. To whom is it fair? Are attempts to ban HFT fair to traders who have invested 
substantial capital to modernize their operations in order to compete efficiently in a highvelocity-information environment? Is it fair to all market participants to minimize the benefits of 
improved liquidity, lower costs, and less volatility in order to limit HFTs’ profits? 
One example of the precariousness of using “fairness” as a basis for regulation is the 
EU’s proposed MiFID II. It states in Article 51(5a) (European Parliament, 2012a, p. 104) that 

	  
	  
35
one of the regulation’s goals is that all fee structures must be “transparent, fair, and 
nondiscriminatory,” and higher fees should be placed on participants “placing a high ratio of 
canceled orders to executed orders and on those operating a high-frequency trading strategy”  
(emphasis ours). It appears that the terms “fair” and “nondiscriminatory” are being used for 
political purposes to impose “fairness” on a portion of the market, but not on all aspects of it. 
Those who have a vested interest in their own profits—or other financial or political 
gain—and who base their arguments on an inability to “compete” with HFTs or others in the 
market often make the argument for “fairness” in financial markets as a whole; however, this 
argument does not indicate a market failure, only a difference in outcomes associated with 
different strategies. It does not make HFT undesirable from an informationally efficient market 
perspective. It does, however, make efforts to curb or eradicate HFT look less like a pursuit of 
fairness and more like rent-seeking. 
A study by James J. Angel and Douglas McCabe (2010) on the impacts of market fairness 
related to HFT found that in the case of procedural fairness (equal opportunity) in markets, the 
same rules applied to HFTs as to other traders. Any trader is permitted to “buy a computer and colocate it in an exchange data center” (p. 22) so it is procedurally fair. Regarding the equality of 
outcomes (distributive fairness), they found that HFT strategies are beneficial to both HFTs and 
other market participants in the form of “reduced trading costs and prices that accurately reflect 
related instruments” (p. 23), so one cannot categorically denounce HFT as unfair. In fact, neither 
markets nor regulation guarantee equality of outcome nor, in the case of informationally efficient 
markets, do they guarantee that everyone will receive information that informs pricing decisions 
at exactly the same time (Fama, 1965a; 1965b). Even though markets can still be efficient without 
equal information or outcomes, this does not mean that low-latency and high-frequency traders do 

	  
	  
36
not engage in practices inconsistent with market efficiency, but there are generally already 
regulations in place that predate HFT to cover these practices. This is why we need to differentiate 
between HFT and algorithmic technology and strategies and practices both inside and outside 
HFT and algorithmic trading that are manipulative and do not promote efficient price discovery. 
The strategies of “layering” or “spoofing” are good examples of manipulative practices that are 
already illegal in many countries, as evidenced by the recent fines levied by multiple countries on 
Panther Energy Trading and its owner, Michael J. Corsica, for using these practices. 
 
Alternative Outcomes 
Our third research question asks us to consider whether regulatory efforts will be effective in 
resolving perceived problems and/or whether alternative outcomes are possible. Several potential 
alternative outcomes emerged when we considered the application of formal one-size-fits-all 
regulation of shared goals, including fewer incentives to self-report technological or trading 
problems, disincentives for investment in system and risk-mitigation innovations, and 
informational inefficiencies in markets. To explore this question further, we look more closely at 
specific strategies within the divergent goals category that are designed to enhance “fairness.” 
 
Eliminating HFT. Two regulatory strategies designed to increase market fairness and stability are 
to slow down the speed of trading and to “curb” or eliminate high-speed trading. These strategies 
assume that the speed of trading by HFTs is creating an unfair, volatile, or dangerous market 
environment. Regulatory tactics being executed to accomplish these goals include eliminating 
HFT profits through FTTs, introducing required minimum hold times, and implementing policies 
that encourage holding securities long-term rather than short-term. 

	  
	  
37
Regarding market volatility, Eugene Fama (2011) said that one of the greatest 
misconceptions about the efficiency of markets is that it “implies low volatility. It doesn’t. It 
implies high volatility. Prices adjust quickly to new information. When uncertainty is very 
high, you expect volatility to be very high” (para. 4). Supporting Fama’s assertion, a review of 
150 years of financial data from around the world found that stock market volatility is highest 
during episodes of economic and political turbulence and is exacerbated during wars (Gerlach, 
Ramaswamy & Scatigna, 2006). As most of these observations of market volatility predate 
HFT, we can assume that even if HFT is eliminated, periods of market volatility, including 
flash crashes, will continue to emerge—as they did before HFT in 1962 and 1987 (Jones, 2013; 
Bell, 2013). 
One problem with the tactics described previously is that it is difficult to reduce market 
speed without eliminating the benefits of improved liquidity, reduced transaction costs, and 
efficient market pricing, especially since the speed of market transactions has increased for all 
traders. Regulators in the UK admit that setting a transaction tax to eliminate HFT would be 
impossible without diminishing the benefits produced by high-frequency trading technology. The 
speed of trading alone does not cause instability in markets; it is simply the reality of a hightechnology market environment. High-speed market transactions are not a market failure; they 
are a key to contemporary market efficiency. Eliminating HFT will not prevent overreactions, 
overcorrections, or other forms of volatility, as these market phenomena predate HFT (see Mills, 
1927; Gerlach, Ramaswamy & Scatigna, 2006; Fama, 2011; Bell, 2013). 
Rather than improving market stability, the alternative outcome would be a redistribution 
of profits to less competitive, non-HFT firms and governments, and lower overall returns for all 
investors as rising taxes, fees, and transaction costs would be passed on to them. Declines in 

	  
	  
38
trading volume caused by new global regulations and decreases in HFT through competition are 
already increasing transaction costs overall, with US costs remaining the lowest according to a 
report by Credit Suisse (Mackintosh & Baudewyn, 2014). It is not clear how the disruption of 
market outcomes and the redistribution of income can be more “fair” than the market outcome in 
quality or efficiency. 
Detractors often argue that HFT should be eliminated because the technology arms race 
associated with HFT provides no social benefit and traders are trading on speed, not price. Yet 
speed is designed to obtain the best price for investors. Eliminating HFT will not necessarily 
eliminate the desire for speed, as the desire to be first to get the best price has existed as long as 
there have been markets. Someone will always be first regardless of overall market speed. It is 
this very desire to be first that keeps markets liquid and informationally efficient. Regulation 
designed to eliminate HFT in France and Italy has demonstrated how quickly liquidity can 
decline significantly without HFT (The Trade, 2013).1 
Trading speed is also subject to the same economic limitations of marginal cost and 
marginal benefit as any other infrastructure investment. There is some empirical evidence that 
nanosecond-trading speeds may not actually increase profits for HFTs (Ye, Yao & Gai, 2013). 
As diminishing marginal returns set in for HFT technology, there will be less incentive to 
compete in an “arms race.” As with any market, those HFT firms that were first to enter the 
market made the most profit. Additional competitors have since entered, driving profits toward 
zero. There is no reason to think the market for HFT will continue to function any differently. 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1 Both France and Italy implemented transaction taxes on canceled orders to reduce order-to-trade ratios. France’s 
share of European equity turnover has declined from 23 percent in 2011 to an estimated 12.85 percent in 2013. In 
Italy equity turnover has dropped from €101 billion in 2012 to €50 billion in 2013. 

	  
	  
39
Another challenge associated with the elimination of HFT is that the regulatory proposals 
reviewed here generally failed to provide a vivid definition of HFT or to make a distinction 
between HFT and algorithmic trading. Increasingly, the term “HFT” is being used in the public 
forum and the language of regulation to describe algorithmic trading as a whole, rather than a 
form of algorithmic trading in which firms use high-speed market data and analytics to look for 
short-term supply-and-demand trading opportunities that often are the product of predictable 
behavioral or mechanical characteristics of financial markets (Bell, 2013). While this definitional 
creep is not surprising, as changes in algorithmic trading more broadly have blurred the line 
between it and HFT, it can be problematic because the lack of distinction appears to direct 
accountability toward HFT for events that are caused by a variety of forms of algorithmic and 
technology-related issues and not by HFT specifically. 
As we are operating in a global financial market, eliminating HFT in one or a number of 
countries will not eliminate it on a global scale or eliminate the negative impacts of market 
manipulation strategies. Countries like Japan, Singapore, Russia, Brazil, and Mexico are actively 
seeking to attract HFT, as they believe it will improve their markets by increasing liquidity and 
attracting foreign traders and capital. Eliminating or significantly “curbing” HFT in any 
country—rather than engaging in oversight and monitoring—may result in the offshoring of HFT 
to emerging HFT markets. When offshoring of HFT occurs, the losing country will no longer be 
able to monitor HFT or enforce penalties for manipulative market practices undesirable to 
market efficiency. Such a country also risks losing capital to more liquid markets. As discussed 
previously, HFT volumes in FX are already growing substantially in Russia as firms are leaving 
countries like Germany (The hammer, 2013; Cave, 2013). Regulators should give the risks of 
offshoring HFT serious consideration before eliminating it domestically. 

	  
	  
40
Minimum hold times, financial transaction taxes, and order-to-trade ratios. The tactic of 
introducing minimum hold times makes trend trading much more difficult for HFTs and other 
algorithmic traders. Trend trading is not a new strategy; pit traders used it to attempt to 
determine an impending price-breakout level. In the case of HFT, algorithms try to find similar 
price-trend indicators and act on them. This strategy is risky, just as it was for pit traders, but it 
provides valuable liquidity to markets (see Kingsley, Phadnis & Stone, 2013). 
The SEC has also found that high-frequency traders are not canceling orders nearly as 
often as people had suspected and that market speed has increased for all participants. SEC chair 
Mary Jo White stated, 
Though we can clearly see that quotes are sometimes canceled within a millisecond or 
faster, the data show that the high-speed market is not dominated by such cancellations. 
. . . In fact, over a quarter of all exchange-based trades in corporate stocks are executed 
against orders that have rested for only half a second or less (Lynch, 2013, SEC Seeing 
Trends section, para. 5). 
 
Minimum hold times would significantly decrease market efficiency by not allowing 
HFTs or other algorithmic traders to respond to new information in a timely manner and would 
discourage traders from buying, once again reducing liquidity and informational efficiency in the 
market. One of the concerns with HFT is that small and “fleeting” orders (those not held for a 
meaningful period of time) lead to increased market volatility; however, there is no significant 
empirical research that confirms this perception (Bollen & Whaley, 2013). The study of 
Australian markets (Australian Securities & Investment Commission, 2013) found that the vast 
majority of small and “fleeting” orders are not associated with HFT, but are shared with other 
algorithmic traders. Again, market speed has increased for all traders and is not an HFTexclusive phenomenon. 

	  
	  
41
Both minimum hold times FTTs on canceled orders make price discovery difficult for all 
types of algorithmic traders. Markets are dynamic and evolving environments, and the high 
velocity of available information makes it necessary for traders to quickly change their opinions 
about appropriate pricing. An alternative outcome is that government intervention creates 
significant informational distortions through minimum hold times that do not allow markets to 
reflect via price the most recent information, creating significant informational inefficiencies. 
FTTs can also create informational distortions by not allowing prices to adjust to “minor” 
information (i.e., small price changes) because any profits would be taxed away. These 
informational distortions will result in wider spreads and less liquidity. 
A recent study finds that “speed competition may be a consequence of failed price 
competition” (Ye, Yao & Gai, 2013, p. 13) in large part because of the regulated minimum tick 
size. The authors suggest deregulating the tick size to allow for smaller price adjustments, which 
will take the speed advantage away from HFTs because they are less likely to trade on a smaller 
tick size. As discussed earlier, minimum hold times and FTTs will only increase spreads and not 
allow prices to reflect minor information, making markets even less informationally efficient and 
price competitive. Plus, even if HFTs were eliminated, the speed of algorithmic trading in 
general is increasing and the speed race would continue there. 
Financial transaction taxes on canceled orders will also decrease liquidity. Liquidity has 
decreased in both France and Italy, where financial transaction taxes have been recently 
implemented. France’s share of European equity turnover has been reduced from 23 percent in 
2011 to an estimated 12.85 percent in 2013. In Italy equity turnover has dropped from €101 
billion in 2012 to €50 billion in 2013 over the same time period for each year, according to 
information from TABB Group (The Trade, 2013). 

	  
	  
42
Along with minimum hold times and FTTs, another related strategy, reducing order-totrade ratios, is designed to slow market speed while reducing “noise” and improving market 
integrity. As discussed earlier, attempts by HFTs to create noise with the desire to manipulate 
markets by creating a false sense of demand in order to trigger other algorithms to behave in a 
way that will benefit the noise-creating algorithm are already illegal under existing regulation in 
most countries. Plus, algorithms are getting better at sniffing out false signals from other 
algorithms, and developing algorithms that neutralize HFT strategies makes this tactic of market 
manipulation less effective. 
In April 2012, Canada’s IIROC began “charging a portion of its cost recovery fees based 
on the number of market messages (i.e., trades and order submissions, cancelations, and 
modifications)” (Malinova, Park & Riordan, 2013, p. 2). The result, according to the same study, 
was that trades, quotes, and order cancelations dropped by 30 percent; however, bid-ask spreads 
marketwide increased by 9 percent. The study, conducted by the University of Toronto, found 
that a 1.6 percent decline in HFT messaging leads to a 0.48 basis point increase in spreads. 
The idea of noise in the form of competing or contradictory information in financial 
markets is also not a new phenomenon, nor is it associated exclusively with HFT. As Bell (2013) 
discusses, economist Frank W. Taussig noted in 1921 “that insider information, rumors, and 
technical knowledge held by some professionals cause markets to act in ways we would not 
expect based on supply and demand for securities alone” (p. 8). The challenge is to determine 
what, if any, noise being created by HFT—not already illegal due to intentional market 
manipulation—is related to a market failure that requires additional regulatory intervention. 
It also may not be feasible to force algorithms to operate continuously to provide 
liquidity regardless of market conditions. It will be nearly impossible if market conditions 

	  
	  
43
change dramatically for algorithms to continue to operate as they did before the change in 
market condition. For example, during the “flash crash” in the US market, a large number of 
securities flooded the market at the same time, and high-frequency traders initially continued 
to operate as they usually do. However, once an imbalance existed in the market between 
shares entering the market and available buyers, they quit trading because while they could 
continue to provide some liquidity by purchasing stock, they were unable to turn shares over 
in the short run. Continuing to purchase stock would have been irrational given the market 
uncertainties present at the time and the inherent limit of capital available to HFTs when they 
could not turn equities over. HFTs did what any investor would have done when a security 
turns toxic. 
 
Short-term vs. long-term investing. The UK, Canada, and others have taken a more behavioral 
perspective by expressing an interest in minimizing “short-termism” (trading) in equity 
markets and encouraging “long-termism” (owning) in their proposed regulation designed to 
essentially eliminate HFT in their markets. The House of Commons Business, Innovation and 
Skills Committee is basing its concerns about HFT in UK markets on The Kay Review of UK 
Equity Markets and Long-Term Decision Making (Kay, 2012), which identified short-term 
decision-making as a problem associated with long-term performance of UK markets, even 
though Kay specifically stated in the report and in testimony before the committee that HFT is 
not the root cause. 
Kay describes how human beings, motivated by human tendencies, can make decisions 
based on short-term desires that they end up regretting in the long term. He calls this short-term 
thinking (or “short-termism”) “myopic behavior.” This behavior causes individuals to place too 

	  
	  
44
much weight on recent events or information and not enough on the long-term “big picture,” a 
theme raised in financial markets long before HFT (Mills, 1927) and in contemporary market 
theories of behavioral economics (DeBondt & Thaler, 1985). Kay suggests that patterns of 
aggregated myopic behavior result in regretted decisions across the economy, exchanging a longterm Pareto-superior state for a short-term payoff, resulting in a state of the world that regulation 
could improve. 
Kay’s argument—that trading decisions that maximize traders’ utility in the short run 
cannot possibly result in an outcome that is best for society—is the essence of the global HFT 
debate. His assumptions, and those of critics of HFT and of free markets in general, are based on 
the tenets of prospect theory that assume individuals and their agents cannot make rational 
decisions due to cognitive errors that do not “correctly reflect their long-term financial interests” 
or the interests of society. In particular, he states, “Optimism bias, anchoring and loss aversion 
have been widely documented in human behavior generally, and in business and financial 
contexts specifically” (Kay, 2013, p. 35). 
Yet he does not see the process of HFT as “damaging short-term behavior” that is 
harmful to the economy as a whole because he is not concerned with the decision-making 
process, only the outcomes. He states, “The outcome, not the process, is what matters, and that 
perspective has been central to this Review” (p. 14). In other words, it doesn’t matter how 
financial markets arrive at an outcome. What matters is that the outcome is controlled and 
acceptable to society because individual decision makers are not inherently capable of reaching 
the socially optimal decision. He does not, however, suggest how the correct socially optimal 
decision should be determined. 

	  
	  
45
However we wish to describe or arrange markets is ultimately irrelevant to critics of HFT 
and of free markets in general who wish to control market outcomes in the pursuit of “fairness.” 
But it cannot be emphasized enough that, as James M. Buchanan famously stated, 
the “order” of the market emerges only from the process of voluntary exchange among 
the participating individuals. The “order” is, itself, defined as the outcome of the process 
that generates it. The “it,” the allocation-distribution result, does not, and cannot, exist 
independently of the trading process. Absent this process, there is and can be no “order” 
[emphasis in original] (Buchanan, 1982, RF.1.2) 
 
Efficient financial markets are indifferent about whether participants are behaving as 
fully rational “global” optimizers or as myopic “individual” decision makers, as long as they are 
making the best personal utility-maximizing choice possible in response to the decision-making 
of others. Individuals making decisions in a purely myopic sense can reach an outcome in which 
no other market participant will be better off by unilaterally changing his or her strategy, 
implying that the social optimum is being achieved—or more accurately, being perpetually 
moved toward at any point in time—even in rapidly evolving high-speed markets. The relative 
transparency of the price mechanism makes this possible. To declare there is a better method, or 
speed, of price discovery than the market outcome, we must assume that a benevolent outsider 
has all available information, including future information, which allows this individual to 
determine the most socially optimal market outcome at any moment in time; that this outcome 
can never be determined or achieved by society; and that it is fixed and does not evolve or 
emerge as part of a process. As no all-knowing benevolent and impartial observer exists, we 
must assume regulation designed to disrupt market outcomes will only serve to distort the market 
process and render markets inefficient and thereby ineffective as a means of social optimization 
of allocation-distribution. 
 

	  
	  
46
Conclusions 
The regulatory goals of legislators and regulatory authorities globally appear to fall into two 
broad categories: shared, market integrity goals and divergent, fairness goals. Market integrity is 
a goal shared by traders, exchanges, and regulators, as no party will be made better off if there is 
a significant market failure that results in chaos. As a result, several existing regulations and 
cooperative nonregulatory solutions have been implemented to maintain the integrity of markets. 
Circuit breakers, HFT-neutralizing algorithms, exchange systems that detect erroneous orders, 
the self-reporting of system issues and their subsequent repair, the emergence of non-HFT 
exchanges, and the implementation of systems that allow regulators to monitor market activity 
are some examples of these solutions. 
The concept of “fairness” and the regulatory strategies designed to foster it create 
divergences between traders, exchanges, and regulators. Evidence suggests that HFT is already 
fair from both a procedural and a distributive perspective. Attempts to treat HFTs differently 
than other market participants from a regulatory perspective—by creating specific fees or taxes, 
limiting speeds and price discovery mechanisms, or eliminating HFT as a technology—deviate 
from the concept of procedural fairness. Instead, they move toward rent-seeking activities 
designed to transfer wealth to governments or to other competitors that have not increased their 
productivity to compete in a high-velocity-information environment. Rent-seeking decreases 
social wealth by reducing market efficiency and liquidity and by increasing spreads, costs of 
trades, and volatility currently smoothed by HFT. 
There is little evidence suggesting a market failure exists that requires additional 
regulatory intervention. The price of securities reflects all available information in a rapid and 
efficient manner, and the market continues to transfer ownership of securities efficiently. The 

	  
	  
47
market is adjusting to the increased speed of information in the external environment by finding 
ways to process and respond to it at similar speeds inside the market. Shared goals associated 
with market integrity are leading to market-driven solutions by traders, exchanges, and 
regulators. Regulators need to be cautious not to engage in “regulatory creep” into areas that the 
market and its participants are already managing. Too much regulatory formalization of existing 
practices, including stiff consequences, can create disincentives for market participants to do 
what is best for the market. For example, if stiff penalties are in place for algorithmic or 
exchange technology problems, traders and exchanges have little incentive to self-report and 
make public such problems. 
Kay suggests that behavioral failures are leading to less than socially optimal long-run 
market outcomes and that regulation would create more responsible outcomes regardless of the 
market process utilized. Accomplishing this goal requires the assumption of a benevolent and 
impartial observer who has all information past, present, and future and thereby can determine 
the social optimum. However, we are forced to cope with the unavoidable human ignorance 
about what the optimal arrangements of resources in future states of the world should be and 
whether HFT contributes to the hypothetical negative outcomes. Not even Kay believes HFT is 
the problem driving the short-term holding of stocks, yet UK regulators and others continue to 
focus on it as an issue. Markets are complex systems that require the interaction of a variety of 
factors to reach an outcome. Focusing on a single factor as the cause of a market behavior is not 
helpful in determining its root causes. 
The media, regulators, and academics are all subject to the same behavioral flaws Kay 
describes. In assigning blame for inherent market phenomenon to HFT, they are often 
overreacting to infrequent and recent market events and ignoring the fact that flash crashes and 

	  
	  
48
other market disruptions have happened before. Reacting to these events, they observe that 
markets as a whole have sped up, so they blame speed. When they think of speed, they focus on 
HFT. In their overreaction, they clamor for fast and aggressive regulation, forgetting that their 
criticism of HFT is that it is too fast and too aggressive. One of the issues creating this 
environment is the definitional “creep” of HFT, as fewer commentators are differentiating 
between HFT and computer- or algorithm-based trading technology and strategies in general. 
This definitional failure may be leading regulators to recommend regulation designed for 
financial markets broadly, rather than designed for specific practices used by high-frequency 
traders that negatively impact market price discovery. Regulators should be careful to utilize 
empirically based evidence of market failures before proposing regulatory intervention. 
Where no market failure exists, as in the case of HFT, we do not want to introduce a 
government failure, since there is little indication that additional government intervention will 
improve market integrity or “fairness” more than the market has. The market and its 
participants can use open competition through alternative exchanges and/or algorithms 
designed to neutralize HFT if the market determines HFT is undesirable. HFT strategies can be 
beaten, and the market will determine whether HFT’s extinction or survival is ultimately 
beneficial. Markets have already contained the proliferation of HFT and driven its profits down 
consistently since 2009. 
The regulatory strategies described here will fail to meet each country’s goals while 
simultaneously diminishing the benefits of HFT. Aggressive regulation may cause highfrequency traders to seek out growing and emerging HFT markets like those in Japan, Singapore, 
Russia, and Brazil, and highly regulated or taxed countries will lose capital and the ability to 
monitor HFT to minimize manipulative practices in the global marketplace. There is evidence of 

	  
	  
49
at least one firm leaving Germany due to the burdens of regulation, and HFT in FX is growing 
substantially in Russia. The potential for offshoring is real and the risks of lost capital and the 
inability to monitor HFT activities for manipulative practices must be considered. 
 
 

	  
	  
50
Appendix A. MiFID II 
The amended version of MiFID II (European Parliament, 2012a), which regulators have voted in 
favor of but have not yet released a final document for, sets forth in its draft the following 
regulatory guidelines for HFTs: 
• HFTs must develop effective systems and risk controls [Article 17(1), p. 61; Article 
51(1), p. 102]. 
• HFTs must report their algorithmic strategies to regulators [Article 17(2), p. 61]. 
• HFTs must create and store a raw audit trail that contains all quotation and trading 
activities that can be made available to regulators on request [Article 17(2a), p. 61]. 
• Firms must enter into market-making agreements with the trading venue that must 
include a liquidity provision. The HFT firm must operate the algorithm continuously to 
provide liquidity regardless of market conditions unless the written agreement provides 
otherwise [Article 17(3), p. 62]. 
• Firms may not “provide sponsored and naked market access to a trading venue.” They 
may provide direct market access with proper controls [Article 17(4), p. 62]. 
• Firms must hold orders, unchanged, for a minimum of 500 milliseconds [Article 51(1b), 
p. 103]. 
• Trading firms must be able to “reject orders that exceed pre-determined volume and price 
thresholds or are clearly erroneous” and have circuit breakers in place in the event of 
“significant price movement in a financial instrument,” and they must be able to cancel or 
correct any transaction should it become necessary [Article 51(2), p. 116]. 
• All algorithms must be tested [Article 51(3), p. 103]. 
 

	  
	  
51
• Member states shall impose a maximum order-to-trade ratio and minimum tick size 
[Article 51(3), p. 103]. 
• All fee structures must be transparent, fair, and nondiscriminatory, and higher fees should 
be placed on participants placing a high ratio of canceled orders to executed orders and 
on those operating a high-frequency trading strategy [Article 51(5a), p. 104]. 
 
 

	  
	  
52
Appendix B. CFTC Concept Release 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2013) has published a Concept Release “intended 
to serve as a high-level enunciation of potential measures intended to reduce the likelihood of 
market disrupting events and mitigate their impact when they occur” (p. 38). It published the 
Concept Release recognizing that derivatives market participants are already taking steps to 
manage the risks of automated trading, with HFT as a subset. The document states, “The 
Commission acknowledges these efforts, and, through this Concept Release, seeks public 
comment on the extent to which measures already in place may be sufficient to safeguard 
markets in automated trading environments” (p. 7). 
While the CFTC recognizes the existence of risk controls, the Concept Release is 
designed to determine whether enforced standardization via regulation is in the market’s best 
interest. The proposed regulations fall into four broad categories: pre-trade controls, post-trade 
reports and measures, system safeguards, and other protections. 
 
Pre-trade Controls 
The CFTC recommends message rate and execution throttles. A maximum message rate could be 
established to mitigate strategies like “order stuffing” that the CFTC describes as “manipulative” 
or “disruptive.” Execution throttles would “prevent an algorithm from exceeding its expected 
message rate or rate of execution, and when tripped, [could] alert monitors at both the exchange 
and the trading firm” (p. 42). The CFTC also suggests implementing volatility awareness alerts, 
which “could be triggered when price movements in a given product move beyond a certain 
threshold within a previously specified time period” (p. 45). 

	  
	  
53
The Concept Release recommends self-trade controls that would prevent traders from 
executing trades with themselves and price collars that would require trading platforms to 
develop a range of acceptable order and execution prices for each of their products. If an order 
came in outside that range, it would not be executed. Additional recommended pre-trade controls 
include maximum order sizes, trading pauses, and more aggressive pre-trade credit risk limits. 
 
Post-Trade Controls 
Trading platforms would be required to generate order and trade reports that provide duplicate 
copies of each order and executed trade to the originating market participant. Derivative clearing 
organizations could be asked to submit a position report on net position per maturity per contract 
to the originating market participant and the market participant’s clearing firm. Trading 
platforms and market participants might be asked to develop “uniform adjust or bust error trade 
policies” that would adjust or remove trades executed due to an error with policies favoring 
adjustments rather than cancelations being the priority. Standard reporting for trade errors is 
another post-trade control recommendation. 
 
System Safeguards 
Trading platforms, clearing members, and market participants must have systems and processes 
in place to be able to auto-cancel orders upon a system disconnection, cancel select working 
orders and deploy kill switches for all orders when appropriate, and automatically turn off 
trading when maximum orders have been reached (this is the system support mechanism of 
execution throttles discussed earlier). Systems must utilize “system heartbeats” to indicate proper 
connectivity between systems. 

	  
	  
54
The automated trading system (ATS) must (1) be designed in a way that does not violate 
any rules or laws, (2) maintain a development environment isolated from the marketing system 
that is in operation, (3) maintain a source code repository, (4) document all system functionality, 
changes, and communications, and (5) develop and maintain documented policies and 
procedures to allow representatives from trading, risk, and software management to approve 
changes and verify adequate internal testing. All ATSs must be adequately tested internally, and 
trading platforms must provide test environments to simulate the trading environment. 
Market participants operating ATSs must provide trained and qualified staff to monitor 
and supervise all systems while engaged in trading. These individuals must be empowered to 
take action if a problem occurs. Crisis management procedures must be in place for all trading 
platforms and market participants operating ATSs. All firms operating ATSs, as well as clearing 
firms, require annual self-certification of ATSs, and the firm must notify the CFTC when an 
algorithm violates its design parameters or whenever risk-control technologies or processes do 
not function as planned. Algorithms should be assigned identifiers that will be attached to all 
orders, and firms operating ATSs should implement “reasonability checks” on incoming market 
data or external information, including social media sources. 
 
Other Protections 
All firms operating ATSs would be required to register with the CFTC and all trading platforms 
must provide a daily summary of market quality to market participants. The report should 
include the following information: 
1. effective spreads 
2. order-to-fill ratios 

	  
	  
55
3. execution speed for different order types and sizes 
4. aggressiveness imbalance 
5. price impact for given trade sizes 
6. average order duration 
7. order efficiency 
8. rejection order ratio 
9. net position changes versus volume 
10. branching ratios 
11. volume imbalance and trade intensity 
12. Herfindahl-Hirschman indexes based on market share of open positions under 
common control 
13. metrics on the number of price-changing trades involving ATSs (pp. 130–31) 
Trading platforms must work with the CFTC to standardize order types across exchanges 
and to implement policies and procedures for identifying securities or products listed on other 
exchanges that would constitute “related” contracts to those listed on their own exchanges. 
 
 

	  
	  
56
References 
Ackerman, A. (2 October 2013). SEC’s White: Recent trading glitches not byproducts of highfrequency trading, dark pools. 
Alembakis, R. (19 June 2013). ASIC vetoes HFT and dark liquidity regulation. Global 
Custodian. Retrieved from http://www.globalcustodian.com/au/news/news_article.aspx 
?id=2147484408#.UhaAxVOE6iY 
Angel, J. J., & McCabe, D. (2010). Fairness in financial markets: The case of high frequency 
trading. Retrieved from http://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-02-10/s70210-316.pdf 
Asness, C. S., & Mendelson, M. (1 April 2014). High-frequency hyperbole. The Wall Street 
Journal. Retrieved from http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB100014240527023039783 
04579475102237652362?mg=reno64-wsj 
Australian Legal Business. (28 May 2013). NZ: Regulator to push for more algorithmic trading. 
Retrieved from http://au.legalbusinessonline.com/news/breaking-news/nz-regulator-to 
-push-for-more-algorithmic-trading/110931 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission. (2013a). Dark liquidity and high-frequency 
trading. Retrieved from http://www.asic.gov.au/asic/asic.nsf/byheadline/Dark-liquidity 
-and-high-frequency-trading?openDocument 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission. (2013b). ASIC market integrity rules 
(competition in exchange markets) 2011. Retrieved from http://www.comlaw.gov.au 
/Details/F2013C00335 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission. (2013c). Report 331: Dark liquidity and 
high-frequency trading. Retrieved from http://www.asic.gov.au/asic/pdflib.nsf/Lookup 
ByFileName/rep331-published-18-March-2013.pdf/$file/rep331-published-18-March 
-2013.pdf 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission. (2013d). ASIC market integrity rules 
(competition in exchange markets) amendment 2013 (no. 2). Retrieved from http://www 
.comlaw.gov.au/Details/F2013L01558 
Bannister, D. (20 June 2013). SEC hopes for Midas touch from HFT surveillance system. 
Banking Technology. Retrieved from http://www.bankingtech.com/149362/sec-hopes 
-for-midas-touch-from-hft-surveillance-system/ 
BBC. (29 April 2013). High-frequency traders face speed limit on deals. Retrieved from 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-22342770 
Bell, H. A. (2013). High frequency trading: Do regulators need to control this tool of 
informationally efficient markets? Cato Institute Policy Analysis, No. 731. Retrieved 
from http://www.cato.org/publications/policy-analysis/high-frequency-trading-do 
-regulators-need-control-tool-informationally 

	  
	  
57
Bloomberg News. (2 August 2013). China cuts transaction fees for share trading. Bloomberg 
Businessweek. Retrieved from http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-08-02/china 
-cuts-transaction-fees-for-share-trading 
Bogard, V. (2014). High-frequency trading: An important conversation. Tabb Forum. Retrieved 
from http://tabbforum.com/opinions/high-frequency-trading-an-important-conversation 
Bollen, N. P. B., & Whaley, R. E. (2013). Futures market volatility: What has changed? 
Retrieved from http://www.futuresindustry.org/downloads/Volatility_Study_8-27 
-2013.pdf 
Brogaard, J. A. (2010). High frequency trading and its impact on market quality (Working 
Paper). Retrieved from http://www.fsa.gov.uk/static/FsaWeb/Shared/Documents/pubs 
/consumer-research/jonathan-brogaard-hft.pdf 
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., & Riordan, R. (2010). High frequency trading and price discovery 
(Working Paper). Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id= 
1928510 
The Brookings Institute. (30 January 2014). Trading stocks in America: Key policy issues 
[forum transcript]. Retrieved from http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/events/2014/1/30 
%20trading%20stocks/20140130_trading_stocks_transcript 
Brush, S. (24 July 2013). CFTC’s Chilton seeking review of CME wash-trade restrictions. 
Bloomberg. Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-06-24/cme-high 
-frequency-wash-trade-plan-needs-review-chilton-says.html 
Buchanan, J. M. (1982). A note stimulated by reading Norman Berry, ‘The tradition of 
spontaneous order,’ Literature of Liberty, V (Summer 1982), 7–58. The Forum at The 
Online Library of Liberty. Retrieved from http://www.econlib.org/library/Essays/Ltr 
Lbrty/bryRF1.html 
Burgos, J. (28 October 2013). Singapore Exchange seeks high-frequency traders: Southeast Asia. 
Bloomberg. Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-10-27/singapore 
-exchange-seeks-high-frequency-traders-southeast-asia.html 
Canadian Securities Administrators. (2013). Canadian securities regulators establish regulatory 
framework to manage risks associated with direct electronic access. Retrieved from 
http://www.securities-administrators.ca/aboutcsa.aspx?id=1158&terms=+NI+23-103 
Can the HR 1579, Inclusive Property [sic] Act, rebuild U.S. financially? (2013). International 
Finance Magazine. Retrieved from http://www.internationalfinancemagazine.com/article 
/Can-the-HR-1579-Inclusive-Property-Act-Rebuild-US-Financially.html 
Cave, T. (11 June 2012). Leading high-frequency trading firm makes Hong Kong push. 
Financial News. Retrieved from http://www.efinancialnews.com/story/2012-06-11 
/leading-high-frequency-trading-firm-makes-hong-kong-push?ea9c8a2de0ee111045601 
ab04d673622 

	  
	  
58
Cave, T. (5 June 2013). German firm quits over tough high-frequency trading rules. The Wall 
Street Journal [blog]. Retrieved from http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2013/06/05 
/german-firm-quits-over-tough-high-frequency-trading-rules/?mod=google_news_blog 
CBC. (25 June 2013). Aequitas, new RBC-led stock exchange, to rival TSX. Huffington Post. 
Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2013/06/25/aequitas-stock-exchange 
-canada-tsx_n_3496095.html 
China Knowledge. (2013). China’s stamp duty on stock trading to rise 8.7% in 2013. Retrieved 
from http://www.chinaknowledge.com/Newswires/NewsDetail.aspx?type=1&cat=INV& 
NewsID=50710 
Chitkara, G. (19 June 2013). OTC clearing presents HFT opportunities in Asia. Retrieved from 
http://www.risk.net/asia-risk/news/2275905/otc-clearing-presents-hft-opportunity-in-asia 
Cleary Gottlieb. (2013). Alert memo: Germany adopts new prudential rules for high-frequency 
trading. Retrieved from http://www.cgsh.com/files/News/853d08bb-cb30-4c24-82b6 
-27584a4a06cb/Presentation/NewsAttachment/c1eda727-f478-4b4d-a6fe-28365b166940 
/Germany%20Adopts%20New%20Prudential%20Rules%20for%20High-Frequency%20 
Trading.pdf 
CME Group. (2013). Advisory notice: Wash trades prohibited. Retrieved from http://www.cme 
group.com/tools-information/lookups/advisories/market-regulation/CMEGroup_RA1308 
-5.html 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission. (2013). Concept release on risk controls and system 
safeguards for automated trading environments. Federal Register, 78(177). Retrieved 
from http://www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@lrfederalregister/documents/file/2013 
-22185a.pdf 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission & Securities and Exchange Commission. (2010). 
Findings regarding the market events of May 6, 2010. Retrieved from www.sec.gov/news 
/studies/2010/marketevents-report.pdf 
Credit Suisse. (5 December 2012). AES Analysis: High frequency trading—The good, the bad, 
and the regulation. Trading Strategy. 
D’Antona Jr., J. (21 January 2014a). HFT-free Aequitas gets the “go-ahead.” Traders Magazine. 
Retrieved from http://www.tradersmagazine.com/news/hft-free-aequitas-gets-the-go 
-ahead-112017-1.html 
D’Antona Jr., J. (1 April 2014b). Careful speed traders: ITG unveils anti-HFT algo. Retrieved 
from http://www.tradersmagazine.com/issues/26_362/Careful-Speed-Traders-ITG 
-Unveils-Anti-HFT-Algo-112326-1.html 
DeBondt, W. F. M., & Thaler, R. (1985). Does the market overreact? Journal of Finance, 40(3), 
793–805. 

	  
	  
59
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. H. R. 4173, 111th Cong. (2010). 
Eurex. (2013a). Circular 099/13. Retrieved from https://www.eurexchange.com/blob/exchange 
-en/4060-499420/499416/2/data/er13099e.pdf.pdf 
Eurex. (2013b). Circular 077/13. Retrieved from https://www.eurexchange.com/blob/exchange 
-en/4060-474482/474480/3/data/er13077e.pdf.pdf 
Eurex. (2013c). German HFT Bill—Client information session. Retrieved from http://www 
.eurexchange.com/blob/exchange-en/455384/457548/4/data/presentation_german_hft 
_bill_client_information_session.pdf 
European Commission. (2007). Markets in financial instruments (MiFID) and investment 
services. Retrieved from http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/internal_market/single 
_market_services/financial_services_transactions_in_securities/l24036e_en.htm 
European Commission. (2011a). Markets in Financial Instruments Directive. Retrieved from 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32004L0039:EN:HTML 
European Commission. (2011b). Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the 
Council on Markets in Financial Instruments Repealing Directive 2004/39/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council. Retrieved from http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUri 
Serv/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2011:0656:FIN:EN:PDF 
European Parliament. (2012a). Report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament 
and of the Council on markets in financial instruments repealing Directive 2004/39/EC of 
the European Parliament and of the Council (recast). Retrieved from http://www.europarl 
.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//NONSGML+REPORT+A7-2012-0306+0+ 
DOC+PDF+V0//EN 
European Parliament. (2012b). Eleven EU countries get Parliament’s all clear for a financial 
transaction tax. Retrieved from http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/pressroom 
/content/20121207IPR04408/html/Eleven-EU-countries-get-Parliament%27s-all-clear 
-for-a-financial-transaction-tax 
European Parliament. (2013). Report on the proposal for a Council directive implementing 
enhanced cooperation in the area of financial transaction tax. Retrieved from http://www 
.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//NONSGML+REPORT+A7-2013 
-0230+0+DOC+PDF+V0//EN 
Fama, E. (1965a). Random walks in stock market prices. Financial Analysts Journal, 
September/October 1965, 55–59. 
Fama, E. (1965b). The behavior of stock-market prices. Journal of Business, 38(1), 34–105. 
Fama, E. (2011). Examining the financial crisis with Professor Eugene Fama. ChicagoBooth 
News. Retrieved from www.chicagobooth.edu/news/2011-10-28_fama.aspx 

	  
	  
60
Fangqin, W. (2010). TSE’s arrowhead system lowers trading costs. Securities Technology 
Monitor. Retrieved from http://www.securitiestechnologymonitor.com/news/-24864 
-1.html 
Foresight. (2012). The future of computer trading in financial markets. Final project report. 
London: The Government Office of Science. Retrieved from http://www.bis.gov.uk 
/assets/foresight/docs/computer-trading/12-1086-future-of-computer-trading-in-financial 
-markets-report.pdf 
Fujitsu. (2010). TSE launches next-generation “arrowhead” trading system. Retrieved from 
http://www.fujitsu.com/global/news/pr/archives/month/2010/20100108-01.html 
Futures & Options World. (2013). High-frequency traders race to find new markets. Retrieved 
from http://www.fow.com/Article/3227934/High-frequency-traders-race-to-find-new 
-markets.html 
Gerig, A. (2012). High-frequency trading synchronizes prices in financial markets. Retrieved 
from http://arxiv.org/pdf/1211.1919v1.pdf 
Gerlach, S., Ramaswamy, S., Scatigna, M. (2006). 150 years of financial market volatility. BIS 
Quarterly Review, September 2006, 77–91. 
German HFT ban may hit liquidity—Nasdaq OMX NLX. (2014). Futures & Options World 
Intelligence. Retrieved from http://www.fointelligence.com/Article/3308981/German 
-HFT-ban-may-hit-liquidity-Nasdaq-OMX-NLX.html 
Gerner-Beuerle, C. (2012). United in diversity: Maximum versus minimum harmonization in EU 
securities regulation. Capital Markets Law Journal, 7(3). doi: 10.1093/cmlj/kms025. 
Gesetz zur Vermeidung von Gefahren und Missbräuchen im Hochfrequenzhandel 
(Hochfrequenzhandelsgesetz). (May 2013). Bundesgesetzblatt Jahrgang, 7. Retrieved 
from http://www.bgbl.de/Xaver/start.xav?startbk=Bundesanzeiger_BGBl# 
__Bundesanzeiger_BGBl__%2F%2F*[%40attr_id%3D%27bgbl113s1162.pdf%27] 
__1375491455729 
Gide Loyrette Nouel. (2012). France-FTT and high-frequency trading. Retrieved from 
http://www.aima.org/objects_store/gide_note_re_french_ftt_-_august_2012.pdf 
The Globe and Mail. (25 June 2013). The influence of high-frequency trading in Canada. 
Retrieved from http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/the-influence-of 
-high-frequency-trading-in-canada/article12790125/ 
Gould, R. (15 September 2010). Market structures change in China: Prospects for HFTs. Global 
Trading. Retrieved from http://fixglobal.com/content/market-structure-change-china 
-prospects-hfts 
GovHK. (2013). Stamp duty rates. Retrieved from http://www.gov.hk/en/residents/taxes/stamp 
/stamp_duty_rates.htm 

	  
	  
61
Grant, J. (11 May 2011). U.S. high-frequency trading firms look eastward. Advanced Trading. 
Retrieved from http://www.advancedtrading.com/infrastructure/us-high-frequency 
-trading-firms-look-eas/229500005 
Grant, J. (6 August 2012). China moves to algorithmic trading. Financial Times. 
The hammer, the sickle and the algo: Russia’s unorthodox journey to a thriving market. (2013). 
Automated Trader Magazine, Q1(28). 
Hasbrouck, J., & Saar, G. (2010). Low-latency trading (Working Paper). Retrieved from 
http://people.stern.nyu.edu/jhasbrou/Research/Working%20Papers/HS10-11-10.pdf 
Hendershott, T., & Riordan, R. (2009). Algorithmic trading and information (Working Paper). 
Retrieved from http://people.stern.nyu.edu/bakos/wise/papers/wise2009-3b2_paper.pdf 
Hendershott, T., Jones, C. M., & Menkveld, A. J. (2011). Does algorithmic trading improve 
liquidity? Journal of Finance, LXVI(1), 1–33. 
Hendershott, T., Riordan, R. (2012). Algorithmic trading and the market for liquidity. Journal of 
Finance and Quantitative Analysis, Forthcoming. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com 
/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2001912## 
High-frequency traders race to find new markets. (2013). Futures & Options World. Retrieved 
from http://www.fow.com/Article/3227934/High-frequency-traders-race-to-find-new 
-markets.html 
Ho, F. (8 January 2013). High-frequency trading still controversial two years after 2010 flash 
crash. The Edge. Retrieved from http://www.theedgemalaysia.com/personal-finance 
/227073-high-frequency-trading-still-controversial-two-years-after-2010-flash-crash.html 
Horch, D., & Popper, N. (22 May 2013). Despite risks, Brazil courts the millisecond investor. 
DealBook. Retrieved from http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2013/05/22/despite-risks-brazil 
-courts-the-millisecond-investor/?_r=0 
House of Commons Business, Innovation and Skills Committee. (2013). The Kay review of UK 
equity markets and long-term decision making: Third report of session 2013–14. 
Retrieved from http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/cmbis/603 
/603.pdf 
IIROC. (2011). The HOT study: Phases I and II of IROC’s study of high frequency trading on 
Canadian equity marketplaces. Retrieved from http://www.iiroc.ca/Documents/2012/c03 
dbb44-9032-4c6b-946e-6f2bd6cf4e23_en.pdf 
IIROC. (2012). IIROC fee model guidelines. Retrieved from http://www.iiroc.ca/Documents 
/2012/bf393b26-7bdf-49ff-a1fc-3904d1de3983_en.pdf 

	  
	  
62
IIROC. (2013). Administrative notice: IIROC study of high frequency trading—Phase III—
request for assistance. Retrieved from http://www.iiroc.ca/Documents/2013/fdc69272 
-9280-4e14-8308-88958f959c29_en.pdf 
Inclusive Prosperity Act, S. 1, 113th Cong. (2013). Retrieved from http://www.govtrack.us 
/congress/bills/113/hr1579 
Inland Revenue Authority of Singapore. (2013). Stamp duty rates & computation. Retrieved 
from http://www.iras.gov.sg/irasHome/page04.aspx?id=8684 
Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada. (2013). Universal market integrity rules 
(UMIR). Retrieved from http://www.iiroc.ca/industry/rulebook/Pages/UMIR 
-Marketplace-Rules.aspx 
Iosebashvili, I. (29 April 2013). EBS to rein in high-frequency traders. The Wall Street Journal 
[online edition]. Retrieved from http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323528 
404578453183303289790.html 
Javers, E. (3 April 2014). Interactive brokers to offer direct routing to ‘Flash Boys’ dark pool 
IEX. CNBC. Retrieved from http://www.cnbc.com/id/101552626 
Jones, C. M. (2013). What do we know about high-frequency trading? Social Science Research 
Network. Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2236201 
Jones, H., & McCrank, J. (23 July 2013). U.S. and UK fine high-speed trader for manipulation. 
Reuters [online edition]. Retrieved from http://in.reuters.com/article/2013/07/22/us 
-britain-fca-hft-idINBRE96L0G620130722 
Junli, F. (19 August 2013). No rewind button on Everbright’s trades in China. MarketWatch, The 
Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from http://www.marketwatch.com/story/no-rewind 
-button-on-everbrights-trades-in-china-2013-08-19 
Kay, J. (2012). The Kay review of UK equity markets and long-term decision making. Retrieved 
from http://www.ecgi.org/conferences/eu_actionplan2013/documents/kay_review_final 
_report.pdf 
Killburn, F. (31 March 2011). Russian roulette: Is HFT in Russia worth the risk? Waters 
Technology. Retrieved from http://www.waterstechnology.com/waters/feature/2039264 
/russian-roulette-hft-russia-worth-risk 
Kimball, M. (23 August 2013). How to avoid another Nasdaq meltdown: Slow down trading. 
Quartz. Retrieved from qz.com/118110/how-to-avoid-another-nasdaq-meltdown-slow 
-down-trading/ 
Kindermann, J. (2013). Legal framework conditions for the High Frequency Trading Act (“HFTAct) [PowerPoint Slides]. Retrieved from http://www.eurexchange.com/blob/exchange 
-en/3150-410008/410090/4/data/HFT-BAI-presentation.pdf 

	  
	  
63
King & Wood Mallesons. (2013). Electronic trading: New Hong Kong regulations in 2014. 
Retrieved from http://www.mallesons.com/publications/marketAlerts/2013/Pages 
/Electronic-trading-New-Hong-Kong-regulations-in-2014.aspx 
Kingsley, T., Phadnis, K., & Stone, G. (2013). HFT: Perspectives from Asia—Part I. Bloomberg 
Tradebook. Retrieved from http://www.bloombergtradebook.com/blog/hft-perspectives 
-from-asia-part-i/ 
Kok, C. (16 March 2012). High frequency trading in SGX equities almost zero-report. Reuters. 
Retrieved from http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/03/15/singaporeexchange-idUSL 
4E8EF83G20120315 
Kuen, Y. L. (4 November 2013). Singapore exchange mulls giving rebates to frequent traders. 
The Star. Retrieved from http://www.thestar.com.my/Business/Business-News/2013/11 
/04/Singapore-exchange-mulls-giving-rebates-to-frequent-traders/ 
KVH Co. Ltd. (24 March 2014). KVH optimizes network to launch industry’s fastest routes to 
CME from Tokyo and Singapore [press release]. In The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 
from http://www.marketwatch.com/story/kvh-optimizes-network-to-launch-industrys 
-fastest-routes-to-cme-from-tokyo-and-singapore-2014-03-24?reflink=MW_news_stmp 
Kwan, J. (17 July 2013). Will Aequitas succeed against TSX by restricting high-frequency 
trading? Canadian Business. Retrieved from http://www.canadianbusiness.com/investing 
/a-bold-new-challenger-to-the-tsx/ 
Lam, E., & Alexander, D. (16 January 2014). Regulators rebuff Aequitas curbs on ‘predatory’ 
trading. Bloomberg Businessweek. Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news 
/2014-01-16/canadian-regulators-rebuff-aequitas-curbs-on-predatory-trading.html 
Leising, M. (11 July 2013). CME requests CFTC approval to change rule barring wash trades. 
Bloomberg. Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-07-11/cme-requests 
-cftc-approval-to-change-rule-barring-wash-trades.html 
Lewis, M. (2014). Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 
London Stock Exchange Group. (2010). London stock exchange group response to CESR call 
for evidence on micro-structural issues of the European Equity Markets (CESR/10-142). 
Retrieved from http://www.londonstockexchange.com/about-the-exchange/regulatory 
/responsetocesrscallforevidenceonmicro-structuralissuesoftheeuropeanequitymarkets.pdf 
Lynch, S. N. (2 October 2013). SEC website will shed light on high-speed trading. Reuters. 
Retrieved from www.reuters.com/article/2013/10/02/us-sec-market-data-idUSBRE9910 
ZE20131002 
Mackintosh, P., & Baudewyn, L. (20 February 2014). Beware, transaction costs are trending up. 
Credit Suisse. 

	  
	  
64
Malinova, K., Park, A., & Riordan, R. (2013). Do retail traders suffer from high frequency 
traders? Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2183806 
Markets Media. (16 May 2013). HFT comes to Japan. Retrieved from http://marketsmedia.com 
/hft-comes-to-japan/ 
McCrank, J. (26 October 2013). Exclusive: Aiming to avoid Facebook chaos, NYSE runs 
Twitter IPO test. Retrieved from http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/10/26/us-nyse 
-twitter-testing-idUSBRE99P0BB20131026 
Melendez, E. D. (12 March 2013). SEC proposal to curb high-frequency trading falls far short of 
goal: Industry experts. Huffington Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com 
/2013/03/12/sec-high-frequency-trading_n_2853004.html 
Menkveld, A. J. (2012) High frequency trading and the new-market makers (Working Paper). 
Retrieved from http://personal.vu.nl/a.j.menkveld/papers/menkveld2.pdf 
Michaels, D., & Mamudi, S. (30 September 2013). SEC once slowed by data gap to report highspeed trader research. Bloomberg. Retrieved from www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-10 
-01/sec-once-slowed-by-data-gap-to-report-high-speed-trader-research.html 
Miller, M., & Wildau, G. (22 August 2013). China vets brokerages’ computer systems after $3.8 
billion buy error. Reuters. Retrieved from http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/08/22 
/us-everbright-tradingerror-idUSBRE97L09O20130822 
Mills, F. C. (1927). The behavior of prices. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic 
Research. 
Moscow Exchange working group to promote algorithmic trading. (2014). Automated Trader. 
Retrieved from http://www.automatedtrader.net/news/at/149256/moscow-exchange 
-working-group-to-promote-algorithmic-trading 
Murray, T. B. (20 August 2013). Otkritie online with additional London presence, beckoning 
global HFT. Waters Technology. Retrieved from http://www.waterstechnology.com/sell 
-side-technology/news/2290059/otkritie-online-with-additional-london-presence 
-beckoning-global-hft 
Najarian, J. (23 August 2013). Blame the high-frequency traders for yesterday’s Nasdaq mess. 
Retrieved from http://finance.yahoo.com/blogs/the-exchange/blame-high-frequency 
-traders-yesterday-nasdaq-mess-162509029.html 
Nan, M. (18 May 2012). China is not ready for high-frequency trading: Official. Morning 
Whistle [Guangzhou, China]. 
National Instrument 23-103: Electronic Trading. (2013). Retrieved from http://www.bcsc.bc.ca 
/uploadedFiles/securitieslaw/policy2/23-103_%5BNI%5D.pdf 

	  
	  
65
O’Hara, M. (4 March 2013). HFT in Russia. HFT Review. Retrieved from http://www.hftreview 
.com/pg/blog/mike/read/73166/hft-in-russia 
Patterson, S., & Hope, B. (6 February 2014). FINRA to provide market surveillance for BATS 
Global Exchange. The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from http://online.wsj.com/news 
/articles/SB10001424052702304680904579366790217684548 
Pearce, R. (18 June 2013). High-frequency trading fears overblown: ASIC. Retrieved from 
http://www.computerworld.com.au/article/465164/high-frequency_trading_fears 
_overblown_asic/ 
Penny, T. (24 July 2013). U.K. lawmakers urge tax on high-frequency trading. Bloomberg. 
Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-07-24/u-k-lawmakers-urge-tax 
-on-high-frequency-trading.html 
Pinnington, V. (May 2013). Market quality in a rapidly changing environment. Presented at 
OSC-IIROC Conference, Toronto, Ontario. Retrieved from http://www.iiroc.ca 
/Documents/2013/03603d99-c3ef-4fb6-8b94-a6b6aa857cf3_en.pdf 
Polansek, T. (11 July 2013). CME group resubmits plan to update rules blocking wash trades. 
Reuters. Retrieved from http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/07/11/cme-washtrades 
-resubmit-idUSL1N0FH11N20130711 
PROTECT Act, S. 1, 113th Cong. (2013). Retrieved from http://beta.congress.gov/bill/113th 
-congress/house-bill/2292 
Puaar, A. (14 August 2013). Russia embraces high-frequency trading. Financial News. Retrieved 
from http://www.efinancialnews.com/story/2013-08-14/russia-embraces-high-frequency 
-trading?ea9c8a2de0ee111045601ab04d673622 
Reuters. (18 September 2008). China: Government ends stamp tax. The New York Times. 
Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/19/business/worldbusiness/19fobriefs 
-GOVERNMENTEN_BRF.html?_r=0 
Robinson, K., Egbert, K., Tao, J., & Louvel, G. (2013). The qualified foreign institutional 
investor program in China—Recent developments, new opportunities and ongoing 
challenges. Investment Lawyer, 20(2), 1–8. 
Rodier, M. (18 November 2011). Mexico takes huge steps to boost its position in high-speed 
trading market. Wall Street & Technology. Retrieved from http://www.wallstreetandtech 
.com/exchanges/mexico-takes-huge-steps-to-boost-its-pos/231903373 
Rogow, G. (13 February 2013). Mexican exchanges to HFT: Bring us your business. The Wall 
Street Journal. Retrieved from http://blogs.wsj.com/marketbeat/2013/02/13/mexican 
-exchange-to-hft-bring-us-your-business/ 

	  
	  
66
Rosenman, K. M. (2012). France releases details of financial transaction tax. HFT Review. 
Retrieved from http://www.hftreview.com/pg/blog/kattenlaw/read/38536/france-releases 
-details-of-financial-transaction-tax 
Rosenthal, S. (9 August 2012). In France, high-frequency traders now get taxed for fictitious 
orders. The Christian Science Monitor [online edition]. Retrieved from http://www 
.csmonitor.com/Business/Tax-VOX/2012/0809/In-France-high-frequency-traders-now 
-get-taxed-for-fictitious-orders 
Ross, A. K., Fitzgibbon, W., & Mathiason, N. (16 September 2012). Britain opposes MEPs 
seeking ban on high-frequency trading. The Guardian. Retrieved from http://www 
.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/16/meps-ban-high-frequency-trading?view=mobile 
Schuster, G., & Dreibus, A. (2 June 2013). Germany: New regulatory requirements for 
algorithmic and high frequency trading. Retrieved from http://www.mondaq.com/x 
/238494/Commodities+Derivatives+Stock+Exchanges/New+Regulatory+Requirements+
For+Algorithmic+And+High+Frequency 
Securities and Exchange Commission. (2013). Regulation systems compliance and integrity. 
Retrieved from http://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/2013/34-69077.pdf 
Securities and Futures Commission. (2012). Consultation paper on the regulation of electronic 
trading. Retrieved from http://www.sfc.hk/edistributionWeb/gateway/EN/consultation 
/openFile?refNo=12CP3 
Securities and Futures Commission. (2013). Consultations & conclusions. Retrieved from 
http://www.sfc.hk/edistributionWeb/gateway/EN/consultation/ 
Séparation des Activités Utiles au Financement de L’économie des Activités Spéculatives. 
(2013). Journal Officiel de la République Française. Retrieved from http://www 
.legifrance.gouv.fr/jopdf/common/jo_pdf.jsp?numJO=0&dateJO=20130727&numTexte=
1&pageDebut=12530&pageFin=12556 
Sharp, A. (16 January 2014). Canadian stock exchange start-up Aequitas tweaks launce plan. 
Reuters. Retrieved from http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/01/16/canada-exchange 
-idUSL2N0KQ1CW20140116 
Sharp, A., & Rocha, E. (25 June 2013). UPDATE 2—New Canadian stock exchange seeks to 
challenge dominant TMX. Reuters. Retrieved from http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/06 
/25/canada-exchange-aequitas-idUKL3N0F12WU20130625 
Shecter, B. (21 November 2013). High-frequency trading activity in Canada appears to have 
declined: IIROC. Financial Post. Retrieved from http://business.financialpost.com/2013 
/11/21/high-frequency-trading-activity-in-canada-appears-to-have-declined-iiroc/ 
Sussman, A. (26 September 2013). HFT: A regulatory work in progress. TabbFORUM. 
Retrieved from http://tabbforum.com/channels/equities/opinions/hft-a-regulatory-work 
-in-progress 

	  
	  
67
Tabb, L. (31 March 2014). No, Michael Lewis, the US equities market is not rigged. Retrieved 
from http://tabbforum.com/opinions/no-michael-lewis-the-us-equities-market-is-not 
-rigged 
Taxation. (26 July 2013a). Transaction tax proposed for in UK. Retrieved from http://www 
.taxationinfonews.com/2013/07/transaction-tax-proposed-for-high-frequency-trading-in-uk/ 
Taxation and investment in China 2013: Reach relevance and reliability. (2013b). New York: 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited. Retrieved from http://www.deloitte.com/assets 
/Dcom-Global/Local%20Assets/Documents/Tax/Taxation%20and%20Investment%20 
Guides/2013/dttl_tax_guide_2013_China.pdf 
Timms, A. (2013). Emerging markets look to attract high frequency traders. Institutional 
Investor. Retrieved from http://www.institutionalinvestor.com/Article/3239889/Emerging 
-Markets-Look-to-Attract-High-Frequency-Traders.html?ArticleId=3239889&p=1 
#.UhawMFOE6iY 
The Trade. (3 September 2013). Liquidity dries up in FTT countries-report. Retrieved from 
http://www.thetradenews.com/news/Asset_Classes/Equities/Liquidity_dries_up_in_FTT 
_countries_-_report.aspx 
Trindle, J., & Bunge, J. (24 June 2013). Regulator criticizes exchange efforts on ‘wash trades.’ 
The Wall Street Journal [blog]. Retrieved from http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2013/06 
/24/regulator-criticizes-exchange-efforts-on-wash-trades/ 
Voigt, C. (2013). Regulatory front-running. Finextra. Retrieved from http://www.finextra.com 
/community/FullBlog.aspx?blogid=7991 
Wall Street Trading and Speculators Act, S. 1, 113th Cong. (2013). Retrieved from http://www 
.govtrack.us/congress/bills/113/hr880 
Walter, E. (2013a). Opening statement at the SEC Open Meeting. Retrieved from http://www.sec 
.gov/News/Speech/Detail/Speech/1365171515104#.UgLdf1OE6iY 
Walter, E. (2013b). Harnessing tomorrow’s technology for today’s investors and markets. 
Retrieved from http://www.sec.gov/News/Speech/Detail/Speech/1365171492300#.UgQr 
IFOE6iY 
Watts, W. L., & Reklaitis, V. (23 August 2013). Critics say flash freeze shows Nasdaq shouldn’t 
run industry’s price processor.  
Webb, A. (2010). Bullseye! Tokyo Stock Exchange hits the mark with “arrowhead.” Automated 
Trader. Retrieved from http://www.automatedtrader.net/articles/exchange-views/40926 
/bullseye--tokyo-stock-exchange-hits-the-mark-with-arrowhead 
Wessing, T. (2013). Wave of action against high-frequency traders hits home. The Lawyer. 
Retrieved from http://www.thelawyer.com/briefings/wave-of-action-against-high 
-frequency-traders-hits-home/3007951.article 

	  
	  
68
World Federation of Exchanges. (2013). Understanding high frequency trading (HFT). Retrieved 
from http://media.futuresmag.com/futuresmag/article/2013/05/31/WFE_Understanding 
%20HFT_May%202013.pdf 
Ye, M., Yao, C., & Gai, J. (2013). The externalities of high-frequency trading. Retrieved from 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2066839 
Yu, X. (22 August 2013). Regulator to check trading systems. China Daily. Retrieved from 
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2013-08/22/content_16914484.htm 
Ziliak, Z. J., & Brown, M. (2013). Regulation ahead: Advice and options for automated and 
high-frequency traders. Bloomberg Law. Retrieved from http://about.bloomberglaw.com 
/practitioner-contributions/regulation-ahead-advice-and-options-for-automated-and-high 
-frequency-traders/ 
