Asymmetric Effects of the Limit Order Book on Price Dynamics
Tolga Cenesizoglu*
HEC Montr´eal
Georges Dionne†
HEC Montr´eal
Xiaozhou Zhou‡
Universit´e du Qu´ebec `a Montr´eal
November 9, 2021
Abstract
The objective of this paper is to analyze how the information embedded in different parts of the limit order book
(LOB) affects price dynamics. We distinguish between slopes of lower and higher levels of the bid and ask sides
and include them in a linear vector autoregressive system, along with the midquote return and trade direction, as in
Hasbrouck (1991). The slopes of the higher levels have signiﬁcantly greater (in terms of absolute value) immediate
effects on prices than do the corresponding slopes of the lower levels. The immediate effects of the slope variable
are reversed when we take the cumulative effects into consideration, suggesting that prices overreact to information
embedded in the LOB. Furthermore, this reversal is stronger for the higher levels than for the lower levels, resulting
in the cumulative effects of the higher levels being smaller than those of the lower levels. We link the asymmetries
in the immediate effects of the lower and higher levels to the existence of more patient traders, in line with recent
theoretical ﬁndings. Finally, we show that ignoring these asymmetries might have cost a high-frequency day trader
16 to 25 basis points in monthly proﬁts.
Key words: Limit order book slope, Hasbrouck model, High-frequency trading, Asymmetric price impact, Patient
traders.
JEL Classiﬁcation: G10, G14, G19
*Address:
3000,
chemin
de
la
Cˆote-Sainte-Catherine,
Montr´eal
(Qu´ebec)
Canada
H3T
2A7;
Telephone:
+1-514-3405668;
Email: tolga.cenesizoglu@hec.ca
†Corresponding Author. Address: 3000, chemin de la Cˆote-Sainte-Catherine, Montr´eal (Qu´ebec) Canada H3T 2A7; Telephone: +1-5143406596; Email: georges.dionne@hec.ca
‡Address:
315,
rue
Sainte-Catherine
Est,
Montr´eal
(Qu´ebec)
Canada
H2X
3X2;
Telephone:
+1-514-9873000
ext
0999;
Email: zhou.xiaozhou@uqam.ca
Forthcoming Journal of Empirical Finance
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

1
Introduction
Regardless of their original trading mechanism, almost all of the world’s major exchanges now feature electronic
limit order books (LOBs). Most exchanges offer investors access to historical and real-time data on their LOBs at
ever-increasing frequencies. Thus, there is an immense wealth of information in these high-frequency LOBs, which
investors can use to gain insights into future price movements.
Hence, it is not surprising that there is a growing body of empirical literature analyzing whether the LOB affects
future price movements.1 However, most studies in the literature overlook the possibility that different levels of the
LOB might affect future price dynamics differently.
In this paper, we contribute to the literature by ﬁlling this gap. Speciﬁcally, we examine whether different parts
of the LOB affect future price dynamics in line with our predictions based on recent theoretical models. The result
of this analysis is important because traders cannot observe underlying factors determining future prices, but they can
make inferences about these factors based on the shape of the LOB. The recent theoretical literature shows that traders
might strategically choose to place their orders in different levels depending on speciﬁc factors. Different levels might
contain information about the underlying factors and have different effects on future price dynamics. We distinguish
between the ask and bid sides, but also between their lower and higher levels, to better capture the shape of the LOB.
To summarize the information in these different parts of the LOB, we use their slope, which is deﬁned as the ratio of
the change in price to the change in the cumulative quantity (depth) available between two given levels of a given side.
To understand how the shape of the LOB might affect future price dynamics, two major underlying factors, based on
the recent theoretical literature, are proposed. One is asymmetric information. For example, Goettler, Parlour, and
1Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995) are among the ﬁrst to analyze the dynamics of limit order markets and present many interesting facts. Specifically, they show that price revisions tend to move in the direction of previous limit order ﬂows, suggesting that the limit order book contains
information relevant to future price paths. In contrast, Grifﬁths, Smith, Turnbull, and White (2000) ﬁnd that limit orders tend to have a negative
impact on prices in the Toronto Stock Exchange, because limit orders can be “picked off” by better-informed investors. This result, in turn, suggests
that limit orders are placed by less-informed investors and thus do not convey much relevant information about prices. In contrast, Cao, Hansch,
and Wang (2009) provide empirical evidence based on data from the Australian Stock Exchange that the limit order book is somewhat informative,
contributing approximately 22% to price discovery. They also show that order imbalances between the demand and supply schedules along the
book are signiﬁcantly related to future short-term returns, even after controlling for autocorrelations in returns, inside spread, and trade imbalance.
Similarly, using data from NYSE’s Trades, Orders, Reports, and Quotes, Kaniel and Liu (2006) argue that informed traders prefer limit orders to
market orders and limit orders are therefore more informative than market orders. More recently, Beltran-Lopez, Giot, and Grammig (2009) also
demonstrate that factors extracted from the limit order book have non-negligible information relevant to the long-run evolution of prices in the
German Stock Exchange. Speciﬁcally, they ﬁnd that shifts and rotations of the order book can explain between 5% to 10% of the long-run evolution
of prices, depending on the liquidity of the asset. Kozhan and Salmon (2012) provide empirical evidence that variables summarizing the information
in the limit order book have statistically signiﬁcant power in predicting future price movements. However, they argue that this statistical relation
cannot be exploited to provide economic value in a simple trading exercise.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Rajan (2009) develop a model in which informed traders place orders at different levels of the book to proﬁt from
their superior information. In this context, the shape of the LOB affects future price dynamics due to the underlying
asymmetries in traders’ information sets. The second proposed underlying factor is traders’ level of patience. For
example, Rosu (2009) proposes a model where traders’ waiting costs determine their level of patience and how they
place their orders in the LOB. Rosu (2009) shows that patient traders place their orders in the higher levels of the ask
side when they expect to take advantage of large market orders that are more likely to arrive. In this paper, we focus
on Rosu’s (2009) model because it is closest, in terms of its modeling assumptions, to the market structure of the Xetra
trading system at the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, where our data are from. Speciﬁcally, in Xetra, liquidity is provided
by anonymous traders who place orders in the LOB. These traders may trade immediately or wait in the order book,
and they may change their orders strategically at any time. They can change or cancel their limit orders dynamically
at no cost. Rosu (2009) considers a dynamic model of an order-driven market where traders trade via limit orders that
they are free to modify or cancel, as is the case in Xetra.
Motivated by Rosu (2009), we ﬁrst develop three sets of testable hypotheses on the effects of LOB slopes on
returns, and then we analyze the relation between these effects and traders’ patience. To test our hypotheses, we begin
by reconstructing the ﬁrst 20 levels of the historical LOB at every millisecond, for all stocks in the DAX30 index in
July 2010 and in May and June 2011, based on data from the Xetra system. We follow Hasbrouck (1991) and consider
data in transaction periods rather than in regularly spaced time periods. We compute midquote returns between two
trades, and various slope measures right after each trade. We then consider stock-speciﬁc vector autoregressive (VAR)
models that include midquote return, trade direction, and four slope measures, i.e., the bid- and ask-side slopes based
on the lower and higher levels. The coefﬁcient estimates in this framework can be interpreted as the effect of the
slope variables on prices, conditional on a transaction, in the sense of Goettler et al. (2009). In this framework, we
distinguish between the immediate effect of a slope variable, deﬁned as the coefﬁcient estimate on its ﬁrst lag, and the
slope variable’s cumulative effect, deﬁned as the sum of the coefﬁcient estimates on all of its lags.
Our ﬁrst set of hypotheses concerns the asymmetries in the immediate effects on returns of the lower and higher
levels of the same side. We expect the immediate effects on returns of the lower and higher levels to differ depending
on the proportion of patient traders. Given that the existence of more patient traders has a greater effect on the
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

slope of the higher levels than the lower levels, any evidence that the immediate effect of the higher levels is greater
in magnitude than that of the lower levels might indicate the existence of more patient traders. Our second set of
hypotheses concerns the asymmetries between the overall effects of the lower and higher levels based on coefﬁcient
estimates on all lags. We consider these asymmetries because it might be the case that the higher and lower levels affect
returns differently, not only instantaneously but also with a delay. More importantly, an intraday trader can potentially
exploit these asymmetries to obtain economic beneﬁts, which is indeed the case, as we show later, in Section 8. Our
third and ﬁnal set of hypotheses concerns the relation between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope
measure. Rosu (2009) predicts that a trade’s subsequent price impact is smaller than its immediate impact, which
he refers to as price overshooting. Given that the price movements are jointly determined by market orders and the
shape of the LOB, this prediction suggests that the cumulative effect of a slope variable might also be different than
its immediate effect. Any evidence that the immediate effect of a slope variable is larger (smaller) in magnitude than
its cumulative effect indicates that prices overreact (underreact) to information in the LOB.
We estimate the VAR model for each stock separately and ﬁnd supporting empirical evidence in line with our
expectations discussed above. First of all, not surprisingly, the immediate and cumulative effects of different ask-side
slopes are, on average, positive, which is in line with the basic law of supply and demand, as in Kalay and Wohl
(2009). In other words, an increase in the ask-side slope indicates a decrease in the selling pressure in the LOB, which
in turn results in an increase in the prices and higher returns. Similar results hold for the bid side but with opposite
signs, as one would expect. More importantly, the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher levels exhibit more
heterogeneity, and they are, on average, greater (in magnitude) than those of the lower levels. That said, there is a
reversal in the immediate effects when we take the cumulative effects into consideration. This in turn suggests that
the prices overreact to information embedded in the LOB. Finally, this reversal is stronger for the higher levels than
the lower levels. In other words, the cumulative effects of the higher levels are smaller (in magnitude) than those of
the lower levels. This stronger reversal in the effects of the higher levels in turn points to asymmetries between the
effects of the lower and higher levels, which is in line with our second set of hypotheses. These results suggest that the
observed differences in the magnitudes of the effects might be due to the existence of patient traders in our sample. We
next turn our attention to the relation between these effects and traders’ patience. To do this, we consider an intraday
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

analysis. We begin by analyzing how the effects of slope measures change as the traders’ patience changes over the
trading day. Foucault, Kadan, and Kandel (2005) hypothesize that traders become less patient over the trading day
because they might want, or need, to liquidate their positions before the end of the continuous trading session. Hence,
there should be, on average, more patient traders in the morning and fewer patient trade rs at the end of the day. We
use the convexity of the LOB as our proxy for traders’ patience, motivated by Rosu’s ﬁnding relating the two.
In line with these expectations, the hourly convexity measure, averaged over all the stocks and trading days in
our sample, is indeed low initially and increases almost monotonically over the trading day, suggesting that there are
indeed more patient traders at the beginning of the trading day and fewer patient traders at the end. We thus expect
that the ask- and bid-side slopes of the higher levels should have signiﬁcantly greater (in absolute value) immediate
effects on prices than the corresponding slopes of the lower levels in the morning, whereas the opposite should hold at
the end of the trading day. Consequently, we estimate separate VAR models for each stock, trading day, and hour, and
obtain a panel data set of the immediate effects of the slope variables. We ﬁnd that the immediate effects of the slope
variables of the higher levels are, on average, greater in magnitude than the corresponding coefﬁcients on the slope
variables of the lower levels at the beginning of the trading day, and that they are smaller in magnitude at the end of
the trading day. We then regress the differences between the coefﬁcient estimates of the higher and lower levels (in
absolute values for the bid side) on dummy variables, for the ﬁrst and last hour of trading. We ﬁnd that the dummy
variable for the ﬁrst hour of trading has signiﬁcantly positive coefﬁcient estimates, whereas the dummy variable for the
last hour of trading has signiﬁcantly negative coefﬁcient estimates for both the ask and bid sides. This implies that the
slope variables of the higher levels do indeed have signiﬁcantly greater (in absolute value) immediate effects on prices
than the corresponding slopes of the lower levels, at the beginning of the trading day, when there are more patient
traders; and the slope variables have signiﬁcantly smaller immediate effects at the end of the trading day, when there
are fewer patient traders. We thus argue that these ﬁndings provide statistically signiﬁcant evidence linking traders’
patience to the immediate effects of slope measures on price dynamics, in line with our predictions.
Having found that different slope measures affect prices differently, we then show that these asymmetric effects can
also be economically important. We do this by observing the performance of high-frequency day-trading strategies that
ignore these asymmetries in forecasting midquote returns at each transaction, and we compare these with a strategy
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

that does use them. Our main trading strategy, which we refer to as the unrestricted strategy, uses an unrestricted
VAR model to forecast midquote returns at each transaction period. The competing strategies, which we refer to
as restricted strategies, employ restricted versions of the VAR model, such that a chosen pair of slope variables has
symmetric effects on price dynamics. In all trading strategies, similarly to Kozhan and Salmon (2012), we consider
a forecast that is greater (smaller) than a given threshold to be a buy (sell) signal, and we revise our existing position
in the stock accordingly. Comparing the average monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted and restricted trading
strategies, we ﬁnd that ignoring these asymmetric effects might have cost a trader between 16 and 25 basis points in
monthly proﬁts in June 2011, corresponding to about 2% and 3% in annual terms.
Our paper contributes to the literature in three important empirical dimensions. First of all, to the best of our
knowledge, we are among the ﬁrst to analyze asymmetries in the effects of information embedded in different parts of
the LOB. Several interesting previously undocumented results emerge from our analysis. The ask- and bid-side slopes
of the higher levels have signiﬁcantly greater immediate effects on prices than do the corresponding slopes of the lower
levels. We also ﬁnd that there is a reversal in the immediate effects when we take cumulative effects into consideration,
suggesting that the prices overreact to information embedded in the LOB. This reversal is stronger for the higher levels
than it is for the lower ones, resulting in smaller cumulative effects for the higher levels than for the lower. Second,
in line with recent theoretical ﬁndings, we link the asymmetries in the effects of the lower and higher levels to the
existence of more patient traders. Speciﬁcally, the slope variables of the higher levels indeed have signiﬁcantly greater
(in absolute value) immediate effects on prices than do the corresponding slopes of the lower levels, at the beginning
of the trading day when there are more patient traders; and they have signiﬁcantly smaller immediate effects at the
end of the trading day, when there are fewer patient traders. Finally, we show that these asymmetric effects can be
economically important.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the details of our data set and deﬁnes the LOB
slope. Section 3 introduces the empirical model along with the empirical choices made to obtain the main set of results.
Section 4 discusses the theoretical motivation behind our empirical analysis and presents our testable hypotheses based
on the theoretical discussion and empirical model. In Section 5, the effects of slope variables on price dynamics are
given. Section 6 reports our main empirical results on the asymmetries in the short-run and cumulative effects of
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

different slope variables on price dynamics. Section 7 relates the asymmetries in the immediate effects of slope
variables on price dynamics to traders’ patience. Section 8 shows that the asymmetries in the effect of slope measures
on price dynamics are also economically important. Section 9 concludes the paper. Additional results and robustness
checks are provided in an online appendix.
2
Data
Our data are from the automated order-driven trading system Xetra, operated by the Deutsche B¨orse Group at the
Frankfurt Stock Exchange. It is the main German trading platform, accounting for more than 90% of total transactions
at all German exchanges. In Xetra, there are no dedicated market makers for blue chip and other liquid stocks. Thus,
all liquidity in Xetra is provided by market participants submitting limit orders.
The raw data set contains all events that are tracked and sent through the data streams. We ﬁrst process the raw
data set using XetraParser software, developed by Bilodeau (2013).2 We then reconstruct the ﬁrst 20 levels of the
limit order book in millisecond time intervals between the normal trading hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.3 The limit
order book can change when either a trade is executed or a limit order is placed, modiﬁed, or canceled. In the unlikely
event that these two types of events have the same millisecond time stamp, we need to make an assumption on the
sequence of events, given that we cannot observe which one arrived earlier. We assume that a trade is always executed
before any other change to the limit order book with the same millisecond time stamp. Thus, we ﬁrst modify the limit
order book to reﬂect the trade execution before taking its snapshot. In other words, if a trade is executed at a given
millisecond, then the snapshot of the limit order book for that millisecond already reﬂects the executed trade.
Our data cover all stocks in the DAX30 index and all trading days in July 2010, and May and June 2011. We focus
on three months of data simply due to the sheer size of ultra high-frequency limit order books. Table 1 presents the
list of stocks in the DAX30 index as of June 2011, along with some daily summary statistics over the whole sample
from the Security Daily ﬁles in Compustat Global.
2We thank Yann Bilodeau for his comments and help in constructing the data set.
3During normal trading hours, there are two types of trading mechanisms: call auctions and continuous auctions. For stocks listed on the DAX
30, there are three call auctions during a trading day: the open, mid-day, and closing auctions. The prices during call auctions are not determined by
trading activity but rather are based on a set of rules determined by the exchange. Between the call auctions, the market is organized as a continuous
auction in which traders can submit round lot-sized limit and/or market orders only. The prices from the call auctions serve as the opening prices
for the following continuous auctions. To avoid any bias due to the peculiar structure of the call auctions, we ignore all data corresponding to the
three call auctions for a DAX 30 stock.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

[Insert Table 1 here]
Figure 1 presents two snapshots of the limit order book for ALV on June 1, 2011. As can be easily seen in
Figure 1, both the bid and ask sides of the limit order book can take on different shapes at different times. We
summarize different shapes that the limit order book can exhibit by distinguishing between its lower and higher
levels and measuring their slopes separately. More precisely, let P B
l1,t and P A
l1,t denote lth
1 best bid and ask prices,
respectively, in period t. Similarly, let DB
l1+1,l2,t and DA
l1+1,l2,t denote the cumulative quantity available between
levels l1 + 1 and l2 (both levels inclusive and l2 > l1) in the bid and ask sides of the limit order book, respectively.
The slopes of the bid and ask sides between levels l1 and l2 in period t, SB
l1,l2,t and SA
l1,l2,t, are deﬁned as the change
in the price relative to the cumulative quantity available between levels l1 and l2:
SB
l1,l2,t
=
P B
l2,t −P B
l1,t
DB
l1+1,l2,t
,
(1)
SA
l1,l2,t
=
P A
l2,t −P A
l1,t
DA
l1+1,l2,t
(2)
for l1 = 1, . . . , 19 and l2 > l1. The slope of the bid side is a measure of price sensitivity to changes in quantity
demanded and is always negative. A high (in absolute value) bid slope implies that the price between two levels of the
bid side will decrease more, on average, for a given change in quantity demanded. In other words, an increase in the
bid slope suggests that investors are willing to buy the same total quantity only at lower prices. Similarly, the slope of
the ask side is a measure of price sensitivity to changes in quantity supplied and is always positive. A high ask slope
implies that the price between two levels of the ask side will increase more, on average, for a given change in quantity
supplied, which, in turn, suggests that investors are willing to sell the same total quantity only at higher prices. We
consider the log of slope variables to diminish the effect of outliers on our results.
[Insert Figure 1 here]
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

3
The Empirical Model
In this section, we present the empirical model and the empirical choices to obtain the main set of results. Our
empirical model is based on that of Hasbrouck (1991), who suggests using the following VAR model to analyze the
effects of trades on prices:
rt
=
∞
X
τ=1
αr,τrt−τ +
∞
X
τ=1
αx,τxt−τ + εr,t,
(3a)
xt
=
∞
X
τ=1
βr,τrt−τ +
∞
X
τ=1
βx,τxt−τ + εx,t,
(3b)
where t indexes trades; xt is the sign of the trade in period t (+1 for a trade initiated by a buyer and -1 for a trade
initiated by a seller based on Lee and Ready (1991)’s algorithm); rt is the log midquote return deﬁned as the change
in log midquote price (i.e. the average of the best bid and ask quotes) between periods t −1 and t, that is, rt =
∆qt = qt −qt−1; and qt is the log midquote price at the end of period t. This is a very general and ﬂexible model that
nests many of the standard microstructure models as special cases. The disturbances in this framework, εr,t and εx,t,
are generally modeled as white noise processes and can be interpreted as public information embedded in unexpected
returns and private information embedded in unexpected trades, respectively.
We assume that the dynamics of a limit order market can also be approximated by a linear VAR system similar to
that proposed by Hasbrouck (1991). Speciﬁcally, we include slope measures based on different levels of the ask and
bid sides as additional state variables in the above VAR, which yields:4
rt
=
cr +
∞
X
τ=1
αr,τrt−τ +
∞
X
τ=1
αx,τxt−τ +
∞
X
τ=1
α′
z,τzt−τ + εr,t,
(4a)
xt
=
cx +
∞
X
τ=1
βr,τrt−τ +
∞
X
τ=1
βx,τxt−τ +
∞
X
τ=1
β′
z,τzt−τ + εx,t,
(4b)
zt
=
cz +
∞
X
τ=1
γr,τrt−τ +
∞
X
τ=1
γx,τxt−τ +
∞
X
τ=1
γ′
z,τzt−τ + εz,t,
(4c)
where zt is a vector that includes the slope measures of interest.
To implement this model empirically, we need to make some empirical choices regarding the sampling approach,
4We use bold letters to distinguish vectors and matrices from scalars.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

the slope measures and the truncation point for the inﬁnite sums. Regarding the sampling frequency, we use tick-bytick data, i.e. sampling every time there is a trade, for our main sets of results following Hasbrouck (1991) and Engle
and Dufour (2001). In the online appendix, we estimate a version of the model in Equation (4) using data sampled
at a regular frequency of 100 milliseconds. With tick-by-tick sampling, we need to make a choice about whether to
take the limit order book snapshot right before or after a trade. We can measure limit order book variables, including
the best bid and ask prices, every millisecond. However, a trade can only be matched to a given millisecond and
thus one needs to decide whether to take a snapshot of the limit order book right before or right after a trade. The
theory does not provide much guidance on this issue. We measure the slope variables right after a trade.5 Our main
sampling approach implies that the midquote return and slope variables in period t are observed right after (less than
a millisecond after) the trade in period t and its direction. Hence, we include the trade direction in period t to control
for its contemporaneous effect on returns and limit order book variables in the estimated version of Equation (4).
Regarding the truncation issues, we truncate the inﬁnite sums in Equation (4) at ﬁve lags. We choose ﬁve lags
following the previous literature. For example, both Hasbrouck (1991) and Dufour and Engle (2000) also truncate the
sums at ﬁve lags. This allows us to compare some of our results to theirs. Furthermore, as we will discuss below,
we use the sum of the coefﬁcients on these lags as a proxy for the cumulative effect of slope variables on returns.
Given that the stocks in our sample are traded very frequently, we believe that ﬁve transactions are more than enough
to capture the cumulative effect of slope variable on returns. That said, we also estimated the model with different
numbers of lags. The results based on different number of lags are presented in the online appendix and are similar to
those based on the model with ﬁve lags.
The timing convention discussed above is reﬂected in the starting points of the summations in the estimated version
of Equation (4). The summations for trade direction in the equations for the returns and limit order book variables
5We also considered the alternative sampling approach of measuring the limit order book variables right before a trade. Our results remain
qualitatively similar.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

start at zero instead of one in the ﬁrst sampling approach. The estimated version of the model is then as follows:
rt
=
cr +
5
X
τ=1
αr,τrt−τ +
5
X
τ=0
αx,τxt−τ +
5
X
τ=1
α′
z,τzt−τ + εr,t,
(5a)
xt
=
cx +
5
X
τ=1
βr,τrt−τ +
5
X
τ=1
βx,τxt−τ +
5
X
τ=1
β′
z,τzt−τ + εx,t,
(5b)
zt
=
cz +
5
X
τ=1
γr,τrt−τ +
5
X
τ=0
γx,τxt−τ +
5
X
τ=1
γ′
z,τzt−τ + εz,t.
(5c)
We include four slope measures: the ﬁrst two are the bid- and ask-side slopes between their corresponding ﬁrst
and ﬁfth levels, SB
1,5,t and SA
1,5,t, which we use to capture the slopes of lower levels, and the other two are the bidand ask-side slopes between their corresponding ﬁfth and twentieth levels, SB
5,20,t and SA
5,20,t, which we use to capture
the slopes of higher levels. This empirical choice is motivated by two factors. The ﬁrst level is undoubtedly the most
frequently updated one, and we thus want to include this information in our deﬁnition of the slope of the lower level.
Second, levels of the limit order book higher than 10 are less frequently updated and might have stale information. We
want to minimize the effect of this stale information by including levels between ﬁve and ten, which are still updated
quite frequently, in our deﬁnition of higher levels.6 We estimate the empirical speciﬁcation in Equation 5 via ordinary
least squares (OLS) with heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors a la Newey and West (1987).
This speciﬁcation has several advantages compared with a simple regression framework. First, it can be considered
as a reduced-form linear approximation that is designed to capture the dynamics of limit order market models discussed
in the introduction. It is also used by Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2016) in a similar fashion to understand
the role of limit orders submitted by high-frequency traders in price discovery. The coefﬁcient estimates on the slope
variables can be interpreted as the effects of these variables on prices conditional on a transaction in the sense of
Goettler et al. (2009). In addition, this empirical speciﬁcation allows us to analyze not only the short-run effects of
slope variables on prices but also their cumulative effects after several transactions. To be more precise on the latter
point, the coefﬁcient estimates on the ﬁrst lags of slope variables can be interpreted as their immediate effects on
prices, while the coefﬁcient estimates on further lags provide an idea about their short-run dynamic effects on prices.
Furthermore, Dufour and Engle (2000) argue that the sum of the coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of a given slope
6We consider using alternative deﬁnitions and cutoff points for lower and higher levels in the online appendix. The results based on these
alternative deﬁnitions and cutoff points are presented in the online appendix and are similar to our main set of empirical results.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

variable can be considered as a ﬁrst raw approximation of its impact on prices after several transactions.
4
Hypothesis Development
In this section, we ﬁrst brieﬂy summarize the theoretical literature before focusing on a speciﬁc model to motivate our
hypotheses. We then discuss how we can test our hypotheses using the empirical model in Equation 5.
Whether the state of the limit order book can predict future price movements is a theoretical question. Earlier
microstructure models, such as those of Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985), Glosten (1994), and Rock (1996),
treat limit orders as free options provided by uninformed investors because they tend to be picked off by betterinformed investors. They thus implicitly assume that the limit order book cannot be informative for future price
movements. However, recent theoretical models allow informed investors to strategically choose between limit and
market orders, and show that investors use not only market orders, as assumed in the previous literature, but also limit
orders in a rational expectations equilibrium.7 Regardless of their underlying assumptions, the common prediction of
these recent theoretical models is that limit orders can predict future price movements.
As mentioned in Section 2, our data is from the automated order-driven trading system Xetra. In Xetra, liquidity
is provided by anonymous traders who place orders in the limit order book. These traders may trade immediately
or wait in the order book, and may change their orders strategically at any time. They can change or cancel their
limit orders dynamically at no cost. Due to the complexity of modeling such markets, there are only a few theoretical
papers modelling the dynamics of an order-driven market. To the best of our knowledge, Rosu (2009) is closest to the
market structure of Xetra in terms of its modeling assumptions. Speciﬁcally, Rosu (2009) presents a dynamic model
of an order-driven market where traders trade via limit orders that they are free to modify or cancel, as in Xetra. In
his model, traders’ patience is the main driving factor. He argues that symmetrically informed patient sellers (buyers)
with a low waiting cost will place their order at a higher level of the ask (bid) to get a better expected selling (buying)
7For example, informed investors could use limit orders to avoid detection, as in Kumar and Seppi (1994), to insure themselves against the
price they could obtain for their market orders, as in Chakravarty and Holden (1995), or to take advantage of their sufﬁciently persistent private
information, as in the studies by Kaniel and Liu (2006) and Kalay and Wohl (2009). There is also a more recent literature on dynamic limit order
markets with strategic traders, such as the works of Foucault et al. (2005), Goettler et al. (2009), and Rosu (2009). Foucault et al. (2005) show
that patient traders tend to submit limit orders, while impatient ones submit market orders in equilibrium. Rosu (2009) shows that fully strategic,
symmetrically informed liquidity traders can choose between market and limit orders based on their trade-off between execution prices and waiting
costs. Goettler et al. (2009) ﬁnd that limit orders tend to be submitted mostly by informed traders, and competition among them results in their
private information being reﬂected in the limit order book. Bhattacharya and Saar (2016) ﬁnd that informed traders tend to provide liquidity in
illiquid markets and demand liquidity from more liquid markets.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

price, whereas a very impatient seller (buyer) will immediately place a market order.
Rosu (2009) has many predictions regarding the relation between traders’ patience, the shape of the limit order
book and the effect of a transaction on returns. Regarding the shape of the limit order book, he shows that it depends
on the relative arrival rates of limit orders from different types of traders. Speciﬁcally, if large market orders are more
likely, as in a more volatile market, the limit order book will be less convex, indicating that patient traders have placed
their orders at the higher levels of the ask.8 If large market orders are unlikely, the limit order book will be more
convex, and the limit orders will cluster at the best ask level or at intermediate levels in a mixed environment.
Regarding the price impact of transactions, he shows that it will be smaller in markets with higher trading activity
(measured by the sum of arrival rates of all agents) and with higher competition (measured by the ratio of the arrival
rates for patient and impatient traders). He also distinguishes between instantaneous and subsequent price impacts
and ﬁnds that the subsequent price impact is smaller than the instantaneous price impact, which he refers to as price
overshooting.
In this paper, we are mostly interested in the effect of the limit order book shape on returns while controlling for
the arrival of market orders. Hence, we ﬁrst use Rosu’s theory to motivate our hypotheses on the effect of limit order
book slopes on returns before linking them to traders’ patience.
We start with our hypotheses on the effect of limit order book slopes on returns. First of all, an increase in the
ask-side slope indicates a decrease in the selling pressure in the limit order book, which in turn results in an increase
in the prices and higher returns. Similarly, an increase in the bid-side slope indicates a decrease in the buying pressure
in the limit order book, which in turn results in a decrease in the prices and lower returns. In other words, these basic
laws of supply and demand indicate that the slope of the ask (bid) side as measured in this paper is related inversely
to the supply (demand) for the stock. We thus expect the slope of the ask (bid) side to have a positive (negative) effect
on returns. Furthermore, one can also analyze the similarities and differences between the effects of bid- and askside slopes. Although we present our estimation results and brieﬂy discuss the similarities and differences between
the effects of bid- and ask-side slopes, we do not put too much emphasis on these results given that they have been
8Rosu (2009, p.4624) states that: “If large market orders are more likely, as in the quadratic case (i), then the price impact function Im(i) is
concave, which indicates that patient sellers indeed place their limit orders at higher levels above the ask.” We prefer to use the term convexity rather
than concavity because the limit order book is convex on average, as will be shown in Section 7. That said, there are, of course, concave limit order
books in our sample. Given that we are interested in relative convexity, we refer to a concave limit order book as being less convex than a convex
limit order book.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

extensively studied in the previous literature (see for example Kalay and Wohl (2009)). Instead, we focus on the
similarities and differences between the effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels of the same side, which
have not been studied in the previous literature.
Our ﬁrst set of hypotheses concerns the asymmetries in the immediate effects on returns of the higher and lower
levels of the same side. Results in Rosu (2009) discussed above suggest that the relative slopes of the higher levels
depend closely on the relative proportion of patient traders in the market. The relative effect of the higher levels on
returns for a given trade direction and/or size might also depend on the relative proportion of patient traders. We thus
expect the immediate effects of the lower and higher levels on returns to differ from each other depending on the
proportion of patient traders. Denoting our hypotheses for the ask side with a and those for the bid side with b, we can
express these hypotheses as restrictions on the immediate effects of slopes on returns as follows:
H1a
:
αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = αz,1(SA
5,20,t);
H1b
:
αz,1(SB
1,5,t) = αz,1(SB
5,20,t);
where αz,1(·) denote the element of αz,1 corresponding to the slope measure of interest in parentheses. Given that
the existence of more patient traders affects the slope of the higher levels more than the lower levels, rejection of these
null hypotheses in favor of the alternative where the immediate effect of the higher levels is bigger in magnitude than
that of the lower levels, i.e. αz,1(SA
1,5,t) < αz,1(SA
5,20,t) for the ask side and αz,1(SB
1,5,t) > αz,1(SB
5,20,t) for the bid
side, might indicate the existence of more patient traders.
We ﬁrst test these hypotheses in the overall sample before focusing on different periods with potentially varying
degrees of trader patience. Given that we cannot directly observe the degree of traders’ patience, we follow Foucault
et al. (2005) by assuming that their relative number changes during a trading day. Namely, traders are more patient in
the morning and less patient at the end of the day because they want to liquidate their positions before the end of the
continuous trading session. So, we expect the slope of the higher levels of the ask side should have a greater impact on
stock prices than that of the lower levels in the morning, when there are potentially more patient traders. We test this
conjecture by estimating the model using data within each hour of the trading day. We then compare the instantaneous
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

and cumulative effects across different hours of the trading day. We expect these effects to be bigger in magnitude in
the morning when there are more patient traders.
Our second set of hypotheses concerns the asymmetries between the overall, and not only the immediate, effects
of the lower and higher levels. We consider these asymmetries because it might be the case that the higher and
lower levels affect returns differently when we consider not their immediate effects but rather their delayed effects.
Furthermore, it is also possible that higher and lower levels affect returns differently when we consider all lags jointly
rather than considering only the ﬁrst lag. We thus test the equality of the coefﬁcients on all lags of slope variables
based on different levels jointly. Our second set of testable hypotheses can be written:
H2a
:
αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) = αz,τ(SA
5,20,t)
for τ = 1, 2 . . . , 5;
H2b
:
αz,τ(SB
1,5,t) = αz,τ(SB
5,20,t)
for τ = 1, 2 . . . , 5.
where αz,τ(·) for τ = 1, 2 . . . , 5 denote the element of αz,τ corresponding to the slope measure of interest in parentheses. Rejection of this null hypothesis suggests that at least one of the ﬁve lags of the higher and lower levels affects
returns differently. This in turn points to the importance of distinguishing between lower and higher levels of the limit
order book and, more importantly, implies that the slopes of the higher and lower levels have statistically different predictive powers for returns. An intraday trader can potentially exploit these differences in predictive powers to obtain
economic beneﬁts, which is what we analyze in Section 8.
Our third set of hypotheses concerns the relation between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope
measure. As discussed above, Rosu (2009) also predicts that subsequent price impact of a trade is smaller than its
immediate impact, which he refers to as price overshooting. Given that the price movements are jointly determined
by market orders and the shape of the limit order book, this prediction suggests that the cumulative effect of a slope
variable might also be different than its immediate effect. We can test this hypothesis by approximating the cumulative
effect of a slope variable by the sum of the coefﬁcient estimates on all ﬁve lags, as discussed in Section 3. Thus, our
third and ﬁnal set of hypotheses tests the equality of the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope measure,
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

and can be expressed as follows:
H3a
:
αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) =
5
X
τ=1
αz,τ(SA
1,5,t);
H3a∗
:
αz,τ(SA
5,20,t) =
5
X
τ=1
αz,τ(SA
5,20,t);
H3b
:
αz,τ(SB
1,5,t) =
5
X
τ=1
αz,τ(SB
1,5,t);
H3b∗
:
αz,τ(SB
5,20,t) =
5
X
τ=1
αz,τ(SB
5,20,t).
where ∗denotes our hypothesis for the higher levels of the limit order book for both ask and bid sides. Rejection
of these hypotheses in favor of the alternative, where the immediate effect of a slope variable is bigger (smaller) in
magnitude than its cumulative effect, indicates that prices overreact (under-react) to information in the limit order
book.
5
Estimation Results
Table 2 presents some summary statistics across stocks from the estimation of the empirical model. We start
our discussion with the effects of the ask-side slopes on prices. The immediate effects (the coefﬁcient estimates on
the ﬁrst lag) of the lower levels are signiﬁcantly positive for each stock separately. These immediate effects are also
jointly signiﬁcant across all stocks based on Bonferroni p-values. The signs of these observed effects are consistent
with the basic law of supply and demand, as in Kalay and Wohl (2009). Indeed, an increase in the ask-side slope
indicates a decrease in the selling pressure in the limit order book which in turn results in an increase in the prices and
higher returns. These effects are signiﬁcant not only statistically but also economically. To understand the economic
magnitude of these coefﬁcient estimates, one needs to take into account the fact that we consider the logarithm of slope
measures in the VAR. For example, the log stock price increases by 0.227 basis points (0.227 b.p. = 0.346×0.656) at
the next trade, following a one standard deviation9 increase in the slope of the ask-side between the ﬁrst and ﬁfth levels.
This effect is economically important given that the mean log return between two transaction periods is practically
9We compute the standard deviation of ask-side slope based on the ﬁrst ﬁve levels using limit order book snapshots one millisecond before each
transaction. We use the average of these standard deviations across 30 stocks.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

zero. Turning our attention to the immediate effects of the higher levels reveals that they are also signiﬁcantly positive
for almost all stocks (28 out of 30) separately and for all stocks jointly based on Bonferroni p-values. However,
they also exhibit more variation across stocks than the immediate effects of the lower levels. More importantly, the
immediate effects of the higher levels of the ask side are on average stronger than those of the lower levels.
[Insert Table 2 here]
The cumulative effects (the sum of the coefﬁcient estimates on all lags) of the lower levels are all positive, and
signiﬁcantly so, for almost all stocks (29 out of 30) in our sample. The cumulative effects of the higher levels are
also positive for almost all stocks (27 out of 30), but signiﬁcantly so for around half (16 out of 30) of the stocks.
More importantly, the slopes of both the lower and higher levels have cumulative effects smaller in magnitude than
their immediate effects. This in turn implies that the effects of further lags on ask side slopes are on average negative.
To put it differently, there is a reversal of the positive immediate effects of ask side slope variables. This reversal
is stronger for the slopes of the higher levels than the lower levels. As a result, the slopes of the lower levels have
stronger cumulative effects that the slopes of the higher levels.
The bid-side slopes, not surprisingly, have negative effects on returns because an increase in the bid-side slope
indicates a decrease in the buying pressure in the limit order book which in turn results in an increase in the prices
and higher returns. Furthermore, the immediate effects of bid-side slopes are slightly bigger in magnitude and exhibit
more heterogeneity across stocks than those of the corresponding ask-side slopes. Otherwise, we observe patterns in
terms of the relations between the immediate and cumulative effects of lower and higher levels of the bid side very
similar to those discussed above for the ask side.
These results already provide preliminary evidence in line with our expectations discussed in Section 4. First,
the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher levels exhibit more heterogeneity and are on average bigger (in
magnitude) than those of the lower levels. As discussed in Section 4, this suggests the existence of patient traders
who place their limit order in the higher levels of the book, as mentioned in the discussion of our ﬁrst set of testable
hypotheses. Second, there seems to be a reversal of the immediate effects when we consider cumulative effects,
providing preliminary evidence of overreaction to information embedded in the limit order book, as discussed in the
motivation of our third set of testable hypotheses. Finally, this reversal effect is stronger for the higher levels than
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

the lower levels, which in turn points to asymmetries in the effects of the lower and higher levels, as discussed while
motivating our second set of hypotheses. In the next section, we analyze whether these preliminary results in line with
our expectations are indeed statistically signiﬁcant by testing the null hypotheses presented in Section 4.
6
Hypothesis Tests
As discussed in Section 4, in addition to our predictions on the signs of these effects, we also predict differences in
the magnitude of these effects, if asymmetries in traders’ level of patience is the main driving factor. To reiterate,
we expect the slope of the higher levels to have a stronger effect on prices when patient traders place their orders in
the higher levels of the limit order book, making it less convex. In this section, before establishing the link between
traders’ patience and the magnitudes of these effects, we ﬁrst test whether the effects of the lower and higher levels
are signiﬁcantly different from each other based on the above estimation .
Table 3 presents some summary statistics for our ﬁrst set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of
the lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). We start our discussion with our results for the ask side. The null hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level for 27 out of 30 stocks. The corresponding Bonferroni p-value is practically
zero, suggesting that the lower and higher levels of the ask side have signiﬁcantly different immediate effects when
we consider all stocks jointly. These results provide strong empirical evidence that the lower and higher levels of the
ask side have immediate effects on returns that are signiﬁcantly different from each other. More importantly, we ﬁnd
that the lower levels of the ask side have smaller immediate effects for 23 of 30 stocks in our sample and signiﬁcantly
so at the 5% level for 22 of these 23 stocks. As discussed in Section 4, these results indicate that patient traders are
more present for these 22 stocks in our sample period. That said, there are also 7 stocks for which the lower levels of
the ask side have bigger immediate effects than the higher levels, and signiﬁcantly so for 5 of these 7 stocks. For these
stocks, impatient traders seem to be more present in our sample period.
Our ﬁndings are very similar for the bid side. Brieﬂy, the higher levels have signiﬁcantly more negative immediate
effects on returns than the lower levels for most of the stocks (24 out of 30) while the opposite is true for only 6 stocks
and signiﬁcantly so for only 4. These results also point to the existence of more patient traders for most of the stocks
in our sample during the period considered.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

[Insert Table 3 here]
Table 4 presents the results for H2a and H2b testing whether the overall effects based on all lags of the slopes of
the lower and higher levels are equal. For both bid and ask side, the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher
levels are signiﬁcantly different from each other for all stocks in our sample, regardless of whether we consider the
empirical evidence for each stock separately or jointly across stocks based on Bonferonni p-values. In other words,
the evidence for the asymmetric effects of lower and higher levels becomes even stronger when we take into account
the effects of lags further than the ﬁrst one. This result is important because it shows that one cannot compute a single
slope variable to capture the state of the limit order book, meaning that the shape of the limit order book is not linear.
More importantly, it is useful to distinguish between the slopes of the different levels as they might have different
effects on returns.
[Insert Table 4 here]
Finally, Table 5 presents the results for our third set of hypotheses on the relation between the immediate and
cumulative effects of a given slope variable (H3a and H3b). As shown above, the cumulative effects of all slope
variables considered are smaller in magnitude than their immediate effects. The results in Table 5 show that these
differences between the cumulative and immediate effects are statistically signiﬁcant. These results in turn suggest
that prices following a transaction overreact to information embedded in limit order book slopes, which is followed
by a signiﬁcant reversal after several transactions. Furthermore, this reversal is much more pronounced for the higher
levels of both ask and bid sides. This in turn explains why the slopes of the higher levels have smaller (in magnitude)
effects after several transactions than the slopes of the lower levels, which is the opposite of what we observe in terms
of the relationship between their immediate effects.
[Insert Table 5 here]
Overall, our results in this section show that the ask- and bid-side slopes of the higher levels have signiﬁcantly
greater (in absolute value) immediate effects on prices than the corresponding slopes of the lower levels. There is
a reversal of this pattern, due to price overreaction, when we consider the effects of slope variables after several
transactions. These results suggest that the observed differences in the magnitudes of the effects might be due to the
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

existence of patient traders in our sample. That said, these results do not provide direct empirical evidence linking
traders’ patience to the effects of the slope variables on prices. In the next section, we provide that empirical evidence.
7
Traders’ Patience and the Asymmetries in the Effects of Slope Variables
on Price Dynamics
To establish the link between traders’ patience and the asymmetries in the effects of slope variables on prices, we
perform an intraday analysis of how the effects of slope variables vary as traders’ patience changes over the trading
day. We ﬁrst provide empirical evidence that there are more patient traders in the morning and less patient traders at
the end of the trading day, as argued by Foucault et al. (2005). We then show that the ask- and bid-side slopes of the
higher levels have signiﬁcantly greater (in absolute value) immediate effects on prices than the corresponding slopes
of the lower levels in the morning, while the opposite holds at the end of the trading day as discussed in Section 4.
Although traders’ patience cannot be directly observed, Rosu (2009) shows that the limit order book should be
less convex when patient traders have placed their orders at the higher levels of the ask. Hence, we ﬁrst verify how the
shape of the limit order book changes over the trading day. To do this, we ﬁrst standardize the prices and (cumulative)
quantities in each level of a given limit order book snapshot to numbers between zero and one so that we can average
them over different stocks and time periods. We standardize the price at a given level by dividing the difference
between this price and the midquote price by the difference between the price of the 20th level and the midquote
price.10 Similarly, we standardize the quantities in each level of a given limit order book snapshot by dividing them
by the total quantity available in all 20 levels. Figure 2 presents the shape of the limit order between 9:00 and 10:00,
12:00 and 13:00, and 16:30 and 17:30, averaged over all stocks and trading days. Both the bid and ask sides of the
limit order book exhibit, on average, a convex shape throughout the trading day. More importantly, we ﬁnd that the
limit order book exhibits a much less convex shape at the beginning of the trading day compared with the rest of the
trading day. This in turn suggests that traders are more patient at the beginning of the trading day, especially during
the opening hour, and they become less patient throughout the day. This is in line with our expectations based on the
10We use the negative of the standardized prices for the bid side for presentational purposes.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

arguments in Foucault et al. (2005).
[Insert Figure 2 here]
To demonstrate this point further, we measure the convexity of the limit order book based on the ratio of the slopes
of the higher and lower levels and present its evolution over the trading day. We consider level ﬁve of the limit order
book as our breakpoint for our main convexity measure. In other words, we measure convexity as SA
5,20,t/SA
1,5,t −1
for the ask side and |SB
5,20,t|/|SB
1,5,t| −1 for the bid side. We also considered other breakpoints to measure convexity
and our results remain similar given that the limit order book exhibits, on average, a convex shape as shown in Figure
2. The interpretation of this convexity measure is straightforward: A positive (negative) convexity implies that the
slope of the higher levels is greater (smaller) than the slopes of the lower levels, while a zero convexity implies a linear
limit order book. For a given stock, we ﬁrst compute the convexity of the ask and bid sides of its limit order book for
each snapshot and then average them over each hour of the trading day.11 Figure 3 presents the convexity measures of
bid and ask sides averaged over stocks and trading days in our sample. The average convexity is low at the beginning
of the trading day, and increases almost monotonically over the trading day. This is in line with our expectations that
there are more patient traders in the morning and less patient traders at the end of the trading day.
[Insert Figure 3 here]
To provide further evidence that our measure is a good proxy for limit order book convexity, we analyze whether
it changes as a function of order size and volatility in line with Rosu’s predictions. Speciﬁcally, Rosu (2009) argues
that the convexity of the limit order book is lower (1) when large market orders are likely or (2) when the market is
more volatile. To test the ﬁrst prediction, we compute the convexity based on the snapshot of the limit order book one
millisecond before each trade. We classify a given trade for a given stock into deciles based on breakpoints for those
speciﬁc stocks. In other words, the deﬁnition of large and small market orders is stock-speciﬁc. Figure 4 presents
the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles of limit order book convexity for each trade decile. It shows that the shape of the
limit order book is always convex, which corresponds to the second case suggested by Rosu where large market orders
are unlikely. Also, according to the theoretical model of Rosu (2009), if patient traders can correctly anticipate the
11The trading hours on Xetra are between 9:00 and 17:30. We average over 30 minute interval between 16:00 and 16:30 so that the ﬁrst and last
periods in a trading day, which are our main interests, are both an hour long.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

probability of large market orders, the convexity should be monotonically decreasing along with the size of the trade.
However, our results show that the relationship between convexity (both bid and ask side) and trade size is U-shaped.
That is, the limit order book is relatively more convex right before small and large market orders. As mentioned by
Rosu, the relation between the shape of the limit order book and size of the trade is often ambiguous in the empirical
literature. Our results appear to support the explanation that patient traders can correctly anticipate the probability of
small and medium size market order arrivals, but not the probability of large market order arrivals.
We consider a similar approach to analyze the second prediction. We ﬁrst compute the daily realized volatility
for each stock-day pair as the sum of squared 5-minute midquote returns. We classify a given trading day for a given
stock into deciles based on breakpoints for that speciﬁc stock. We then compute the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles of
the average limit order book convexity for stock-day pairs that are in a given volatility decile. Figure 5 presents these
results and shows that there is a slight negative relation between limit order book convexity and volatility as predicted
by Rosu (2009). This negative relation is more evident for the bid side than the ask side and for higher levels of
convexity (75% percentile) than median or low levels of convexity (50% and 25% percentiles). These results provide
some supporting evidence that the limit order book convexity is lower on days with higher volatility than days with
lower volatility.
[Insert Figures 4 and 5 here]
Rosu (2009) also compares his model based on waiting costs of patient traders with the model of Glosten (1994),
which is based on asymmetric information and perfect competition. He argues that one can test his model by checking
whether the expected increase in the bid-ask spread conditional on the arrival of the next order is positive. The intuition
is that the bid-ask spread should increase on average in order to compensate patient traders who wait in the order book.
In other words, the bid-ask spread should be higher not only when there are more patient traders but also when there
are more trades. A high volume combined with a low bid-ask spread might indicate a lack of patient traders in the
market, while a high volume combined with a high bid-ask spread might point to the existence of patient traders. Thus,
another way to understand how traders’ patience changes over the trading day is to jointly analyze the evolution of
bid-ask spread and volume over the trading day. To this end, we ﬁrst present in panel (a) of Figure 6 the number of
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

transactions (averaged over stocks and trading days) over the trading day.12 The number of transactions in our data
set exhibits the well-known U-shape pattern over the trading day where it is high both at the beginning and end of the
trading day. We then present the evolution of the bid-ask spread over the trading day. To do this, we use the book
bid-ask spread, deﬁned as the depth weighted ask price minus the depth weighted bid price over all levels, instead of
the difference between best ask and bid prices, which might be tick constrained. Furthermore, given that the Rosu’s
model involves the whole book and not just the top of the book, the book spread measure is a better ﬁt and is not
limited by the minimum tick in the market. We compute the book spread based on snapshots of the limit order book
right after a transaction.13 For a given hour of the trading day, we then average the book spread over all the stocks
and trading days and present its evolution over the trading day in panel (b) of Figure 6. The book bid-ask spread
is high at the beginning of the day and decreases almost monotonically throughout the trading day. These intraday
patterns for volume and bid-ask spread point to traders’ patience rather than their information as the driving force.
More importantly, the patterns also suggest that there might be more patient traders at the beginning of the trading day
and less at the end of the day, in line with our other sets of results.
[Insert Figure 6 here]
So far, we have provided empirical evidence in support of several predictions of Foucault et al. (2005) that point
to the existence of more patient traders at the beginning of the trading day and less towards the end of the trading day,
which is in line with our expectations. We now turn our attention to how the effect of slope variables changes over the
trading day. We expect the slope variables of the higher levels to have greater (in absolute value) immediate effects
on prices than the corresponding slopes of the lower levels at the beginning of the trading day. To test this, we ﬁrst
estimate the empirical model in Equation 4 for each stock, trading hour and day separately and obtain a panel data
set of coefﬁcient estimates.14 Figure 7 presents these coefﬁcient estimates for different trading hours averaged over
stocks and trading days. The positive lines in Figure 7 are for the ask side, suggesting that the coefﬁcient estimates are
on average positive for the ask side, while the negative ones are for the bid side, suggesting that they are on average
negative. This is consistent with our ﬁndings based on the estimation using the whole sample. Regardless of the side
12We also considered volume in Euros rather than the number of transactions and observed the similar U-shape pattern over the trading day.
13We also considered snapshots of the limit order book right before a transaction and our results are very similar to those presented.
14We estimate the empirical model in Equation 4 only if there are at least 100 observations for a given stock, trading hour and day.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

considered, the coefﬁcient estimates on all slope variables, on average, decrease in magnitude over the trading day.
This pattern is more pronounced for the coefﬁcients on the slope variables of the higher levels. More importantly, the
coefﬁcients on the slope variables of the higher levels are, on average, greater in magnitude than the corresponding
coefﬁcients on the slope variables of the lower levels at the beginning of the trading day and smaller in magnitude at
the end of the trading day. In other words, the slope variables of the higher levels have greater (in absolute value for
the bid side) immediate effects on prices than the corresponding slopes of the lower levels for an average stock in the
DAX30 index in our sample period. This in turn provides empirical evidence that slope variables of the higher levels
should have greater (in absolute value) immediate effects on prices than the corresponding slopes of the lower levels
when there are more patient traders at the beginning of the trading day, in line with our expectations.
[Insert Figure 7 here]
We now test whether this relationship between traders’ patience and the effects of slope variables on prices is
statistically signiﬁcant. To do this, we regress the differences between the coefﬁcient estimates of the higher and lower
levels on dummy variables for the ﬁrst and last hour of trading. These results are presented in Table 6. For the ask side,
the dummy variable for the ﬁrst hour of trading has signiﬁcantly positive coefﬁcient estimates, whereas the dummy
variable for the last hour of trading has signiﬁcantly negative coefﬁcient estimates. The results are very similar for the
bid side with opposite signs. This suggests that slope variables of the higher levels should have signiﬁcantly greater (in
absolute value) immediate effects on prices than the corresponding slopes of the lower levels at the beginning of the
trading day when there are more patient traders and signiﬁcantly smaller immediate effects at the end of the trading
day when there are less patient traders. We also considered dummy variables based on half-hour and two-hour periods
at the beginning and end of the trading day. Our ﬁndings are very similar to those presented in Table 6.
[Insert Table 6 here]
Finally, we analyze how the differences between the coefﬁcient estimates of the higher and lower levels change
directly as a function of traders’ patience, proxied by the convexity of the limit order book. Given that the convexity of
the limit order book is a relatively noisy proxy for traders’ patience, we use a non-parametric approach to the effect of
this noise on our results. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst sort the coefﬁcient estimates for the ask (bid) side into deciles based on
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

the convexity of the ask (bid) side and compute the average difference between the coefﬁcient estimates of the higher
and lower levels. Figure 8 presents these average differences for ask and bid sides along with their 95% conﬁdence
intervals. For the ask side, the difference is signiﬁcantly positive when the convexity is low. This suggests that the
effect of the higher levels on prices is signiﬁcantly greater than that of the lower levels. As the convexity increases,
this difference decreases and it becomes signiﬁcantly negative for high levels of convexity. The results are very similar
for the bid side with opposite signs. These results provide additional empirical evidence in line with our expectations.
More precisely, the slopes of the higher levels have signiﬁcantly greater (in absolute value) immediate effects on prices
than the slopes of the lower levels when there are more patient traders, as proxied by convexity, whereas the opposite
holds when there are less patient traders in the market.
[Insert Figure 8 here]
8
Economic Value of Asymmetric Effects
8.1
Basic Trading Strategy
Our empirical results discussed so far provide statistically signiﬁcant evidence in support of certain asymmetries
between the effects of different slope measures on price dynamics. In this section, we show that these asymmetries can
also be economically signiﬁcant. We do this by comparing the performances of a high-frequency day-trading strategy
that ignores these asymmetries and a strategy that uses them. Our unrestricted strategy employs the return equation
of the VAR system, Equation (5a), to forecast midquote returns at each transaction period, whereas the competing
strategies employ restricted versions of this equation such that a chosen pair of slope variables has symmetric effects
on price dynamics.15
To be consistent with the idea of high-frequency trading, we consider the possibility of trading at every transaction
period and, thus, focus on the economic value of the asymmetries in the overall effects of different slope variables,
rather than the asymmetries in their cumulative effects . To this end, we impose the restrictions implied by hypotheses
15In all these forecasting models, we choose to exclude the contemporaneous effect of trade direction on returns. As discussed above, any
contemporaneous effect of the trade direction on returns is not a causal relationship, even if the trade direction is observed right before the return
is calculated. Nevertheless, we also considered trading strategies based on forecasting models that include the contemporaneous effect of trade
direction on returns. Our results based on this VAR model are similar to those based on the restricted VAR model and, thus, are not presented here
in detail but are available upon request.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

H1a, H1b, H2a, and H2b one at a time on Equation (5a) and use these versions as our forecasting models in these
so-called restricted strategies. The restricted strategies thus ignore a certain type of asymmetry in forecasting price
movements. Comparing the performances of the restricted strategies and the unrestricted strategy allows us to evaluate
the economic value of different asymmetries. To give a more concrete example, in the restricted strategy based on
H1a, we restrict the coefﬁcients on the ﬁrst lags on ask-side slopes based on higher and lower levels to be the same.
This forces the ask-side slope measures to have symmetric immediate effects on prices while allowing for all other
potential asymmetries in their effects on prices. If the performance of the unrestricted strategy is higher than that of
the corresponding restricted strategy, we argue that the asymmetry between the immediate effects of these two slope
measures is economically important.
The trading strategy we consider is similar to that discussed in Kozhan and Salmon (2012) and can be summarized
as follows: At each transaction period t for a given stock, we take a snapshot of the limit order book immediately
(less than a millisecond) after observing the transaction, in line with our empirical model discussed in Section 3. We
then compute the forecast of the midquote return in the next transaction period t + 1, ˆrt+1, based on this snapshot
and a given forecasting model, and then reevaluate our existing position if the return forecast is either greater than a
nonnegative threshold, κ, or less than −κ. We consider a forecast greater than κ, i.e. ˆrt+1 > κ, to be a buy signal
and do one of the following actions depending on our existing position in the stock: (1) buy one share of the stock if
we do not already have an existing position in the stock; (2) buy two shares of the stock if we have an existing short
position in the stock, i.e. close the short position and take a long position of one share; (3) do nothing if we already
have a long position. Similarly, we consider a forecast less than −κ, i.e. ˆrt+1 < −κ, to be a sell signal and do one
of the following actions depending on our existing position in the stock: (1) short-sell one share of the stock if we do
not already have an existing position in the stock; (2) short-sell two shares of the stock if we have an existing long
position in the stock, i.e. close the long position and take a short position of one share; (3) do nothing if we already
have a short position. We implicitly assume that our trading does not alter the dynamics of the relationship between
returns, trade directions, and limit order book. We believe that this is a reasonable assumption because we consider
trading at most two shares at a time and holding a short or long position of one share at any point in time. The effect
of our trading and position should be negligible given that the limit order book depth of stocks in our sample is large.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

We also close any existing position at the end of each trading day and, thus, do not hold an overnight position, in line
with the idea of day trading. We evaluate the performance of each strategy based on its average cumulative monthly
return.
In this paper, we focus on in-sample results based on the model estimated using tick-by-tick data from June 2011
due to the sheer size of the data set as well as the time it takes to run the trading algorithms.16 Table 7 presents the
differences between the monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted and restricted trading strategies. A positive
number implies that the unrestricted strategy provides, on average, higher monthly cumulative returns than the trading
strategy that uses the restricted forecasting model implied by hypotheses in the corresponding column heading. In
other words, a positive number suggests that a given asymmetry is economically important. Compared with the strategies imposing the restrictions implied by H1a and H1b on the empirical model, the unrestricted strategy provides a
higher cumulative return for 25 and 24 out of 30 stocks and statistically so for 9 and 11 stocks, respectively. Averaged
over all stocks, the unrestricted strategy provides cumulative returns that are, respectively, 16.2 and 16.9 basis points
higher than the strategies imposing the restrictions implied by H1a and H1b, with Bonferroni p-values lower than 5%.
The results are even stronger for the economic importance of asymmetries in the overall effects of slope measures.
Indeed, the unrestricted strategy provides cumulative returns that are higher than the strategies imposing the restrictions implied by H2a and H2b for 26 and 25 out of 30 stocks respectively, and statistically so for 14 and 10 stocks
respectively, with an average outperformance of 24.6 and 24.2 basis points, respectively. Overall, these results suggest
that asymmetries in the immediate and overall effects of both ask- and bid-side slopes are economically important;
ignoring them might have cost a trader between 16 and 25 basis points in return in June 2011.
[Insert Table 7 here]
8.2
Alternative Trading Settings
In this section, we analyze the robustness of our results on the economic importance of asymmetries to alternative
empirical choices. We start with several remarks regarding our main set of results presented in Table 7. First, as
in Kozhan and Salmon (2012), κ can be considered a parameter to ﬁlter out potentially weak signals, and trading
16Our results are in-sample results in the sense that we use the same data period to estimate parameters of the forecasting models and to test the
relative performances of trading strategies based on these forecasting models.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

frequency decreases as higher values of κ are considered. In our main set of results, we consider a κ of zero. In other
words, we only consider the sign, not the strength, of our forecasts. This allows us to analyze the economic value of
different asymmetries in forecasting the direction of prices. In robustness checks, we also consider alternative values
for κ and, thus, take the strength of our forecasts into account in our trading strategies. Second, our main empirical
results are based on the assumption that we can trade at midquote prices, instead of the more realistic assumption of
trading at the best bid and ask prices. We made this assumption mainly to be consistent with our empirical models,
which forecast midquote returns. This assumption also allows us to analyze the economic value of the asymmetries
without having to worry about transaction costs. Nevertheless, we test the robustness of our results to trading at the
best bid and ask, rather than midquote, prices. Third, we calculate our trading signals based on the snapshots of the
limit order book immediately (less than a millisecond) after a transaction and assume that we can trade at the prices
in that snapshot of the limit order book. However, in reality we can neither observe a transaction (and the snapshot
of the limit order book right after it) instantaneously nor trade at prices observed in this snapshot of the limit order
book. This is due to latency in different legs of the trading process where information ﬁrst ﬂows from the exchange
to the trader’s system, and is then processed by the trader, and an order is ﬁnally sent from the trader’s system to the
exchange. Thus, a trader will trade based on information and prices different from those in the observed snapshot
of the limit order book.17 Ideally, the effects of the three legs of the information latency on the economic values of
asymmetries should be examined separately, yet this is difﬁcult because we need to know the time duration of each
leg. Instead, we take a very simplistic approach and assume that we can only trade at prices observed in the snapshot
of the limit order book 500 milliseconds after a transaction.
Trading at Different Thresholds
We ﬁrst show that asymmetries continue to be economically important when we take into account not only the sign
but also the strength of forecasts by considering alternative values of the threshold parameter κ. For each stock, we
consider values of κ that correspond to 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% and 50% of the standard deviation of its tick-by-tick
returns in June 2011. As mentioned above, κ can be considered a parameter to ﬁlter out potentially weak signals, and
trading frequency decreases as higher values of κ are considered. In other words, we can trade potentially at each
17Hasbrouck (2018) discusses the costs associated with traders’ latencies.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

observed transaction period if we completely ignore the trading signal. For example, in our main set of results where
we set κ to zero, we trade, on average, approximately 30% to 35% of the time, i.e. 30% to 35% of all transaction
periods, for a given stock in a given day. On the other hand, when we set κ to 50% of the corresponding standard
deviation, we trade less than 1% of the time. Thus, choosing higher values of κ also allows us to analyze the effect
of the trading frequency on our results in addition to the effect of jointly considering the sign and strength of our
forecasts. We ﬁnd that the number of trades indeed decreases on average when we consider higher values of κ, as
expected. Furthermore, the absolute performances of all trading strategies, also not presented, decrease as we trade
less and less frequently at higher values of κ.
[Insert Table 8 here]
Table 8 presents the difference between the cumulative returns of the unrestricted strategy and the trading strategy
that uses the restricted forecasting model implied by hypotheses in the corresponding column heading, averaged
over all stocks and trading days in June 2011. All return differences are positive and statistically signiﬁcant at 5%,
suggesting that the asymmetries in the immediate and overall effects of slope measures continue to be economically
important when we consider alternative values of κ. There is a small tendency for the return differences to increase as
we consider higher values of κ, suggesting that taking both the sign and strength of the signal provides the day trader
with further economic proﬁts. The asymmetries in the overall effects of slope measures continue to be slightly more
important economically compared with the asymmetries in the immediate effects for different values of κ.
Trading at the Best Bid and Ask Prices
We now consider the effect of trading at the best bid and ask prices corresponding to the direction of the required
position. We should note that monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted and restricted strategies are, on average,
negative when we assume that we trade at the best bid and ask prices. This is in contrast to mostly positive average
returns when we assume that we can trade at midquote prices. In other words, positive proﬁts of all strategies are
negated by transaction costs, in line with the ﬁndings of Kozhan and Salmon (2012). Nevertheless, Table 9 shows that
the return differences between the unrestricted and restricted strategies are positive not only on average but also for
most ﬁrms in our sample when we trade at the best bid and ask prices with a κ of zero. This is signiﬁcantly so for all
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

asymmetries at the 5% signiﬁcance level when the empirical evidence for all stocks is considered jointly and for eight
to twelve stocks depending on the asymmetry when the empirical evidence for each stock is considered separately.
We also ﬁnd that these results mostly hold when we consider higher values of κ up to 25% of the standard deviation
of tick-by-tick returns for a given stock.
[Insert Table 9 here]
Trading at a Slower Speed
As mentioned above, in our main sets of results we assume that we can observe a transaction and the associated
snapshot of the limit order book and trade at prices in this snapshot without any delay. However, in reality any trader
who wants to implement such a trading strategy faces several delays. First, the trader observes the transaction and the
associated snapshot of the limit order book with a delay, which corresponds to the time it takes for this information to
travel from the exchange to the trader’s system. Second, whether the trader is a human or a computer, it takes time to
process this information. Finally, if the trader decides to trade based on this information, it takes time for the order to
arrive at and be executed by the exchange’s system.
With each delay, the market conditions can undoubtedly change and the trader’s information can become stale quite
rapidly in today’s extremely fast markets. As a result, the trader would make decisions based on stale information.
Ideally, one should distinguish between the ﬁrst leg of the trading process during which the information travels from
the exchange’s systems to the trader’s system (and is processed by the trader) and the second leg, during which the
information ﬂows in the other direction. It would be intriguing to analyze the effects of these legs of the information
delay on the economic values of asymmetries separately, yet this is relatively difﬁcult because these delays can be
random and can change signiﬁcantly from trader to trader depending on the physical proximity of the trader to the
exchange and the information processing speeds.
We thus adopt an approach similar to the one discussed in Kozhan and Tham (2012), which can be considered as an
approximation for the effect of these delays on the economic value of asymmetries. However, contrary to Kozhan and
Tham (2012), we assume there is a positive delay in the ﬁrst leg of the trading process and that the trader can observe
a transaction (and the associated snapshot of the limit order book) and react to it after having considered the state of
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

the entire book, which is an important consideration in our model. The violation of this assumption in reality might
make the trader change the forecasting model due to the associated delay. In the second leg of the trading process, we
assume that there is still a positive delay. In other words, once a trader places an order, it takes time to be executed
by the exchange’s systems, which is a reasonable assumption for the year 2011. We consider a total latency of 500
milliseconds for all legs of the trading process. This implies that the orders will be executed at prices in the snapshot
of the limit order book observed exactly 500 milliseconds after a transaction. The average latency on the Xetra system,
i.e. the average time required for an order to travel from a trader’s system across the network to its backend and for
conﬁrmation of its receipt to be sent back to the trader, is about 13 milliseconds but we do not know which information
is treated by the average trader. A delay of 500 milliseconds including the treatment of the information in the entire
order book can be considered as relatively long compared with the average latency in the system. Nevertheless, we
also considered a delay of 100 milliseconds, and our results remain similar to those presented in Table 10.
[Insert Table 10 here]
Our results can be summarized as follows: We ﬁnd that the absolute performance of all trading strategies when
we trade with a latency of 500 milliseconds is much lower than that based on a latency of zero milliseconds, in line
with our expectations. More importantly, Table 10 presents the differences between the monthly cumulative returns
of the unrestricted and restricted trading strategies when we trade at midquote prices with a κ of zero and a latency of
500 milliseconds, and shows that our main set of results is mostly robust to trading slower speeds.18 For example, the
number of stocks for which asymmetries are both economically important and statistically signiﬁcant is similar to our
main set of results. However, as expected, the return differences are, on average, smaller than those in our main set of
results, which is also reﬂected in the Bonferroni p-values of positive return differences.
9
Conclusion
In this paper, we analyze whether different parts of the LOB affect immediate and cumulative price dynamics in
line with our predictions based on recent theoretical models. To do this, we use high-frequency LOB data from the
18We also considered trading at the best bid and ask prices as well as at higher values of κ, and with a latency of 500 milliseconds. Our results
remain qualitatively similar.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Xetra electronic trading system for all 30 stocks in the DAX30 index. We distinguish between not only the bid and ask
sides, but also their lower and higher levels, since the recent theoretical literature shows that traders might strategically
choose to place their orders in different levels of the book depending on various factors. We consider one such factor,
namely, traders’ patience, and we analyze how different levels of the LOB affect future price dynamics based on this
factor. If traders’ patience is present in the data, we expect the ask-side slope to have a positive effect on prices and
the bid-side slope to have a negative one, regardless of the levels used to measure them. Furthermore, we also expect
the slope of the higher levels to have a stronger effect on prices when the LOB is less convex, which would indicate
the presence of patient traders in the higher levels.
We analyze these predictions by estimating a separate linear vector autoregression that includes the midquote
return, trade direction, and four slope measures, i.e., the bid- and ask-side slopes based on the lower and higher levels,
for each stock. We ﬁnd that ask-side slopes have mostly positive effects on prices, while those of the bid-side slopes
are mostly negative, regardless of the levels used to measure them, suggesting that traders’ patience might be present
in our sample. We then turn our attention to the relative magnitudes of these effects. We ﬁnd that the ask- and bidside slopes of the higher levels have signiﬁcantly greater (in absolute value) immediate effects on prices than do the
corresponding slopes of the lower levels, for most of the stocks based on the estimation of our model using the whole
sample period. This ﬁnding suggests that the differences observed between the effect magnitudes might be due to the
existence of patient traders in our sample, but no formal link can be established between these two phenomena. To do
this, we consider an intraday analysis of how traders’ patience and the effects of slope measures on prices change over
the trading day. In line with our expectations, we ﬁnd that the effects of the slope variables of the higher levels are
indeed greater in magnitude than those of the lower levels, at the beginning of the trading day, when traders are more
patient, as proxied by the convexity of the LOB.
Having found statistically signiﬁcant evidence in support of asymmetries between the effects of different slope
measures on price dynamics, we also demonstrate that these asymmetries can be economically signiﬁcant. We do
this through a simple high-frequency day-trading exercise comparing the performance of strategies that ignore the
asymmetries and a strategy that uses them. In this framework, we show that the unrestricted strategy provides monthly
proﬁts that are, on average, 16 to 25 basis points higher than each restricted strategy.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

We would like to thank to an anonymous referee, Yann Bilodeau, Michael Brennan, Dennis Chung, Sophie Moinas,
Maureen O’Hara, Stephen Sapp, Gabriel Yergeau and participants at the Northern Finance Association Meetings and
Financial Management Association Asia/Paciﬁc Meetings for comments on earlier versions of this paper. We would
also like to thank Yann Bilodeau for his help in constructing the data set. This research received ﬁnancial support
from SSHRC Canada [435-2019-1183], the Canada Foundation for Innovation [36738] and Fonds de Recherche sur
la Soci´et´e et la Culture de Qu´ebec [2019-NP-253336].
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

References
Beltran-Lopez, H., Giot, P., Grammig, J., 2009. Commonalities in the Order Book. Financial Markets and Portfolio
Management 23, 209–242.
Bhattacharya, A., Saar, G., 2016. Limit Order Markets under Asymmetric Information. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3688473 .
Biais, B., Hillion, P., Spatt, C., 1995. An Empirical Analysis of the Limit Order Book and the Order Flow in the Paris
Bourse. Journal of Finance 50, 1655–1689.
Bilodeau, Y., 2013. Xetra parser. [computer software], HEC Montreal .
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., Riordan, R., 2016. Price Discovery without Trading: Evidence from Limit Orders.
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2655927 .
Cao, C., Hansch, O., Wang, X., 2009. The Information Content of an Open Limit-Order Book. Journal of Futures
Markets 29, 16–41.
Chakravarty, S., Holden, C. W., 1995. An Integrated Model Of Market And Limit Orders. Journal of Financial Intermediation 4, 213 – 241.
Dufour, A., Engle, R. F., 2000. Time and the Price Impact of a Trade. Journal of Finance 55, 2467–2498.
Foucault, T., Kadan, O., Kandel, E., 2005. Limit Order Book as a Market for Liquidity. Review of Financial Studies
18, 1171–1217.
Glosten, L. R., 1994. Is the Electronic Open Limit Order Book Inevitable? Journal of Finance 49, 1127–1161.
Glosten, L. R., Milgrom, P. R., 1985. Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices In a Specialist Market with Heterogeneously
Informed Traders. Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100.
Goettler, R. L., Parlour, C. A., Rajan, U., 2009. Informed Traders and Limit Order Markets. Journal of Financial
Economics 93, 67 – 87.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Grifﬁths, M. D., Smith, B. F., Turnbull, D. A. S., White, R. W., 2000. The Costs and Determinants of Order Aggressiveness. Journal of Financial Economics 56, 65 – 88.
Hasbrouck, J., 1991. Measuring the Information Content of Stock Trades. Journal of Finance 46, 179–207.
Hasbrouck, J., 2018. High-Frequency Quoting: Short-Term Volatility in Bids and Offers. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 53, 613–641.
Kalay, A., Wohl, A., 2009. Detecting Liquidity Traders. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44, 29–54.
Kaniel, R., Liu, H., 2006. So What Orders Do Informed Traders Use? Journal of Business 79, 1867–1913.
Kozhan, R., Salmon, M., 2012. The Information Content of A Limit Order Book: The Case of an FX Market. Journal
of Financial Markets 15, 1–28.
Kozhan, R., Tham, W. W., 2012. Execution Risk in High-Frequency Arbitrage. Management Science 58, 2131 – 2149.
Kumar, P., Seppi, D. J., 1994. Limit and Market Orders with Optimizing Traders. Working paper Carnegie Mellon
University .
Kyle, A. S., 1985. Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading. Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
Lee, C., Ready, M., 1991. Inferring Trade Direction from Intraday Data. Journal of Finance 46, 733–746.
Newey, W. K., West, K. D., 1987. A Simple, Positive Semi-Deﬁnite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix. Econometrica 55, 703–708.
Rock, K., 1996. The Specialist’s Order Book and Price Anomalies. Working Paper, Harvard University .
Rosu, I., 2009. A Dynamic Model of the Limit Order Book. Review of Financial Studies 22, 4601.
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Figure 1: Snapshots of the Limit Order Book for ALV on June 1, 2011
(a) Snapshot at 10:30:00.000
0
1
2
2.5
×104
95.7
95.8
95.9
96
96.1
96.2
96.3
96.4
96.5
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)=1.84 ×10-5
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)=2.05 ×10-5
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)=-1.97 ×10-5
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)=-1.14 ×10-5
(b) Snapshot at 11:30:00.000
0
1
2
2.5
×104
95.7
95.8
95.9
96
96.1
96.2
96.3
96.4
96.5
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)=0.94 ×10-5
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)=1.36 ×10-5
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)=-0.53 ×10-5
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)=-1.70 ×10-5
Note: This ﬁgure presents two snapshots of the limit order book for ALV on 1 June 2011. Panel (a) and (b) present the snapshot at 10:30:00.000 and 11:30:00.000,
respectively. The x axis presents the cumulative quantity available and the y axis presents the price in the ﬁrst 20 levels of the limit order book. The diamonds and
squares represent different levels of the ask and bid sides, respectively. The annotation displays the corresponding ask- and bid-side slope measures between the ﬁrst and
ﬁfth levels and between the ﬁfth and twentieth levels.
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Figure 2: Average Shape of the Limit Order Book at the Beginning, Middle and End of the Trading Day
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Note: This ﬁgure presents the shape of the normalized limit order book during a given hour at the beginning (9:00-10:00 (circles)), middle (12:00 and 13:00 (squares))
and end (16:30-17:30 (diamonds)) of the trading day averaged over all snapshots, stocks and trading days. We normalize the prices and quantities at each level so that
we can average them over different stocks and trading days. The price at a given level for a given snapshot is normalized by dividing the difference between that price
and the midquote price by the difference between price in the 20th level and the midquote price for that snapshot. Mathematically, the normalized prices for the ask
and bid sides at time t are respectively given by (Pl, tA −Mt)/(P20, tA −Mt) and (Mt −Pl, tB)/(Mt −P20, tB) where Mt is the midquote given by
(P1, tA + P2, tB)/2 and Pl, tA and Pl, tB are, respectively, the price at level l of the ask and bid sides for = l = 1, 2, . . . , 20. To make the graph easier to
read, we use the negative of the normalized prices for the bid side. The cumulative quantity at a given level for a given snapshot is normalized by dividing it by the total
cumulative quantity available in the ﬁrst 20 levels of the corresponding side. The normalized price and cumulative quantity are by deﬁnition between zero and one for
all limit order book snapshots and thus can be averaged across stocks and time periods. For a given level of the limit order book, the ﬁgure presents the normalized price
and cumulative quantity averaged over all snapshots for all stocks and trading days during the same hour.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Figure 3: Limit Order Book Convexity Over the Trading Day
(a) Ask Side Convexity
9:00-10:00
10:00-11:00
11:00-12:00
12:00-12:30
12:30-13:30
13:30-14:30
14:30-15:30
15:30-16:30
16:30-17:30
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
(b) Bid Side Convexity
9:00-10:00
10:00-11:00
11:00-12:00
12:00-12:30
12:30-13:30
13:30-14:30
14:30-15:30
15:30-16:30
16:30-17:30
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Note: This ﬁgure presents the average convexity measures of the ask (panel (a)) and bid (panel (b)) sides over the trading day. The convexity of the limit order
book is deﬁned as the ratio of the slopes of the higher and lower levels. Mathematically, the convexity is measured as SA
5,20,t/SA
1,5,t −1 for the ask side and
|SB
5,20,t|/|SB
1,5,t| −1 for the bid side, where Si
l1,l2,t is the slope of a given side i = A, B between levels l1 and l2 of the snapshot at time t as described in the
text. For a given stock, we ﬁrst compute the convexity of ask and bid sides of its limit order book for each snapshot and then average them over each hour of the trading
day. For a given trading hour, we then compute the average convexity measure (solid line) and the 25th and 75th quantiles (dashed lines) over all stocks and trading
days.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Figure 4: The Relation Between Limit Order Book Convexity and Trade Size
(a) Ask Side
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
(b) Bid Side
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Note: This ﬁgure presents how the convexities of the ask (panel (a)) and bid (panel (b)) sides right before a transaction vary as a function of the number of shares traded
in that transaction. The convexity of the limit order book is deﬁned as the ratio of the slopes of the higher and lower levels. Mathematically, the convexity is measured
as SA
5,20,t/SA
1,5,t −1 for the ask side and |SB
5,20,t|/|SB
1,5,t| −1 for the bid side, where Si
l1,l2,t is the slope of a given side i = A, B between levels l1 and l2
of the snapshot at time t as described in the text. For a given transaction, we measure limit order book convexity based on the snapshot one millisecond prior to that
transaction. We classify each trade for a given stock into deciles based on breakpoints for that speciﬁc stock. The x-axis presents the deciles of the trade size and the
y-axis presents the 25th (lower dashed lines), 50th (middle solid lines) and 75th (upper dashed lines) percentiles of convexity measures for that decile.
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Figure 5: The Relation Between Limit Order Book Convexity and Daily Volatility
(a) Ask Side
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
(b) Bid Side
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Note: This ﬁgure presents how the convexities of the ask (panel (a)) and bid (panel (b)) sides vary as a function of daily volatility. The convexity of the limit order
book is deﬁned as the ratio of the slopes of the higher and lower levels. Mathematically, the convexity is measured as SA
5,20,t/SA
1,5,t −1 for the ask side and
|SB
5,20,t|/|SB
1,5,t| −1 for the bid side, where Si
l1,l2,t is the slope of a given side i = A, B between levels l1 and l2 of the snapshot at time t as described in the
text. For a given stock-day pair, we compute the daily realized volatility as the sum of squared 5-minute midquote returns for that stock on that day. We classify each
trading day for a given stock into deciles based on breakpoints for that speciﬁc stock. The x-axis presents the deciles of daily realized volatility and the y-axis presents
the 25th (lower dashed lines), 50th (middle solid lines) and 75th (upper dashed lines) percentiles of convexity measures for that decile.
Figure 6: Book Spread and Volume Over the Trading Day
(a) Volume
9:00-10:00
10:00-11:00
11:00-12:00
12:00-12:30
12:30-13:30
13:30-14:30
14:30-15:30
15:30-16:30
16:30-17:30
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
(b) Book Spread
9:00-10:00
10:00-11:00
11:00-12:00
12:00-12:30
12:30-13:30
13:30-14:30
14:30-15:30
15:30-16:30
16:30-17:30
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
10-3
Note: This ﬁgure presents how the volume (panel (a)) and book spread (panel (b)) vary over the trading day. We compute the book bid-ask spread, deﬁned as the depth
weighted ask price minus the depth weighted bid price over the ﬁrst 20 levels, based on the snapshot of the limit order book one millisecond after a transaction. For a
given stock, we ﬁrst compute book spread for each snapshot after a transaction and then average them over each hour of the trading day. For a given trading hour, we
then compute the average book spread (solid line) and the 25th and 75th percentiles (dashed lines) over all stocks and trading days. The volume of a transaction is
deﬁned as the number of shares traded. For a given hour of the trading day, we compute the average volume (solid line) and the 25th and 75th percentiles (dashed
lines) over all stocks and trading days. The x-axis presents the hours of the trading day, with the exception of the thirty minute period between 12:00-12:30. The y-axis
presents the average, the 25th and 75th percentiles of the variable of interest.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Figure 7: Immediate Effects of Slope Variables Over the Trading Day
9:00-10:00
10:00-11:00
11:00-12:00
12:00-12:30
12:30-13:30
13:30-14:30
14:30-15:30
15:30-16:30
16:30-17:30
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Note: This ﬁgure presents how the immediate effects of different slope variables on returns vary over the trading day. The immediate effects are the coefﬁcient estimates
on the ﬁrst lags of a given slope variable from the estimation of the empirical model in Equation 4. We estimate the empirical model in Equation 4 for each stock, trading
day and hour separately. For a given trading hour, we compute the average of the immediate effects over all stocks and trading days. The ﬁgure presents these averages
over different hours of the trading day. The immediate effects of the slopes of both lower and higher levels of the ask side are on average positive and thus presented
above the zero line in the graph. The solid line above the zero line presents the immediate effect of the slope of the lower levels of the ask side, while the dashed line
above the zero line presents that of the higher levels. The immediate effects of the slopes of both the lower and higher levels of the bid side are on average negative and
thus presented below the zero line in the graph. The solid line below the zero line presents the immediate effect of the slope of the lower levels of the ask side while the
dashed line below the zero line presents that of the higher levels.
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Figure 8: The Effect of Convexity on the Difference Between the Immediate Effects of Slopes of the Higher and Lower
Levels
(a) Ask Side
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.7
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
(b) Bid Side
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Note: This ﬁgure presents how the differences between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower level varies with limit order book convexity. We
ﬁrst estimate the empirical model in Equation 5 for each stock, trading hour and day with at least 100 observations separately and obtain a panel data set of coefﬁcient
estimates. We then compute the differences between the immediate effects of the higher and lower levels for ask and bid sides. We obtain the average ask and bid side
convexities using limit order book snapshots for each stock, trading hour and day. We then group each stock, trading hour and day into one of the deciles based on the
average convexity of the ask side in panel (a) and that of the bid side in panel (b). The x-axis presents these deciles and the y-axis presents the mean (solid line) and its
95% conﬁdence intervals (dashed lines) of the difference between the immediate effects of the higher and lower levels that are in a given decile.
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 1: List of Stocks and Their Characteristics
Ticker
Company Name
Avg. Market
Avg. Daily
Avg. Daily
Avg. Daily
Std. Dev. of
Capitalization
Trading Volume
Turnover
Return
Daily Return
(in billion Euros)
(in million shares)
(in percentage)
(in percentage)
(in percentage)
ADS
ADIDAS AG
10.372
1.084
0.518%
0.082%
1.758%
ALV
ALLIANZ SE
41.942
2.579
0.568%
-0.080%
1.485%
BAS
BASF SE
55.074
4.355
0.474%
-0.115%
1.658%
BAYN
BAYER AG
44.467
3.062
0.370%
-0.116%
1.419%
BEI
BEIERSDORF AG
10.199
0.476
0.210%
0.031%
0.913%
BMW
BAYER MOTOREN WERKE AG
35.468
2.969
0.493%
0.141%
1.844%
CBK
COMMERZBANK
11.422
47.425
1.390%
-0.342%
3.730%
DAI
DAIMLER AG
51.039
4.824
0.453%
-0.049%
1.562%
DB1
DEUTSCHE BOERSE AG
10.375
1.398
0.717%
-0.015%
1.520%
DBK
DEUTSCHE BANK AG
35.703
6.862
0.816%
0.003%
1.742%
DPW
DEUTSCHE POST AG
15.627
4.436
0.367%
0.026%
1.172%
DTE
DEUTSCHE TELEKOM
45.090
14.698
0.339%
0.031%
1.396%
EOAN
E.ON SE
40.915
10.682
0.534%
-0.174%
1.524%
FME
FRESENIUS MEDICAL CARE AG&CO
14.601
0.717
0.241%
-0.051%
1.170%
FRE
FRESENIUS SE & CO KGAA
9.837
0.342
0.219%
0.039%
1.269%
HEI
HEIDELBERGCEMENT AG
8.188
1.036
0.552%
-0.354%
1.889%
HEN3
HENKEL AG & CO KGAA
8.164
0.786
0.441%
-0.034%
1.161%
IFX
INFINEON TECHNOLOGIES AG
7.604
12.378
1.139%
-0.020%
1.886%
LHA
DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AG
6.435
3.707
0.810%
0.005%
1.576%
LIN
LINDE AG
18.788
0.518
0.306%
0.077%
1.238%
MAN
MAN SE
12.301
0.956
0.678%
-0.092%
1.564%
MEO
METRO AG
13.989
1.115
0.344%
-0.271%
1.384%
MRK
MERCK KGAA
4.670
0.483
0.748%
0.197%
1.413%
MUV2
MUNICH RE CO
19.884
0.868
0.461%
-0.058%
1.181%
RWE
RWE AG
22.476
2.708
0.517%
-0.205%
1.405%
SAP
SAP SE
50.418
3.847
0.314%
-0.049%
1.205%
SDF
K&S AG
9.614
1.185
0.619%
0.107%
1.367%
SIE
SIEMENS AG
80.435
3.146
0.344%
-0.097%
1.306%
TKA
THYSSENKRUPP AG
15.510
3.114
0.605%
0.121%
2.002%
VOW3
VOLKSWAGEN AG
20.302
1.186
0.697%
0.188%
1.803%
Mean
24.364
4.765
0.543%
-0.036%
1.551%
Median
15.568
2.643
0.505%
-0.027%
1.452%
Min
4.670
0.342
0.210%
-0.354%
0.913%
Max
80.435
47.425
1.390%
0.197%
3.730%
Note: This table presents the average market capitalization (in billion Euros), the average daily trading volume (in million shares), the average daily
turnover (in percentage) deﬁned as the trading volume divided by the number of shares outstanding, the average daily (log) return and its standard
deviation (in percentage) for the 30 stocks in the DAX30 index over July 2010, May 2011, and June 2011. All data are from the Compustat Global
Security Daily ﬁles and based on the primary issues.
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 2: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.346
0.169
0.435
0.039
-0.365
-0.168
-0.464
-0.038
Median
0.328
0.167
0.440
0.031
-0.355
-0.170
-0.472
-0.030
Std. Dev.
0.125
0.044
0.166
0.043
0.141
0.041
0.200
0.039
Positive
30
30
29
27
0
0
1
4
Signiﬁcantly Positive
30
28
28
19
0
0
1
1
Negative
0
0
1
3
30
30
29
26
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
0
3
30
28
29
18
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of
the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over July 2010, May 2011, and June 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in
the return equation 5a (αz,1). The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean,
median and standard deviations are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which
the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number
of stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance
level.
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 3: The Relation Between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
23
6
αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
7
24
H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%
25
26
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
19
5
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
6
21
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers, with the exception of the last
row, are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of
stocks for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
The row “H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of
the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is
rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance
level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is computed as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith
stock.
Table 4: The Relation Between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
178.140
185.874
Median of F-statistic for H2
167.821
170.897
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
78.368
80.115
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
30
30
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stock separately. The mean, median and standard deviation are
computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks (out of
30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal is rejected at the
5% signiﬁcance level. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our
sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is computed as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi
is the p-value for H2 for the ith stock.
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 5: The Difference Between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
0.177
0.396
-0.197
-0.426
Median
0.156
0.407
-0.176
-0.440
Std. Dev.
0.101
0.141
0.120
0.178
Positive
30
29
0
1
Sign. Positive
29
29
0
1
Negative
0
1
30
29
Sign. Negative
0
0
29
29
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is computed as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 6: The Effect of Trading Hour on the Difference Between Immediate Effects of the Higher and Lower Level
Slopes
Ask
Bid
Constant
-0.0129
0.0004
First Hour Dummy
0.1181***
-0.0796**
Last Hour Dummy
-0.1224***
0.1657***
Note: This table presents the coefﬁcient estimates from a regression of the difference between immediate effects of the higher and lower level slopes
on a constant and on dummy variables for the ﬁrst and last hour of trading. We estimate the empirical model in Equation 4 for each stock, trading
hour and day separately and obtain a panel data set of the coefﬁcient estimates on the ﬁrst lag of different slope variables, i.e. their immediate
effects. We regress the differences between the immediate effects of the higher and lower level slopes on a constant and on dummy variables for the
ﬁrst and last hour of trading. ***, ** and * denote signiﬁcant coefﬁcient estimates at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 7: Relative Performances of the Restricted Trading Strategies
Restrictions on the Immediate Effect
Restrictions on the Overall Effect
H1a
H1b
H2a
H2b
Mean
0.162%
0.169%
0.246%
0.242%
Median
0.126%
0.159%
0.252%
0.222%
nb positive
25
24
26
25
nb positive & signf
9
11
14
10
Bonferonni p-val
0.015
0.000
0.014
0.001
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the differences between the monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted and restricted trading
strategies. A positive number implies that the unrestricted strategy provides, on average, higher monthly cumulative returns than the trading strategy
that uses the restricted forecasting model implied by the hypotheses in the corresponding column heading. Mean and median are calculated over
all stocks in our sample. nb pos and nb pos & signf present the number of stocks out of 30 in our sample for which the return difference is positive
and signiﬁcantly positive, respectively. Bonf. p-val is the p-value based on the Bonferroni correction for stocks with positive return differences and
is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , pm) × m) where the minimum is calculated only over stocks for which the return difference is positive and,
thus, m is the number of stocks for which the return difference is positive. pi is the p-value of the hypothesis testing whether monthly cumulative
returns of the unrestricted and a given restricted trading strategy are equal.
47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 8: Average Relative Performances of the Restricted Trading Strategies at Different Thresholds
Restrictions on the Immediate Effect
Restrictions on the Overall Effect
κ
H1a
H1b
H2a
H2b
0
0.162%
0.169%
0.246%
0.242%
0.1
0.238%
0.259%
0.375%
0.412%
0.2
0.118%
0.085%
0.245%
0.294%
0.3
0.462%
0.416%
0.740%
0.620%
0.4
0.604%
0.583%
0.910%
0.953%
0.5
0.425%
0.450%
0.696%
0.688%
Note: This table presents the difference between the monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted trading strategy and the trading strategy that
uses the restricted forecasting model implied by the hypotheses in the corresponding column heading, averaged over all stocks and trading days
in June 2011, for different values of the threshold parameter, κ. We trade less frequently as higher values of κ are considered, which ﬁlters out
potentially weak signals. A positive number implies that the unrestricted strategy provides, on average, higher monthly cumulative returns than the
trading strategy that uses the restricted forecasting model implied by the hypotheses in the corresponding column heading.
48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 9: Relative Performances of the Restricted Strategies When Trading at the Best Bid and Ask Prices
Restrictions on the Immediate Effect
Restrictions on the Overall Effect
H1a
H1b
H2a
H2b
Mean
0.140%
0.139%
0.196%
0.141%
Median
0.172%
0.165%
0.267%
0.138%
nb positive
22
22
19
19
nb positive & signf
8
12
12
10
Bonferonni p-val
0.024
0.000
0.001
0.002
Note: This table presents the difference between the monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted and the trading strategy that uses the restricted
forecasting model implied by hypotheses in the corresponding column heading, when we trade at the best bid and ask prices instead of midquote
prices and a κ of zero. A positive number implies that the unrestricted strategy provides, on average, higher monthly cumulative returns than
the trading strategy that uses the restricted forecasting model implied by hypotheses in the corresponding column heading. Mean and median are
calculated over all stocks in our sample. nb pos and nb pos & signf present the number of stocks out of 30 in our sample for which the return
difference is positive and signiﬁcantly positive, respectively. Bonf. p-val is the p-value based on the Bonferroni correction for stocks with positive
return differences and is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , pm) × m) where the minimum is calculated only over stocks for which the return
difference is positive and, thus, m is the number of stock for which the return difference is positive. pi is the p-value of the hypothesis testing
whether monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted trading strategy and a given restricted trading strategy are equal.
49
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table 10: Relative Performances of the Restricted Strategies when Trading at a Slower Speed
Restrictions on the Immediate Effect
Restrictions on the Overall Effect
H1a
H1b
H2a
H2b
Mean
0.057%
0.125%
0.106%
0.123%
Median
0.050%
0.131%
0.114%
0.130%
nb positive
21
26
23
24
nb positive & signf
14
15
13
15
Bonferonni p-val
0.208
0.247
0.228
0.225
Note: This table presents the differences between the monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted and restricted trading strategies when we
trade at a latency of 500 milliseconds and at midquote prices with a κ of zero. A positive number implies that the unrestricted strategy provides,
on average, higher monthly cumulative returns than the trading strategy that uses the restricted forecasting model implied by hypotheses in the
corresponding column heading. Mean and median are calculated over all stocks in our sample. nb pos and nb pos & signf present the number of
stocks out of 30 in our sample for which the return difference is positive and signiﬁcantly positive, respectively. Bonf. p-val is the p-value based
on the Bonferroni correction for stocks with positive return differences and is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , pm) × m) where the minimum
is calculated only over stocks for which the return difference is positive and, thus, m is the number of stocks for which the return difference is
positive. pi is the p-value of the hypothesis testing whether monthly cumulative returns of the unrestricted trading strategy and a given restricted
trading strategy are equal.
50
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Online Appendix
October 16, 2021
A.1
Robustness Checks
A.1.1
Sampling Frequency
In our main set of results, we follow the previous literature and estimate the Hasbrouck’s VAR model using tick-bytick data. This sampling approach has several advantages and allow one to compare some of our results with those in
the literature. It also has few disadvantages. For example, as discussed above, one needs to choose whether to take
limit order book snapshots right before or after a trade. Furthermore, this sampling approach allows one to analyze
only the conditional (on the arrival of a market order) effects of a given slope variable on returns. To overcome these
issues, we also consider sampling at a regular frequency of 100 milliseconds. As mentioned above, we can sample all
variables at millisecond frequency. However, sampling every millisecond results in too many observations as well as
too many periods with zero trades. On the other hand, sampling at a very low frequency results in fewer number of
observations. Sampling at a 100 millisecond frequency represents a fair compromise. We take snapshots of the limit
order book every 100 milliseconds and also compute the midquote returns based on these snapshots. We use signed
volume in number of shares for xt instead of the trade direction. This sampling approach has several advantages
compared with the ﬁrst sampling approach. First, this approach allows us to avoid choosing whether to take limit
order book snapshots right before or after a trade. Second, it also allows us to analyze the effects of slope variables
on returns on an ex-ante basis without having to condition on the arrival of a trade. Finally, it allows us to analyze the
effects of order size on the limit order book slopes at different times over the trading day.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Here, we mostly focus on the last point and analyze the relation between order size and limit order book slopes
over the trading day. We nevertheless ﬁrst summarize the estimation and hypothesis test results based on this sampling
approach, which are presented in Tables A.1-A.4. The immediate and cumulative effects of slope variables based on
this sampling approach are very similar to those in our main set of results based on tick-by-tick sampling, with two
relatively minor differences. First, the effects are smaller in magnitude although still statistically signiﬁcant with the
similar signs. Second, the immediate effects of the higher levels are bigger (in magnitude) than those of the lower
levels only when we consider their median across stocks but not their mean, unlike our main set of results. This
difference can be explained by the overreaction of prices to information in limit order book slopes observed in our
main set of results. Recall that in our main set of results the coefﬁcient estimates on further lags of slope variables
have on average the opposite sign of the coefﬁcient estimates on the ﬁrst lag. We also ﬁnd in our main results that
these opposite effects are much stronger for slopes of the higher levels than that of the lower levels. These opposite
effects of further lags observed in tick-by-tick data are captured by the immediate effects and more strongly so for
slopes of higher levels when we consider sampling at 100 millisecond intervals, which is on average longer than the
duration between two transactions. This difference is reﬂected in the results for the ﬁrst hypothesis. Speciﬁcally, we
ﬁnd in Tables A.1-A.4 that the immediate effects of higher levels of the ask side are bigger than those of the lower
levels for around half of the stocks in our sample, which is in contrast to our main results where this is true for most
of the stocks. The results for the other two hypotheses based on 100 millisecond sampling are very similar to those
based on tick-by-tick sampling.
We now turn our attention to the relation between order size and limit order book slopes over the trading day. Our
analysis resembles the one discussed in Section 7. Speciﬁcally, we consider data for each trading hour of the day
separately and estimate the empirical speciﬁcation in Equation 5 using data sampled every 100 millisecond from that
hour. We then compute the immediate effect of signed volume on a given slope measure as the coefﬁcient estimate on
its ﬁrst lag in the equation for that slope measure in the VAR system. Similarly, we compute its cumulative effect as
the sum of the coefﬁcients on all of its ﬁve lags. Figure A.1 presents how the median immediate and cumulative effects
of signed volume on slope measures change over the trading day. Several interesting facts emerge. The immediate
effect of signed volume on slopes of the lower levels is practically zero regardless of the side considered. This suggests
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

that the signed volume does not really affect liquidity supply in the limit order book. This changes when we consider
higher levels of the limit order book. An increase in the signed volume increases slopes of the higher levels of the ask
side and much more so of the bid side. In other words, a smaller sell volume or a bigger buy volume decreases the
liquidity supply in the higher levels of the limit order book. The fact that this effect is stronger for the slope of the
higher levels of the bid side suggests that the buyers in the limit order book become even more impatient following a
decrease in the selling pressure or an increase in the buying pressure observed in market orders. This is an interesting
ﬁnding that has not been previously reported in the literature. Turning our attention to the cumulative effects reveals
similar results. One important difference is that the cumulative effects of signed volume on slopes of the higher levels
are smaller in magnitude. For example, the cumulative effects of signed volume on the slope of the higher levels of
the ask side become practically zero. These ﬁndings suggest that there is a certain degree of reversal in the immediate
effects of signed volume on the higher levels. Finally, in terms of intraday trends in these effects, we ﬁnd that the
effects decrease over the trading day but only slightly so. This in turn suggests that the limit order traders are less
sensitive to changes in buying or selling pressure from the market orders towards the end of the trading day than at the
beginning where there are more patient traders.
A.1.2
Additional Control Variables
In our main empirical model, we include three sets of variables, namely returns, trade direction and slope variables.
As discussed in Section 3, we consider this model because it can be seen as a natural extension of Hasbrouck’s model,
which is theoretically motivated. In the original Hasbrouck model, the trade direction is the main variable whose effect
on returns is of interest. In our extension of this model, the trade direction serves as a control variable when analyzing
the asymmetries in the effects of slope variables on returns. From an empirical standpoint, we can also include other
variables that control for differences in liquidity and trading activity across stocks. To this end, we include the bidask spread, the volume (in euros) of a market order, the duration in millisecond between two market orders as state
variables in our main empirical speciﬁcation. The bid-ask spread is measured as the difference between the best bid
and ask prices of the same limit order book snapshot used for measuring the slope variables right before a trade. The
volume of a market order is measured as the number of shares transacted multiplied by the transaction price. The
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

duration is simply the time in milliseconds between two transactions. The estimation and hypothesis test results from
this model are presented in Tables A.5-A.8. They are very similar to our main set of empirical results. This in turn
suggests that controlling for differences in liquidity and trading activity across stocks does not signiﬁcantly alter our
main conclusions on the asymmetries in the effects of slope variables on returns.
A.1.3
Other Robustness Checks
In this subsection, we list the additional robustness checks that we performed. First, we consider alternative truncation
points for the inﬁnite sum. Speciﬁcally, we consider three and eight lags instead of the ﬁve lags considered in our
main set of results. These results are presented in Tables A.9-A.16. Second, we consider alternative deﬁnitions and
cutoff points for the lower and higher levels: (1) we change the cutoff level to two and deﬁne lower and higher levels
based on the ﬁrst two and the second to twentieth levels, respectively; (2) we exclude the ﬁrst level from the deﬁnition
of lower levels and deﬁne it to be levels between the second and ﬁfth, and we deﬁne higher levels as levels between
the ﬁfth and the twentieth. These results are presented in Tables A.17-A.24. Finally, we estimate our main empirical
speciﬁcation separately for each of the three months in our sample. These results are presented in Tables A.25-A.36.
Overall, the estimation and hypothesis test results based on these alternative empirical choices are similar to our main
sets of results with some minor differences and this suggests that our results are robust to a battery of additional checks.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Figure A.1: The Effect of Signed Volume on Limit Order Book Slopes
(a) Immediate Effect
9:00-10:00
10:00-11:00
11:00-12:00
12:00-12:30
12:30-13:30
13:30-14:30
14:30-15:30
15:30-16:30
16:30-17:30
-5
0
5
10
15
20
10-4
(b) Cumulative Effect
9:00-10:00
10:00-11:00
11:00-12:00
12:00-12:30
12:30-13:30
13:30-14:30
14:30-15:30
15:30-16:30
16:30-17:30
-5
0
5
10
15
20
10-4
Note: This ﬁgure presents how the immediate (panel (a)) and cumulative (panel (b)) effects of signed volume on the slopes of the higher and lower levels of the ask and
bid sides vary over the trading day. For a given trading hour of the day, we estimate the model in Equation 5 using data sampled every 100 millisecond for all stocks
and trading days. The immediate effect of signed volume on a given slope measure is the coefﬁcient estimate on its ﬁrst lag in the equation for that slope measure in the
VAR system. The cumulative effect of signed volume on a given slope measure is the sum of the coefﬁcients on all of its ﬁve lags. The x-axis presents the trading hours
and the y-axis presents the median of the immediate and cumulative effects of signed volume on slope measures.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.1-A.4) present the estimation and hypothesis test results from the estimation of the empirical model using
data sampled at regular frequency of 100 milliseconds as discussed in Section A.1.1. Tables A.1-A.4 can be directly compared to Tables 2-5 of the
main text.
Table A.1: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.105
0.009
0.090
0.002
-0.102
-0.009
-0.087
-0.002
Median
0.089
0.008
0.090
0.002
-0.094
-0.008
-0.095
-0.001
Std. Dev.
0.042
0.002
0.050
0.002
0.043
0.002
0.037
0.002
Positive
30
30
29
27
0
0
1
6
Signiﬁcantly Positive
30
28
26
21
0
0
0
4
Negative
0
0
1
3
30
30
29
24
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
0
3
29
28
28
23
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation
of the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using data sampled at regular frequency of 100 milliseconds
for that stock in our sample over July 2010, May 2011, and June 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the
corresponding slope variable in the return equation 5a (αz,1). The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope
variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean, median and standard deviations are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents
the number of stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive
(Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive
(negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.2: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
14
18
αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
16
12
H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%
24
27
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
12
15
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
12
12
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.3: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
1773.841
1757.622
Median of F-statistic for H2
1665.655
1960.088
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
674.646
686.745
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
30
30
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.4: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
0.096
0.088
-0.094
-0.086
Median
0.079
0.087
-0.085
-0.092
Std. Dev.
0.042
0.050
0.042
0.036
Positive
30
29
0
1
Sign. Positive
30
28
0
1
Negative
0
1
30
29
Sign. Negative
0
1
30
29
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.5-A.8) present the estimation and hypothesis test results where we include the bid-ask spread, the volume
(in euros) of a market order, the duration in millisecond between two market orders as state variables in our main empirical speciﬁcation. Tables
A.5-A.8 can be directly compared to Tables 2-5 of the main text.
Table A.5: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.345
0.169
0.436
0.037
-0.366
-0.169
-0.463
-0.040
Median
0.325
0.164
0.458
0.031
-0.352
-0.172
-0.447
-0.030
Std. Dev.
0.129
0.043
0.162
0.043
0.138
0.042
0.209
0.041
Positive
30
30
29
27
0
0
1
4
Signiﬁcantly Positive
30
28
28
17
0
0
1
1
Negative
0
0
1
3
30
30
29
26
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
0
3
30
28
29
18
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of the
model in Equation 5 that also includes the bid-ask spread, the volume (in euros) of a market order, the duration in millisecond between two market
orders as state variables. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over July 2010, May 2011, and June 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in
the return equation 5a (αz,1). The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean,
median and standard deviations are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the
corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number of
stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.6: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
23
6
αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
7
24
H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%
27
26
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
21
4
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
6
22
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S2,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S2,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S2,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S2,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S2,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.7: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
177.638
180.073
Median of F-statistic for H2
169.501
160.602
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
76.562
83.045
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
30
30
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.8: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
0.176
0.399
-0.197
-0.423
Median
0.154
0.418
-0.173
-0.417
Std. Dev.
0.105
0.137
0.116
0.186
Positive
30
29
0
1
Sign. Positive
29
29
0
1
Negative
0
1
30
29
Sign. Negative
0
0
29
29
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
2,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
2,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.9-A.12) present the estimation and hypothesis test results from the estimation of the empirical model with
3 lags. Tables A.9-A.12 can be directly compared to Tables 2-5 of the main text.
Table A.9: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.109
0.111
0.231
0.048
-0.114
-0.115
-0.256
-0.045
Median
0.108
0.114
0.228
0.043
-0.113
-0.117
-0.222
-0.037
Std. Dev.
0.035
0.027
0.123
0.037
0.039
0.031
0.132
0.038
Positive
30
30
28
28
0
0
1
2
Signiﬁcantly Positive
30
28
26
23
0
0
0
2
Negative
0
0
2
2
30
30
29
28
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
0
2
30
28
28
20
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of
the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over July 2010, May 2011, and June 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in
the return equation 5a (αz,1). The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean,
median and standard deviations are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the
corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number of
stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.10: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
26
4
αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
4
26
H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%
25
25
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
21
4
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
4
21
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.11: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
115.726
129.245
Median of F-statistic for H2
121.515
123.057
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
65.511
56.976
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
30
30
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.12: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
-0.001
0.182
0.000
-0.211
Median
-0.006
0.188
0.003
-0.193
Std. Dev.
0.016
0.101
0.018
0.108
Positive
9
28
19
1
Sign. Positive
4
26
6
1
Negative
21
2
11
29
Sign. Negative
8
0
4
29
Bonferonni pvalue
0.012
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.13-A.16) present the estimation and hypothesis test results from the estimation of the empirical model with
8 lags. Tables A.13-A.16 can be directly compared to Tables 2-5 of the main text.
Table A.13: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.352
0.151
0.446
0.033
-0.372
-0.148
-0.473
-0.033
Median
0.332
0.149
0.446
0.026
-0.361
-0.150
-0.483
-0.027
Std. Dev.
0.128
0.039
0.168
0.039
0.143
0.034
0.202
0.036
Positive
30
30
29
27
0
0
1
5
Signiﬁcantly Positive
30
28
28
19
0
0
1
2
Negative
0
0
1
3
30
30
29
25
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
0
3
30
28
29
17
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of
the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over July 2010, May 2011, and June 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in
the return equation 5a (αz,1). The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean,
median and standard deviations are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the
corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number of
stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.14: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
24
6
αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
6
24
H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%
25
26
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
20
5
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
5
21
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.15: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
158.302
157.931
Median of F-statistic for H2
152.284
154.472
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
66.478
64.931
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
30
30
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.16: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
0.201
0.413
-0.224
-0.440
Median
0.192
0.418
-0.208
-0.452
Std. Dev.
0.107
0.147
0.125
0.184
Positive
30
29
0
1
Sign. Positive
29
29
0
1
Negative
0
1
30
29
Sign. Negative
0
0
29
29
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.17-A.20) present the estimation and hypothesis test results where we change the cutoff level to two and
deﬁne lower and higher levels based on the ﬁrst two and second to twentieth levels, respectively. Tables A.17-A.20 can be directly compared to
Tables 2-5 of the main text.
Table A.17: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-2)
Ask Slope (Levels 2-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-2)
Bid Slope (Levels 2-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.107
0.099
0.397
0.053
-0.114
-0.104
-0.433
-0.045
Median
0.104
0.098
0.417
0.047
-0.110
-0.104
-0.452
-0.043
Std. Dev.
0.036
0.024
0.186
0.043
0.040
0.029
0.225
0.044
Positive
30
30
29
28
0
0
1
4
Signiﬁcantly Positive
30
28
27
23
0
0
1
3
Negative
0
0
1
2
30
30
29
26
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
0
2
30
28
27
18
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of
the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over July 2010, May 2011, and June 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in
the return equation 5a (αz,1). The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean,
median and standard deviations are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the
corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number of
stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.18: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,2,t) < αz,1(S2,20,t)
27
3
αz,1(S1,2,t) > αz,1(S2,20,t)
3
27
H1 : αz,1(S1,2,t) = αz,1(S2,20,t) is rejected at 5%
24
25
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,2,t) < αz,1(S2,20,t)
21
3
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,2,t) > αz,1(S2,20,t)
3
22
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S1,2,t) < αz,1(S2,20,t)” (“αz,1(S1,2,t) > αz,1(S2,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S1,2,t) = αz,1(S2,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,2,t) < αz,1(S2,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,2,t) > αz,1(S2,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.19: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
165.688
195.355
Median of F-statistic for H2
145.593
180.067
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
97.379
90.378
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
30
30
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.20: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
0.008
0.344
-0.010
-0.388
Median
0.002
0.367
-0.003
-0.399
Std. Dev.
0.021
0.162
0.022
0.204
Positive
16
29
11
1
Sign. Positive
8
28
1
1
Negative
14
1
19
29
Sign. Negative
1
0
9
29
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
1,2,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
2,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
2,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.21-A.24) present the estimation and hypothesis test results where we exclude the ﬁrst level from the
deﬁnition of lower levels and deﬁne it to be levels between the second and ﬁfth, and we deﬁne higher levels as levels between the ﬁfth and
twentieth. Tables A.21-A.24 can be directly compared to Tables 2-5 of the main text.
Table A.21: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 2-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 2-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.092
0.096
0.309
0.045
-0.098
-0.093
-0.337
-0.043
Median
0.100
0.092
0.346
0.039
-0.104
-0.091
-0.346
-0.038
Std. Dev.
0.052
0.031
0.165
0.043
0.055
0.030
0.184
0.037
Positive
29
30
28
28
1
0
1
2
Signiﬁcantly Positive
25
28
27
23
0
0
1
1
Negative
1
0
2
2
29
30
29
28
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
1
2
27
28
27
19
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of
the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over July 2010, May 2011, and June 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in
the return equation 5a (αz,1). The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean,
median and standard deviations are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the
corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number of
stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.22: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S2,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
28
2
αz,1(S2,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
2
28
H1 : αz,1(S2,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%
25
25
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S2,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
23
2
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S2,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
2
23
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S2,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S2,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S2,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S2,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S2,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.23: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
144.971
156.673
Median of F-statistic for H2
119.859
143.654
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
93.519
86.462
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
30
29
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.24: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
-0.004
0.264
-0.005
-0.293
Median
-0.008
0.306
0.007
-0.300
Std. Dev.
0.042
0.139
0.046
0.163
Positive
12
28
17
1
Sign. Positive
4
26
9
1
Negative
18
2
13
29
Sign. Negative
8
1
7
28
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
2,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
2,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.25-A.28) present the estimation and hypothesis test results from the estimation of the empirical model
using data only from July 2010. Tables A.25-A.28 can be directly compared to Tables 2-5 of the main text.
Table A.25: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.306
0.150
0.427
0.070
-0.334
-0.149
-0.484
-0.059
Median
0.300
0.151
0.379
0.044
-0.336
-0.147
-0.435
-0.039
Std. Dev.
0.132
0.047
0.278
0.073
0.157
0.049
0.325
0.071
Positive
29
29
29
26
0
0
4
5
Signiﬁcantly Positive
29
27
24
17
0
0
0
3
Negative
0
0
0
3
29
29
25
24
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
0
1
29
27
25
13
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of
the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over July 2010. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in the return equation 5a (αz,1).
The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean, median and standard deviations
are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope
variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the corresponding
effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.26: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
21
7
αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
8
22
H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%
17
20
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
11
6
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
6
14
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.27: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
53.392
59.344
Median of F-statistic for H2
45.519
50.695
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
34.876
38.790
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
27
28
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.28: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
0.155
0.357
-0.185
-0.424
Median
0.144
0.343
-0.157
-0.416
Std. Dev.
0.109
0.230
0.139
0.281
Positive
29
29
0
4
Sign. Positive
28
25
0
0
Negative
0
0
29
25
Sign. Negative
0
0
27
25
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.29-A.32) present the estimation and hypothesis test results from the estimation of the empirical model
using data only from May 2011. Tables A.29-A.32 can be directly compared to Tables 2-5 of the main text.
Table A.29: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.363
0.185
0.358
0.028
-0.383
-0.187
-0.391
-0.032
Median
0.313
0.186
0.350
0.036
-0.332
-0.182
-0.417
-0.023
Std. Dev.
0.141
0.057
0.236
0.044
0.162
0.053
0.228
0.043
Positive
30
30
28
24
0
0
1
7
Signiﬁcantly Positive
30
28
24
14
0
0
0
4
Negative
0
0
2
6
30
30
29
23
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
1
3
30
28
26
11
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of
the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over May 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in the return equation 5a (αz,1).
The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean, median and standard deviations
are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope
variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the corresponding
effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.30: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
21
12
αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
9
18
H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
14
7
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
8
13
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.31: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
81.180
83.762
Median of F-statistic for H2
79.590
73.841
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
41.234
40.250
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5%
30
30
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.32: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
0.178
0.330
-0.197
-0.359
Median
0.143
0.320
-0.160
-0.365
Std. Dev.
0.115
0.209
0.140
0.209
Positive
30
28
0
1
Sign. Positive
29
26
0
1
Negative
0
2
30
29
Sign. Negative
0
1
29
27
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

The following four tables (Tables A.33-A.36) present the estimation and hypothesis test results from the estimation of the empirical model
using data only from June 2011. Tables A.33-A.36 can be directly compared to Tables 2-5 of the main text.
Table A.33: Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask Slope (Levels 1-5)
Ask Slope (Levels 5-20)
Bid Slope (Levels 1-5)
Bid Slope (Levels 5-20)
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Imm. Eff.
Cum. Eff.
Mean
0.448
0.200
0.508
0.032
-0.449
-0.201
-0.509
-0.036
Median
0.381
0.194
0.522
0.031
-0.419
-0.205
-0.510
-0.030
Std. Dev.
0.218
0.071
0.226
0.059
0.198
0.072
0.260
0.062
Positive
30
30
29
21
0
0
1
6
Signiﬁcantly Positive
30
28
27
14
0
0
1
4
Negative
0
0
1
9
30
30
29
24
Signiﬁcantly Negative
0
0
0
5
30
28
27
17
Bonferonni p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the immediate and cumulative effects of limit order book slopes on returns from the estimation of
the model in Equation 5. We estimate the VAR system for each stock separately using all tick-by-tick data available for that stock in our sample
over June 2011. The immediate effect is the coefﬁcient estimate on the ﬁrst lag of the corresponding slope variable in the return equation 5a (αz,1).
The cumulative effect is the sum of coefﬁcient estimates on all lags of the slope variable (P5
τ=1 αz,τ). The mean, median and standard deviations
are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the corresponding effect of the slope
variable in the column heading is positive (negative). Signiﬁcantly Positive (Negative) presents the number of stocks for which the corresponding
effect of the slope variable in the column heading is signiﬁcantly positive (negative) at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
Table A.34: The Relation between the Immediate Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Number of stocks for which
Ask Side
Bid Side
αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
23
7
αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
7
23
H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t) is rejected at 5%
19
22
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)
15
5
H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)
4
17
Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents the relation between the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and lower levels on returns and results for our ﬁrst
set of hypotheses on the equality of the immediate effects of lower and higher levels (H1a and H1b). All numbers with the exception of the last row
are out of 30 stocks in our sample. The row “αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”) presents the number of stocks
for which the immediate effect of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “H1 : αz,1(S1,5,t) = αz,1(S5,20,t)
is rejected at 5%” presents the number of stocks for which our ﬁrst hypothesis on the equality of the immediate effects of the slopes of the higher and
lower levels. The row “H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) < αz,1(S5,20,t)” (“H1 is rejected in favor of αz,1(S1,5,t) > αz,1(S5,20,t)”)
presents the number of stocks for which our hypothesis is rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level in favor of the alternative that the immediate effect
of the slope of the lower levels is smaller (greater) than that of the higher levels. The row “Bonferonni p-value for H1 across stocks” presents the
p-value for testing H1 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is
calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H1 for the ith stock.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945

Table A.35: The Relation between the Overall Effects of the Slopes of the Higher and Lower Levels on Returns
Ask
Bid
Mean of F-statistic for H2
89.512
88.648
Median of F-statistic for H2
78.129
90.620
Std. Dev. of F-statistic for H2
44.269
38.703
Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5
Bonferroni p-value
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents results on whether the overall effects (based on all lags considered) of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the
same side are equal (H2a and H2b). We test H2 for ask and bid sides and for each stocks separately. The mean, median and standard deviation
are computed over these individual F-statistics for H2. The row “Nb. of Stocks for which H2 is rejected at 5% ” presents the number of stocks
(out of 30) for which our second hypothesis that the overall effects of the slopes of the lower and higher levels of the same side are equal. The row
“Bonferonni p-value for H2 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H2 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of
multiple testing based on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H2 for the ith
stock.
Table A.36: The Difference between the Immediate and Cumulative Effects of Limit Order Book Slopes on Returns
Ask
Bid
Low
High
Low
High
Mean
0.248
0.476
-0.247
-0.473
Median
0.198
0.474
-0.204
-0.464
Std. Dev.
0.181
0.202
0.159
0.236
Positive
30
30
0
2
Sign. Positive
29
27
0
1
Negative
0
0
30
28
Sign. Negative
0
0
29
28
Bonferonni pvalue
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Note: This table presents summary statistics on the difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns. The
difference between the immediate and cumulative effects of a given slope variable on returns is computed as the difference between the coefﬁcient
estimate on the ﬁrst lag of a slope variable in the return equation and the sum of the coefﬁcients on all its ﬁve lags. It is also given as the sum of
the coefﬁcient estimates on the second to ﬁfth lags of this slope variable. We compute these differences for each stock separately and the mean,
median and standard deviation are computed across the 30 stocks in our sample. Positive (Negative) and Sign. Positive (Sign. Negative) present
the number of stocks for which the difference is positive (negative) and signiﬁcantly so at the 5% signiﬁcance level, respectively. These differences
correspond to our third hypothesis, related to the over- or under-reaction of returns to information embedded in the limit order book. The results
under Ask-Low correspond to H3a : αz,1(SA
1,5,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
1,5,t) and Ask-High to H3a∗: αz,1(SA
5,20,t) = P5
τ=1 αz,τ(SA
5,20,t).
The results under Bid-Low and Bid-High are for the corresponding hypotheses for the bid sides, i.e. H3b and H3b∗. The row “Bonferonni p-value
for H3 across stocks” presents the p-value for testing H3 jointly across all 30 stocks in our sample adjusted for the issue of multiple testing based
on the Bonferroni correction. It is calculated as min(1, min(p1, · · · , p30) × 30) where pi is the p-value for H3 for the ith stock.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2878945
