1 
 
Deep limit order book events dynamics* 
 
Yann Bilodeau1 
 
December 2, 2020 
 
Abstract 
This paper analyzes the limit order book events arrival dependency structure using highdimensional Hawkes processes. We seek for recurrent relationships among events from a set of 86 
event types which in addition to transactions, includes limit order submissions and cancellations 
taking place up to the 20th depth level of the order book. We focus on BMW, SAP, and ADS, 
three liquid DAX 30 index stocks for which we have a microsecond stamped high-frequency 
dataset covering the 61 trading day period going from February 1 to March 31, 2013. For each 
stock, we build a tailored descriptive model by selecting recurrent events relationships. Estimated 
on a daily basis, we find that the selected models offer interesting data fitting performance, 
particularly for limit order submissions and cancellations occurring on the first five price levels of 
the order book. Finally, we use the comprehensive sets of estimated parameters to describe a global 
events arrival dynamics that we relate to the potential behaviors of market participants having 
different objectives and directional views. 
 
JEL classification: C22 C41 C53 G11 
Keywords: Limit order book, Hawkes process, high-frequency, algorithmic trading, liquidity, 
Frankfort Stock Exchange. 
 
 
* Research supported by SSHRC Canada, FRQSC Quebec, Canada Foundation for innovation 
and the Canadian Derivatives Institute. The author thanks professors Georges Dionne and Manuel 
Morales, as well as Gabriel Yergeau, Xiaozhou Zhou and Mathieu T-Blais for their support and 
comments. 
 
 
1 Canada Research Chair in Risk management and Finance Department, HEC Montreal. 
yann.bilodeau@hec.ca. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

2 
 
1. Introduction 
In recent years, technology improvements have completely transformed the financial markets 
landscape. The main part of market activity is now performed through algorithms on electronic 
trading platforms using real-time open limit order book information. Even more conventional 
investors such as banks, mutual funds and institutions now outsource their trading tasks to 
algorithmic traders who split the main orders into multiple child orders distributed over time, trying 
to achieve the best execution price while hiding their intention to other market participants. In this 
new financial world, speed and information quality have become very important keys to success. 
Indeed, in order to remain competitive, algorithms must take investment decisions and send their 
answer to the market in a few milliseconds time frame and this window size tends to decrease 
years after years with technological improvements. Although high-frequency and algorithmic 
trading now represent a market standard around the world, limit order book modeling has not yet 
received a very important coverage in academic and scientific literature. This situation suggests a 
gap between practical and academic knowledge on this topic, which is not surprising from an 
economic point of view. Indeed, the high competition level and important barriers to entry 
probably encourage practitioners to keep the secret of their successful models and strategies. In 
this context, this paper focuses on modeling the behavior of a multilevel limit order book at a 
microscopic level with algorithmic trading perspectives. 
Until recently, regularly spaced data were used for asset returns modeling and forecasting 
purposes. However, to maximize the advantage of newly available high frequency data, modeling 
irregularly spaced data is essential since at a microscopic level, important market events such as 
transaction and limit orders submission are irregularly spaced in time. In this situation, point 
processes models are natural candidates to describe these irregularities. In a widely cited paper, 
Cont, Stoikov et al. (2010) use a Poisson process system to represent events arrival in a limit order 
book and perform various quantities computations, such as the probability of making the spread 
over a given period. Despite the interesting results produced by their model, the main disadvantage 
of homogeneous Poisson process remains the assumption of independent exponentially distributed 
event arrival times. More recently Huang, Lehalle et al. (2015) and Muni Toke and Yoshida (2017) 
have developed and simulated complete limit order book models based on state-dependant event 
arrival processes. Although the former introduces a certain level of dependency between processes, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

3 
 
none of these papers explicitly consider the arrival of events itself as a major factor driving the 
arrival of other events. However, it has been established that a clustering phenomenon is present 
in the arrival sequence of some types of limit order book events. This particularity led to the 
introduction of self-exciting point processes in finance such as the Hawkes process, that was 
originally used for earthquakes occurrence modeling and forecasting (Hawkes (1971), Hawkes and 
Oakes (1974)). 
As well described by Shek (2011), in a self-exciting process such as univariate Hawkes model, the 
current arrival rate for a given type of events is driven by past occurrences of events of the same 
type. In its multivariate version, Hawkes process is said to be a cross or mutually-exciting process. 
Within this extended case, in addition to past events of the same type, event arrival intensity is also 
driven by past events of other types. Using this feature, it becomes possible to account for 
dependency between different event categories occurring at irregularly spaced times, which has 
otherwise, not been explicitly covered in the current literature. 
Over the last years, Hawkes processes themselves have been used for various purposes in finance. 
A very general definition of this process and its possible financial applications is provided by 
Embrechts, Liniger et al. (2011). From another point of view, Bacry, Delattre et al. (2013) use 
them for price changes modelling purposes. They model the number of ticks up and down for both 
single and pairs of assets using counting processes. Hawkes processes allow them to take 
autocorrelation in price movements into account. Fauth (2012) use four bivariate mutually-exciting 
processes to model bid and ask prices moves up and down. Their processes pairs modeling 
structure allows them to produce a consistent bid-ask spread. In order to add more information to 
their model, they also include trades volumes. Large (2007) uses up to ten Hawkes processes to 
analyse the limit order book resiliency well-known phenomenon. 
In a market events perspective closer to the limit order book, Hewlett (2006) uses bivariate Hawkes 
processes for buy and sell trades occurring on the FX markets modelling. He then applies them for 
optimal trading strategies purposes as developed by Almgren (2003), Almgren (2000), Bertsimas 
and Lo (1998), Obizhaeva and Wang (2012) and more recently Cheng, Di Giacinto et al. (2017), 
assuming the market maker considers buy and sell orders arrival to follow Hawkes processes. Shek 
(2011) also uses a bivariate mutually-exciting model for buy and sell trades occurrence. As Fauth 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

4 
 
(2012), he includes trade sizes in order to consider more information in large trades than in small 
ones. Toke and Pomponio (2012) apply a bivariate process to model the occurrence of trades 
consuming more than one order book level, also known as trade-through. Finally, Bowsher (2007) 
uses two pairs of bivariate Hawkes processes to model the joint arrival of trades and mid-quote 
changes. 
In their respective thesis, Vinkovskaya (2014) and Huang (2012) use multivariate Hawkes 
processes in order to model the limit order book first level order flows. Vinkovskaya (2014) 
considers four different processes representing limit order arrivals and market order arrivals for 
both sides of the book. For estimation procedure simplification, she combines market order and 
limit order cancellation events. She presents a regime switching extension in order to account for 
the spread size effect on the order arrival intensities. She performs her parameters estimation using 
a 2008 subsample of the Trade and Quotes (TAQ) database with a one second time precision. The 
forecasting power of her model is interesting since it outperforms Poisson model and AR, MA and 
ARIMA time-series models for out-of-sample predictions. On the other hand, Huang (2012) uses 
six multivariate Hawkes processes in order to model the arrival of market orders, limit orders and 
limit order cancellations on both sides of the book. Parameters estimates are obtained from a 
millisecond precision order book snapshots dataset on a five-day period in 2009 for Vodaphone 
(VOD.L), a stock traded on the London Stock Exchange. He then computed various probabilities 
using a Monte Carlo simulation method based on the thinning algorithm introduced by Ogata 
(1981).  
Since only few of the previously cited contributions have analyzed more than one level in the limit 
order book, we propose to extend the current literature in this way. In this context, we suggest a 
multivariate Hawkes processes system to model and analyze the behavior of a multilevel limit 
order book. Our main objective is to determine how various order book event types occurring at 
different levels affect each other. Let us assume a first level that contain only one limit order and 
the absence of hidden or iceberg orders. By the nature of the limit order book itself, one can easily 
see that the cancellation of this order or the submission of a market order consuming it entirely 
would instantly convert the current level 2 into the new best bid or best ask level. In the same way, 
level 3 would become level 2 and so on. With this simple example in mind, it is possible to believe 
that analyzing higher levels event arrival processes could provide interesting information on the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

5 
 
future states of best price levels where transactions generally occur. To accomplish this task, we 
define an extensive set of events occurring on the first twenty levels of both sides of the book and 
take advantage of the Hawkes dependency structure to establish how they relate to each other. 
Our parameters estimation and performance analysis are realized on a Xetra 2013 microsecond 
(10-6) precision limit order book dataset. It is possible to expect the microsecond precision to 
provide an informational advantage over what has been done in the past. However, the real Xetra 
order flows are not directly available and have to be deduced using observable limit order book 
state changes and executed trades. This procedure may lead to some missing events because of the 
aggregated nature of the data. On the other hand, our dataset is exactly the one used by algorithmic 
trading systems that were operating on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange over the February to March 
2013 period, suggesting we cannot get closer to real-time market information without having 
access to the stock exchange internal database. This fact is important since our models are 
developed in an algorithmic trading perspective. Indeed, we have to keep in mind that it is possible 
for an algorithmic response to an order book event to be so fast that it could not have been though 
and launched by a human trader. Fortunately, Hawkes processes have the capacity to capture this 
type of very short-term phenomena. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we present the concept of Hawkes 
processes, which provides the theoretical foundations for this paper. In Section 3, we introduce the 
dataset. In Section 4, we define the set of events considered as potentially interrelated. In Section 
5, we use Section 2 theory to specify our complete model. In Section 6, we elaborate the estimation 
methodology that will lead to one descriptive model for each of our three liquid stocks. In Section 
7, we analyse the results of the estimation phase in terms of models selection, data fitting and 
estimated parameters characteristics. In Section 8, we use the estimated parameters to describe a 
global events arrival dynamics that we relate to market participants potential behaviors. Finally, in 
Section 9, we conclude and introduce an extension for this paper. 
2. Hawkes processes 
In this section, we present the theoretical foundations underlying to our models, their estimation 
methodology, and the analysis performed on the results. Before presenting the fundamentals for 
univariate and multivariate Hawkes processes models, we introduce the general concept of point 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

6 
 
process, which is defined by Carstensen (2010) as a “statistical model used to describe point 
patterns in a given space”. In our financial context, these points correspond to events arrival times. 
In general terms, a point process {𝑁(𝑡), 𝑡≥0, 𝑁(𝑡) ∈ℕ} counts the events occurring at times 
{{𝑡𝑖}, 𝑖= 1, … , 𝑁(𝑡)}. The theoretical behavior of this mathematical concept is dictated by the 
form taken by its intensity function λ(𝑡). As an example, the intensity of a pure homogeneous 
Poisson process, hereafter referred as Poisson process, is provided by λ(𝑡) = 𝜆, a constant 
parameter corresponding to the average number of event occurrences by unit of time. The 
following expression defines a point process compensator. 
(1) 
Λ(𝑡0, 𝑡1) = ∫λ(𝑡) dt
𝑡1
𝑡0
 
 
Since λ(𝑡) is the arrival rate function, assuming 𝑡1 ≥𝑡0, Λ(𝑡0 , 𝑡1) may be interpreted as the time 
period 𝑡0 to 𝑡1 expected number of event occurrences.2 Equation (2) provides the general loglikelihood function, which can be maximized to estimate any point process model parameters. 
(2) 
lnℒ({𝑡𝑖}𝑖=1,…,𝑁(𝑇)|𝜃) = ∫(1 −𝜆(𝑠|𝜃))𝑑𝑠
𝑇
0
+ ∫𝑙𝑛𝜆(𝑠|𝜃)𝑑𝑁(𝑆)
𝑇
0
 
= 𝑇−∫𝜆(𝑠|𝜃)𝑑𝑠
𝑇
0
+ ∑𝑙𝑛
𝑡𝑖< 𝑇
𝜆(𝑡𝑖|𝜃) 
≡−Λ(0, 𝑇|𝜃) + ∑𝑙𝑛
𝑡𝑖< 𝑇
𝜆(𝑡𝑖|𝜃) 
 
 
 
 
2 The Poisson process compensator function is defined as Λ(𝑡0, 𝑡1) = ∫
λdt
𝑡1
𝑡0
= 𝜆(𝑡1 −𝑡0) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

7 
 
Univariate Hawkes process 
Having defined the general concept of point process, we now introduce the Hawkes processes 
model. In its univariate version, such model assumes the occurrence of an event to have an impact 
on the arrival of events of the same type. Under this paradigm, by its effect on the process intensity 
function, an event occurrence increases the probability of another occurrence that does the same 
and so on. Consequently, the process has the potential to become self-excited, which makes the 
description of events clustering phenomena possible. 
As defined by Hawkes (1971) and Hawkes and Oakes (1974), in its most general form, the selfexciting Hawkes process {𝑁(𝑡), 𝑡≥0, 𝑁(𝑡) ∈ℕ}, is characterized by the following continuous 
intensity function: 
(3) 
𝜆(𝑡) = 𝜇(𝑡) + ∫𝑣(𝑡−𝑠)𝑑𝑁(𝑠)
𝑠<𝑡
 
where 
𝜆(𝑡) : process intensity 
𝜇(𝑡) ≥0 : baseline intensity 
𝑣: ℝ+ →ℝ+: excitation kernel function 
 
The previous Poisson process with constant intensity 𝜆 represents a special case where ∀ 𝑡∈ℝ+, 
𝑣(𝑡) = 0 and 𝜇(𝑡) = 𝜆. 
Because of discrete nature of 𝑁(𝑡) that counts the events taking place at times {{𝑡𝑖}, 𝑖=
1, … , 𝑁(𝑡)},  it is possible to rewrite (3) : 
(4) 
𝜆(𝑡) = 𝜇(𝑡) + ∑𝑣(𝑡−𝑡𝑖)
𝑡𝑖<𝑡
 
 
As it is often the case in financial and economics literature, we use a constant baseline intensity 
𝜇(𝑡) = 𝜇. We also use the simple exponential kernel function, which is characterized by the 
following expression: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

8 
 
(5) 
𝑣(𝑡) = 𝛼𝑒−𝛽𝑡 
where 
𝛼> 0 : excitation term 
𝛽> 0 : exponential decay factor 
 
Combining (5) and (4), the univariate exponential Hawkes process intensity function is defined as: 
(6) 
𝜆(𝑡) = 𝜇+ ∑𝛼𝑒−𝛽(𝑡−𝑡𝑖)
𝑡𝑖<𝑡
 
 
In general terms, 𝛼 represents the immediate impact of an event occurrence on its arrival rate. Each 
time an event occurs, the process intensity is instantaneously incremented by 𝛼. Because of the 
kernel function, this effect also immediately begins to decline. Considering an event taking place 
at time 𝑡𝑖, the proportion of 𝛼 still present in the process intensity at time 𝑡> 𝑡𝑖 is given by 
𝑒−𝛽(𝑡−𝑡𝑖). Thus, this quantity depends on both the exponential decay factor 𝛽 and the time elapsed 
between 𝑡𝑖 and 𝑡. It is important to keep in mind that under this exponential framework, an event 
effect never completely vanishes from the process intensity. However, it remains practically 
significant over a time span whose length is dictated by 𝛽, which brings us to the definition of the 
half-life period as presented in (7). 
(7) 
𝐻𝐿= 𝑙𝑛(2)
𝛽
 
 
Widely used in biology and physics, this measure is interpreted as the duration over which an 
effect loses 50% of its strength. It actually loses 99% of its strength after about 6.64 half-live 
periods. For computational purposes, we consider it to completely vanish after 20 half-live periods. 
Back to (6), it is possible to denote that occurrences effects are cumulative. Indeed, 𝜆(𝑡) 
theoretically encompasses the residual effects of all the events having taken place at times {𝑡𝑖}, 𝑖=
1, … , 𝑁(𝑡). The process intensity also includes 𝜇, the baseline intensity. This constant represents 
the event arrival rate in place before the occurrence of the first event. It may also play an important 
role in the rate prevailing between self-excitation periods when past events effects on 𝜆(𝑡) have 
become marginal. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

9 
 
The following expression defines the branching ratio (𝐵𝑅), which may be interpreted as the 
average number of child events expected to follow the arrival of a parent event. 
(8) 
𝐵𝑅= ∫𝛼𝑒−𝛽𝑡𝑑𝑡
∞
0
= 𝛼
𝛽 
 
This expression leads to condition (9), which ensures the process to be stationary. This condition 
is intuitive since it is easy to see that a branching ratio equal or larger than one could lead to a 
process explosion. In such case, it would be expected for each event occurrence to lead to more 
than one new occurrence. 
(9) 
𝛼
𝛽 < 1 
 
The branching ratio is also an important component of the process intensity unconditional 
expectation, which is provided by the following expression: 
(10) 
𝐸[𝜆(𝑡)] = 
𝜇
1 − 𝛼
𝛽
 
 
The following expression presents the self-exciting Hawkes process compensator function : 
(11) 
Λ(𝑠, 𝑢) = ∫𝜇+ ∑𝛼𝑒−𝛽(𝑡−𝑡𝑖)
𝑡𝑖<𝑢
𝑑𝑡
𝑢
𝑠
 
 
The first term of the integral relates to the baseline intensity while the second cumulates the past 
events residual effects. Thereafter, given the desirable properties of the exponential Hawkes 
intensity function, the compensator closed form solution is provided by the next expression: 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

10 
 
(12) 
Λ(𝑠, 𝑢) = 𝜇(𝑢−𝑠) + ∑𝛼
𝛽[𝑒−𝛽(𝑠−𝑡𝑖) −𝑒−𝛽(𝑢−𝑡𝑖)]
𝑡𝑖<s
 
+ ∑
𝛼
𝛽[1 −𝑒−𝛽(𝑢−𝑡𝑖)]
𝑠 ≤ 𝑡𝑖<u
 
 
Finally, applying (6) and (12) to (2) leads to the univariate exponential Hawkes process loglikelihood function, which, when computed for the period going from times 0 to 𝑇, is provided by 
the following expression :  
(13) 
lnℒ({𝑡𝑖}𝑖=1,…,𝑁(𝑇)) = −𝜇𝑇− ∑𝛼
𝛽[1 −𝑒−𝛽(𝑇−𝑡𝑖)]
𝑁(𝑇)
𝑖=1
+ ∑ln (𝜇+ ∑𝛼𝑒−𝛽(𝑡𝑖−𝑡𝑘)
𝑡𝑘<𝑡𝑖
)
𝑁(𝑇)
𝑖=1
 
 
Since inefficient from a computational point of view, it is transformed into the following 
expression involving the recursive function 𝑅(𝑖), which is appropriate for the purposes of 
numerical maximization. 
(14) 
lnℒ({𝑡𝑖}𝑖=1,…,𝑁(𝑇)) = −𝜇𝑇− ∑𝛼
𝛽[1 −𝑒−𝛽(𝑇−𝑡𝑖)]
𝑁(𝑇)
𝑖=1
+ ∑ln(𝜇+ 𝛼𝑅(𝑖))
𝑁(𝑇)
𝑖=1
 
in which: 
𝑅(𝑖) = 𝑒−𝛽(𝑡𝑖−𝑡𝑖−1)(1 + 𝑅(𝑖−1)) ∀ 𝑖 ≥2 
𝑅(1) = 0 
 
Multivariate Hawkes process 
In its multivariate version, the Hawkes point process allows to model inter-events arrival 
dependency. In addition to be potentially affected by the occurrence of events of the same type, 
arrival of events of a given type can be affected by the occurrence of events of different types. 
Therefore, in addition to the self-excitation phenomenon described previously, multivariate 
Hawkes processes allow for mutual-excitation. As described by Embrechts, Liniger et al. (2011), 
assuming 𝑀∈ℕ, a mutually-exciting Hawkes process counting events taking place at times 
{{𝑡𝑖
𝑚}, 𝑚= 1, … , 𝑀, 𝑖= 1, … , 𝑁𝑚(𝑡)} is defined as {𝑁𝑚(𝑡), 𝑚= 1, … , 𝑀, 𝑁𝑚(𝑡) ∈ℕ}. As for 
the univariate case, we focus on the simple exponential kernel version of the mutually exciting 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

11 
 
Hawkes process with constant baseline intensity, which is characterized by the following 
discretized intensity functions: 
(15) 
𝜆𝑚(𝑡) = 𝜇𝑚+ ∑∑𝛼𝑛/𝑚𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑡−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)
𝑡𝑘
𝑛 < 𝑡
𝑀
𝑛=1
 
where 
𝜆𝑚(𝑡)  : component 𝑚 process intensity 
𝜇𝑚≥0 : component 𝑚 intensity baseline 
𝑡𝑘
𝑛 : time of the 𝑘𝑡ℎ occurrence of event type 𝑛 
 
In this expression, 𝑚 corresponds to the type of explained event and 𝑛= 1, … , 𝑀,  to those of 
explanatory events. We refer to 𝑛 and 𝑚 as types for the predecessor and successor events. We 
introduce the 𝑛/𝑚 notation to designate an events relationship, or relationship, in which event type 
𝑛 act as the processor and event type 𝑚 as the successor. In such case, we claim event of type 𝑛 
occurrences to have an effect on the occurrence of events of type 𝑚. In this context, 𝛼𝑛/𝑚 
represents the immediate effect of an event of type 𝑛 occurrence on type 𝑚 event intensity. 
Similarly, 𝛽𝑛/𝑚 corresponds to its exponential decay factor. It determines how the impact of past 
type 𝑛 events persists in the intensity of type 𝑚 event over time. It is important to note that while 
𝑚≠𝑛 represents mutually-exciting relationships, when present, the 𝑚= 𝑛 case relates to a selfexciting relationship. Also, despite the fact that mutual-excitation is supported by the multivariate 
Hawkes process, dependency structure symmetry is not mandatory. Indeed, assuming 𝑚≠𝑛, the 
presence of a 𝑛/𝑚 relationship does not involve that of an 𝑚/𝑛 relationship. 
As useful as in the univariate context, the following expression defines the multivariate Hawkes 
process compensator: 
(16) 
Λ𝑚(𝑠, 𝑢) = 𝜇𝑚(𝑢−𝑠) + ∑∑𝛼𝑛/𝑚
𝛽𝑛/𝑚[𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑠−𝑡𝑘
𝑛) −𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑢−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)]
𝑡𝑘
𝑛<s
𝑀
𝑛=1
   
+ ∑
∑
𝛼𝑛/𝑚
𝛽𝑛/𝑚[1 −𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑢−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)]
𝑠 ≤ 𝑡𝑘
𝑛<u
𝑀
𝑛=1
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

12 
 
 
In the spirit of (8), the branching ratio 𝐵𝑅𝑛/𝑚= 𝛼𝑛/𝑚𝛽𝑛/𝑚
⁄
 is now interpreted as the expected 
number of type 𝑚 events related to the occurrence of an event of type 𝑛. 
As described by Toke (2011), a branching ratios matrix 𝚪= (𝛼𝑛/𝑚𝛽𝑛/𝑚
⁄
)
𝑚,𝑛=1,…,𝑀 spectral radius 
strictly smaller than one represents a sufficient condition for a Hawkes process stationarity. 3  
Afterward, assuming a process stationarity, the unconditional expectation of its components 
intensity is given by (17), in which 𝝀 corresponds to the 𝐸[𝜆𝑚(𝑡)]𝑚=1,…,𝑀 vector, and 𝝁 to the 
baseline intensities (𝜇𝑚)𝑚=1,…,𝑀 vector. 
(17) 
𝝀= (𝑰−𝚪)−1𝝁 
 
The log-likelihood function of a multivariate Hawkes process can be represented as the sum of its 
components log-likelihood functions. This interesting feature for speed and computational 
intensity considerations is possible because of the absence of shared parameters between the 
components. The general process log-likelihood is thus provided by the following expression: 
(18) 
lnℒ({𝑡𝑖
𝑚}𝑚=1,…,𝑀,𝑖=1,…,𝑁𝑚(𝑇)) = ∑lnℒ𝑚({𝑡𝑖
𝑚}𝑖=1,…,𝑁𝑚(𝑇))
𝑀
𝑚=1
 
 
The log-likelihood function of a single component of the multivariate Hawkes process is provided 
by the following expression: 
(19) 
lnℒ𝑚({𝑡𝑖
𝑚} 𝑖=1,…,𝑁𝑚(𝑇)|{𝑡𝑘
𝑛}𝑛=1,…,𝑀,𝑘=1,…,𝑁𝑛(𝑇))
= −𝜇𝑚𝑇 −∑∑𝛼𝑛/𝑚
𝛽𝑛/𝑚[1 −𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑇−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)]
𝑁𝑛(𝑇)
𝑘=1
𝑀
𝑛=1
 
+ ∑𝑙𝑛(𝜇𝑚+ ∑
∑
𝛼𝑛/𝑚𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑡𝑖
𝑚−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)
𝑡𝑘
𝑛 < 𝑡𝑖
𝑚
𝑀
𝑛=1
)
𝑁𝑚(𝑇)
𝑖=1
 
 
 
3 The spectral radius of the matrix A is defined as (𝑨) = max
𝑎∈𝑆(𝑨)|𝑎| , where S(A) corresponds to the set of all 
eigenvalues of A. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

13 
 
Finally, in the way (14) did before, (20) provides a more computationally efficient version of this 
function. 
(20) 
lnℒ𝑚({𝑡𝑖
𝑚} 𝑖=1,…,𝑁𝑚(𝑇)|{𝑡𝑘
𝑛}𝑛=1,…,𝑀,𝑘=1,…,𝑁𝑛(𝑇))
= −𝜇𝑚𝑇 −∑∑𝛼𝑛/𝑚
𝛽𝑛/𝑚[1 −𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑇−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)]
𝑁𝑛(𝑇)
𝑘=1
𝑀
𝑛=1
 
+ ∑𝑙𝑛(𝜇𝑚+ ∑
∑
𝛼𝑛/𝑚𝑅𝑛/𝑚(𝑖)
𝑡𝑘
𝑛 < 𝑡𝑖
𝑚
𝑀
𝑛=1
)
𝑁𝑚(𝑇)
𝑖=1
 
in which, ∀ 𝑖 ≥2 
𝑅𝑛/𝑚(𝑖) = 𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑡𝑖
𝑚−𝑡𝑖−1
𝑚)𝑅𝑛/𝑚(𝑖−1) +
∑
𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑡𝑖
𝑚−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)
𝑡𝑖−1
𝑚 ≤ 𝑡𝑘
𝑛 < 𝑡𝑖
𝑚
 
and 
𝑅𝑛/𝑚(1) = {
∑
𝑒−𝛽𝑛/𝑚(𝑡𝑖
𝑚−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)
𝑡𝑘
𝑛 < 𝑡𝑖
𝑚
,
𝑁𝑛(𝑡𝑖
𝑚−) > 0
0,
𝑁𝑛(𝑡𝑖
𝑚) = 0
 
 
3. The data 
As introduced before, this paper empirical analysis is performed using an extensive three months 
Xetra dataset. Given the important number of parameters that may result from our models selection 
and estimation methodology, we restrict our analysis to the stocks of three individual companies: 
BMW, SAP, and Adidas. This restriction increases our high-dimensional result sets intelligibility. 
BMW is an automobiles and motorcycles manufacturer, SAP an enterprise software corporation 
and Adidas (ADS), an important player of the shoes, clothing, and accessories industry. These 
companies stocks are DAX index components, which encompasses the 30 main German blue chips 
trading on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. 
The time period covered in this paper spans from February 1st to March 31st, 2013. It encompasses 
61 trading days over which BMW, SAP and ADS stand in the DAX Index second tier in terms of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

14 
 
the total traded volume. These liquid stocks respectively occupy 16th, 12th and 19th ranks with 
approximately 115, 187 and 58 million of traded shares. These ranks slightly improve when it 
comes to the total traded amount. Regarding this second metric, our stocks occupy the 11th, 7th and 
14th positions with rough totals of 8, 11.4 and 4.4 billion EUR. Similar to traded shares, although 
close in ranking, SAP exchanged amount is 42.5% larger than BMW that already represents an 
81.8% improvement over ADS. This documents the fact that when it comes to traded volumes, the 
DAX index components show important discrepancies. As an example, during our reference 
period, the average exchanged amount of stocks constituting the most traded half of the DAX 
index in these terms appears 3.3 times larger than for those included in the other half. Therefore, 
we claim that selecting our three stocks inside the second tier of the DAX index in terms of traded 
volumes ensures diversity even if they seem closely related at some levels. From this point, to 
simplify the reading of information related to our three liquid stocks, we use a vector inspired 
notation in which [BMW; SAP; ADS] reports the values specific to BMW, SAP, and ADS. 
A DAX stock normal trading day essentially consists in five steps. The opening auction takes place 
between 8:50 and 9:00.4 It is followed by a four-hour continuous trading session that is suspended 
at 13:00, leaving the room for the intraday auction that last for a minimum of 2 minutes. Afterward, 
the market resumes for a four and a half hour continuous trading session ending at 17:30, which 
corresponds to the closing auction start time. This last auction period ends between 17:35:00 and 
17:35:30. In order to focus on the most typical intraday market conditions, we discard the post 
opening auction as long as the pre and post intraday auction 30 minutes continuous trading periods. 
As a result of these exclusions, our trading day consists in both a morning and an afternoon period 
going from 9:30 to 12:30 and 13:30 to 17:30, which sums to 7 trading hours. 
Although transformed, our dataset originates from Xetra Enhanced Broadcast Solution 13.0, a 
piece of software responsible for transmitting real-time market information to Frankfurt Stock 
Exchange participants. In addition to executed transactions information, it includes microsecond 
timestamped update information for 20 price levels on both sides of the Limit Order Book (LOB). 
Regarding our 61 seven-hour trading periods, BMW, SAP, and ADS approximately count 114, 
106 and 72 million of these LOB updates. It is interesting to notice that although less traded in 
 
4 Opening, intraday and closing auction sessions have a random ending time occurring during the 30 second period 
following 9:00:00, 13:02:00 and 17:35:00. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

15 
 
terms of shares and euros volumes, BMW is slightly more active than SAP from a LOB 
perspective. An update is reported for any change occurring on the first 20 price levels of both 
sides of the LOB. They are generally related to trade executions, limit order submissions, and limit 
order cancellations. It is possible for multiple price levels variations to be reported through the 
same update. Figure 1 presents the empirical cumulative distribution functions of the durations 
between reported LOB updates. With the exceptions of the proportion of changes being reported 
in less than one microsecond that appears to be more important for BMW and those with an interval 
between 10 and 160ms that seems slightly higher for SAP, this figure shows that our stocks present 
similar characteristics in terms of LOB update durations. More than 75% of these variations are 
separated by less than 100 ms and about 95% of them by less than one second. These large 
proportions of close LOB changes are consistent with the presence of high frequency trading 
activities. 
4. The events 
Our first step in describing a multi-level order book events arrival dynamics consists in identifying 
the events of interest. At the highest level, market participants interact through orders submission 
and cancellation. We consider each of these individual actions as an event occurrence that must be 
classified based on its effect on the LOB. As long as their impact on available liquidity, best 
available prices and bid-ask spread, we use the affected LOB side and depth level as events 
classification drivers. From our financial point of view, we also take the investor intention behind 
each event type into consideration. As an example, assuming they involve the same number of 
shares, a trade execution and a limit order cancellation may have the same effect on the best 
available price and available liquidity. However, the intentions behind the decisions leading to the 
new order book state being clearly different, we consider important to make a distinction between 
these two types of events. Widely inspired by Large (2007), we divide the events into four global 
categories : Trades with best price impact (Trades w/ BPI), Trades without best price impact 
(Trades w/o BPI), Limit order submissions with best price impact (LOS w/ BPI) and LOB events. 
We divide this last category into limit order submissions taking place on the current best price 
depth level and beyond (LOS), and Limit order cancellations (LOC). 
An actual share exchange taking place on an order-driven stock market generally results from the 
submission of a market order or an aggressive limit order. We define this second element as a bid 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

16 
 
(ask) limit order for which the price is equal or higher (lower) than the best available ask (bid) 
price, which lead to its immediate partial or total execution. Our dataset providing no explicit 
information on these transactions starting points, depending on the affected book side, we simply 
refer to these events as buy and sell trades. However, in our attempt to capture the largest possible 
number of dependency effects, we follow Large (2007) and make the distinction between trades 
affecting the best available price and the bid-ask spread from those who do not. In our Xetra 
context, we relate these categories to transactions entirely consuming the first depth level and 
beyond, or trades-through (see Toke and Pomponio (2012)), and those partially affecting this best 
price level. We denote Trades w/ BPI as Buy* (Sell*) events and Trades w/o BPI as Buy (Sell). 
Panel I of Figure 2 visually presents a Buy* trade event example. The best ask price level being 
entirely consumed, while the bid-ask spread increases from 0.02 to 0.03, the pre-trade second best 
ask price becomes the post-trade best ask price. Similarly, Panel II shows the effects of a Buy 
event. In this case, the best ask level is partially consumed with no effect on the best ask price and 
the bid-ask spread. 
We define a distinct event categories for LOS and LOC events taking place on the bid and ask 
sides of the book on a depth level basis. As with trade events, we make the distinction between 
LOS with and without best price impact. While referring to bid and ask LOS w/o BPI events as 
BA1 and AA1, we identify bid and ask LOS w/ BPI as BA1* and AA1*. Representing the arrival 
of a new limit order inside the bid-ask spread, these last events present some particularities. First, 
for these events to be feasible, the spread must be wide enough to allow the creation of a new price 
level. Consequently, in situations where the bid-ask spread is only one tick wide, it is impossible 
for BA1* and AA1* events to be observed. Because of this specificity, Zheng et al. (2014) have 
modeled these events arrival using constrained Hawkes processes. However, our BMW, SAP and 
ADS stocks presenting a bid-ask spread wider than one tick for 92, 70 and 88 percent of the 
complete 61 trading days dataset, we keep relying on the traditional multivariate Hawkes processes 
for the representation of each of our events arrival sequences. Second, assuming the creation of a 
price level inside a favorable spread, the only event occurrence identified as BA1* or AA1* is the 
one related to the submission of this new level first order. As long as its price remains the best 
available, depending on its book side, any LOS taking place on this depth level will be identified 
as a BA1 or AA1 event. Panel III of Figure 2 provides a simple ask LOS w/ BPI event example. 
As for the previous examples, before the event occurrence, the best available ask price is 1.06 with 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

17 
 
a 0.02 bid-ask spread. Then, an ask 1.05 limit order is submitted, leading to the creation of a new 
best ask price level and a decreased bid-ask spread that goes from 0.02 to 0.01, which situation is 
identified as the occurrence of an AA1* event. 
Our extension of Large (2007) events classification mostly concerns limit order submissions 
without best price effect and limit order cancellations. In this paper, the author defines four event 
types, one for each combination of book side (bid or ask), and LO action (submissions or 
cancellations). In order to include a depth dimension into our LOB events arrival analysis, in 
addition to the book side, we group LOS and LOC events on the basis of the depth level number, 
which is relative to the best bid or ask price on which they take place. Disregarding the involved 
prices, we refer to LOS w/o BPI events taking place on the twenty referenced depth levels as BA1 
to BA20 for the bid book side, and AA1 to AA20 for the ask side. Similarly, we denote bid and 
ask LOC events as BC1 to BC20 and AC1 to AC20. This is to reduce the number of categories 
required to cover the same price range that we choose this best prices relative approach rather than 
that of Cont et al. (2010) who uses prices tick grids in order to define their events arrival processes. 
Because of this choice, we identify three possible scenarios leading to the identification of the 
same LOS event type. Figure 2 provides an example for each of them where the type of the 
identified event is AA2. First, Panel IV presents the trivial case where a limit order is submitted 
on the existing second best ask price level, increasing its available liquidity. Second, in the Panel 
VI example, no liquidity with a 1.07 price is available in the pre-event LOB. Therefore, resulting 
from a limit order submission leading to the creation of a new depth level on this available tick 
space, the event is identified as taking place on the second best price level, despite the pre-event 
prevalence of a different depth level 2. With the same idea, Panel VI presents a situation where a 
submitted limit order also leads to the identification of a depth level 2 LOS event despite the fact 
that room is available for a 1.07 new second best price level. In this case, the post-event 1.08 
involved price level still corresponds to the second best price. Closing our events identification 
examples, Panel VII finally presents a BC1 event case in which the liquidity available on the bid 
best price level is decreased by the size of the cancelled order. 
Having formally identified the events of interest, Figure 3 presents daily average number of the 
events studied in this paper for our three liquid stocks. Globally, Panels (a) to (c) suggests limit 
order submissions to be more frequent than transactions. Disregarding their detailed classification, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

18 
 
for each trade event, our liquid stocks are subject to averages 30.5, 26.9 and 28.2 limit order 
submissions. When it comes to the most aggressive events, Panel (a) shows Trades w/ BPI to be 
slightly more frequent than Trades w/o BPI. The actual number of shares consumed in these trades 
being not considered in our classification, it is not surprising to observe an almost equal numbers 
of Trades w/ BPI and Trades w/o BPI events. Although likely for very large trades to consume 
more than one price level, these events classification remains dependent of the LOB shape. For 
the same number of consumed shares, it is possible for a trade to be classified as either Buy* 
(Sell*) or Buy (Sell), depending on the pre-trade LOB. As we decrease on the events underlying 
action aggressively scale, Panels (b) and (c) suggest that while more common than Trades, BA1* 
and AA1* appear less frequent than BA1 and AA1. We relate this observation to the fact that LOS 
w/o BPI events are not restricted by the previously described bid-ask spread conditions and involve 
less commitment than LOS w/ BPI underlying actions. Finally, regarding deeper LOB events, 
Panels (b) to (d) show that for LOS as well as LOC, an important part of the action actually take 
place on depth levels 1 to 5. Beyond this point, we denote a decrease in events arrival up to depth 
level 10 for LOS and level 11 for LOC where some local peaks are observed. Afterward, the 
number of occurrences appears generally constant up to level 17. Finishing with depth levels 18 
to 20, although LOC events appear slightly more common than LOC, a very small number of both 
event types appear to take place this far from the best bid and ask. 
5. The model 
In this section, we relate Hawkes processes theory to our events definition through the definition 
of our potential arrival processes. We begin by defining the set of all events using the following 
expression: 
(21) 
𝑆= {
𝐵𝑢𝑦∗, 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙∗, 𝐵𝑢𝑦, 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙, 𝐵𝐴1∗, 𝐴𝐴1∗,
𝐵𝐴1, … , 𝐵𝐴20, 𝐴𝐴1, … , 𝐴𝐴20, 𝐵𝐶1, … , 𝐵𝐶20, 𝐴𝐶1, … , 𝐴𝐶20   }. 
In addition to Trades w/ BPI, Trades w/o BPI and LOS w/ BPI, this set includes LOS w/o BPI and 
LOC events taking place on depth levels 1 to 20 for both sides of the book, which represents a 
total of 86 event types. Obtained from equation (15), the next expression represents the intensity 
function of any event 𝑚∈𝑆 process on a given trading day 𝑑= 1, … , 61. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

19 
 
(22) 
𝜆𝑑
𝑚(𝑡) = 𝜇𝑑
𝑚+ ∑∑𝛼𝑑
𝑛/𝑚𝑒−𝛽𝑑
𝑛/𝑚(𝑡−𝑡𝑘
𝑛)
𝑡𝑘
𝑛 < 𝑡
𝑛∈𝑆𝑚
 
In this definition, 𝑆𝑚 corresponds to the set of predecessor events used to explain the arrival of the 
successor event 𝑚. In a complete model context, ∀𝑎∈𝑆, 𝑆𝑎= 𝑆, which is related to the previous 
section notation by |𝑆| = 𝑀. However, 𝑆 representing 86 event types, a complete model would 
involve 7 396 events relationships, which would lead to the estimation of 14 878 parameters on a 
daily basis. We establish rules to limit the number of explanatory events involved in some of the 
intensity processes. Based on events categories and affected depth levels, we define four sets of 
explanatory events acting as starting points in the estimation methodology presented in the next 
section. These sets definition are presented in Table 1. Given a successor event 𝑚∈𝑆 (column), 
𝑆𝑚 includes the checked explanatory events groups (rows). First, Trades and LOS w/ BPI arrival 
intensity processes are initially unrestricted. Indeed, taking advantage of the data availability, we 
test these successor events arrival for all potential dependency relationships. Second, Trades and 
LOS w/ BPI are part of the potential explanatory events set of all LOB events. Then, we define the 
exact set of each of them on the basis of its occurrence depth level. Following an incremental 
pattern, the potential explanatory events sets for LOS and LOC events taking place on depth levels 
1 to 3, 4 to 6 and 7 to 10 respectively include levels 1 to 3, 1 to 6 and 1 to 10 LOB events. In a last 
increment, no restriction are imposed on depth levels 11 to 20 LOB events arrival intensity 
processes. By imposing these restrictions, the number of relationships potentially included in our 
daily models is reduced to 5268, which leads to 10622 estimated parameters. We consider this 
29% reduction as an interesting trade-off between model exhaustivity and estimation efficiency. 
6. Estimation methodology 
Having defined an extensive set of potentially related events and imposed initial restrictions to our 
multivariate Hawkes process, we intent to identify the most recurrent dependency relationships 
observable for our three stocks over our data sample period. Each trading session being unique in 
many ways, we do not attempt to analyze each daily idiosyncrasy present in these stocks events 
dependencies structures. However, by focussing on the significant and persistent relationships, we 
expect to identify and depict some of their more general characteristics. In order to identify these 
interrelations, we develop a two part estimation methodology that we apply on each of our three 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

20 
 
liquid stocks. First, on a trading day basis, we identify the members of the previously defined sets 
of potential explanatory events that have a significant effect on the arrival of their respective 
successor event. We refer to the daily Hawkes processes made of these relationships as complete 
models. Then, selecting the most recurrent relationships from these daily models, we define a final 
Hawkes process that we identify as a descriptive model. Afterward, it becomes possible to perform 
our analysis using the daily parameters estimated value of the three descriptive models. It is 
important to note that despite the fact that the initial sets of potential explanatory events are the 
same for each stock, since they do not present the same recurrent events relationships, we observe 
discrepancies across the components of the three descriptive models. 
Estimating high-dimensional Hawkes processes parameters presents some challenges. The loglikelihood function being not strictly concave, it is possible for the numerical maximization 
procedure to find a local maximum instead of a global one.5 Our experiments suggest this method 
to offer a better performance in situations where the underlying process is not crowed by multiple 
non-significant relationship parameters to estimate. Parameters initial value selection also appears 
to represent a key factor to convergence. Having these issues in mind, we establish that in our 
high-dimensional context, for a given successor event, estimating the parameters of a Hawkes 
process simultaneously by initially including all the concerned predecessor events may not 
represents the best avenue. Indeed, our main objective being to identify relevant predecessor / 
successor events relations without prior assumption, testing all of them in a single pass may 
represents an attempt to estimate multiple non-significant parameters. In the same spirit, providing 
appropriate initial values for all the estimated parameters may become a challenging task. In this 
context, we use an iterative methodology allowing to divide the whole parameters estimation task 
into smaller sub-tasks. By successively introducing potential relationships into the model, it 
becomes possible to discard the less relevant ones early in the process. 
Working on a stock, trading day and dependant event basis, our methodology first step consists in 
estimating the parameters of a simple univariate Hawkes model for each potential explanatory 
event. Each of these models assumes the included predecessor event type as the only one involved 
 
5 We perform parameters estimation using Matlab interior-point algorithm. In situations where this algorithm does not 
converge correctly, the BOBYQA algorithm implemented in the free NLOpt package is used for a second estimation 
pass. In the rare cases for which this second algorithm also fails to converge, the tested dependency relationship is 
discarded. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

21 
 
in the successor event intensity process. The main objective of this first step is to obtain parameters 
initial values to be used in the next estimation round in which candidate explanatory events are 
successively introduced into the model. It also allows us to go through first relationships discarding 
round. Explanatory events for which the estimated 𝛼 parameter p-value is larger than 0.01 are 
immediately excluded. These values are obtained by inverting the Hessian matrix at the loglikelihood maximum point identified by the non-linear optimization algorithm. We also exclude 
events relationships for which the 𝛼 parameter value, although appearing significant, is smaller 
than 0.1. Finally, we discard any relationship presenting a branching ratio (BR) smaller than 0.02. 
In this case, we consider the predecessor event to have a neglectable effect on the successor event 
arrival. By performing this first discarding task early, we attempt to ease the next estimation rounds 
that may benefit from reduced sets of potential explanatory events. 
The second step represents the core of our estimation methodology. It generally consists in 
multiple model estimations for each explained event type. For each of them, we begin with the set 
of predecessor events that have not been discarded from the previous step. We build the 
foundations of each daily complete model iteratively. On each iteration, a new explanatory event 
candidate is introduced into the evolving model. We use parameters value obtained in the first step 
as optimization algorithm initial values for the newly introduced predecessor event. Once the 
model parameters are estimated, events relationships appearing non-significant or weak are 
discarded. We keep using the criteria described in the first step to perform these exclusions. The 
non-discarded explanatory events remain in the model for the next iteration. In these cases, rather 
than using step one coefficients as initial values for the optimization algorithm, we use their last 
estimated values. This iterative procedure goes on until all step one predecessor events candidates 
have been tested in the model. At this stage, we identify the Hawkes process model containing the 
non-discarded events as the complete model for the trading day. 
For each stock, the last step of our methodology consists in building a descriptive model and 
estimating its parameters value for each trading day. We simply use the number of days for which 
event relationships have been confirmed as a part of a daily complete model to select the 
components of these final models. We choose each predecessor event considered as having a 
significant effect on the successor event on at least 31 days. This threshold ensures the relationships 
included in our final models to have been part of more than 50 percent of the daily complete 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

22 
 
models. Once this task is completed, each model parameters are estimated on a daily basis. These 
estimated values that represent a source of events dependency information are used to perform our 
next section analysis. 
7.  The results 
 Descriptive models selection 
Reporting results from the first step of our estimation methodology, Table 2 presents the number 
of trading days for which events relationships meet our selection criteria. Despite relying on 
preliminary observations, we consider this table as a general events arrival dependency map. The 
different panels split explained events types by categories and depth levels of occurrence.  Each 
cell represents a potential relationship for which the row and the column link a predecessor event 
to a successor event. We use the number of trading days over which the selection criteria are met 
to classify these relationships. First, we qualify events effects encountering the selection conditions 
on 0 to 6 trading days (out of 61) as absent. Conversely, we define those for which the numbers of 
days lies between 55 and 61 as persistent. While fairly straightforward to categorize these first 
relationships groups, the task increases in ambiguity when it comes to those presenting a number 
of effective trading days lying between these two opposite ranges bounds. In this context, we 
define events effects meeting our significance criteria on 7 to 30 trading days as sparse. We relate 
these effects to algorithms and trading mechanisms that have a significant impact on a limited 
number of trading days. On the other hand, because of their impact on the main part of our analysed 
period, we classify effects observed on 31 to 54 days as frequent. Therefore, having established 
our selection threshold to 50% of the trading days, these last effects combine to those identified as 
persistent to form our descriptive models dependency components. 
Table 2 Panel I first shows that for our liquid stocks, Trades w/ BPI and Trades w/o BPI events 
appear only affected by Trades w/o BPI and LOS w/ BPI on a recurrent enough basis to be included 
in our descriptive models. As mentioned before, we have defined our initial candidate models in 
order to be able to take advantage of the data availability and analyse the effects of LOB events on 
the arrival of Trades w/ BPI and Trades w/o BPI events. However, having performed an extensive 
search for the presence of  BA1 to BA20, AA1 to AA20, BC1 to BC20 and AC1 to AC20 effects 
on the arrival of Buy*, Sell*, Buy and Sell events, we conclude in the general absence of such 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

23 
 
relationships. As presented in Panel I, despite some sparse exceptions, most of these relationships 
have met our selection criteria on less than 7 trading days, which are qualified as absent based on 
our previously defined scale. We relate this lack of recurrent effects to the proportion of LOB 
events relative to Trades. In line with the previously presented numbers, regardless of the depth 
level on which they take place, disregarding LOS w/ BPI, the average number of LOB events 
appears 50.8 to 57.3 times higher than the number of Trade events. This information suggests the 
LOB to be the theatre of multiple LOS and LOC strategies that, most of the time, do not lead to 
actual shares exchange. Therefore, we consider consistent that the Trades events arrival do not 
appear systematically affected by single events arising from these extensive games. On the other 
hand, the presence or absence of Trades w/o BPI and LOS w/o BPI effects on Trades w/ BPI and 
Trades w/o BPI events seems related to the LOB side affected by both predecessor and successor 
events. Indeed, Panel I shows that while Buy/Buy*, Sell/Sell*, Buy/Buy and Sell/Sell appear 
frequent to persistent, it is possible to qualify Buy/Sell*, Sell/Buy*, Buy/Sell and Sell/Buy as 
absent. Then, presenting lower contrast levels, AA1*/Buy* and BA1*/Sell* appear to be highly 
persistent for our three stocks while BA1*/Buy* and AA1*/Sell* span from sparse for SAP, to 
frequent in the cases of BMW and ADS. Consequently, the SAP descriptive model imposes 
restrictions on these two last relationships, which is not the case for BMW and ADS. We use the 
same guidelines for AA1*/Buy and BA1*/Sell that appear frequent in the BMW and SAP cases 
but meet our selection criteria on less than half the trading days for ADS. 
Panel I of Table 2 also indicates that LOS w/ BPI (BA1* and AA1*) arrival seems mainly affected 
by Trades and other BA1* and AA1* events. With some rare sparse exceptions, these events 
appear generally unaffected by LOS and LOC occurring on depth levels 2 to 20. The situation 
differs when it comes to LOS and LOC events taking place on the prevalent best price levels. We 
observe some BA1, AA1, BC1 and AC1 events effects on the arrival processes of BA1* and AA1*. 
The actual presence or absence of such relationships appear directly related to the involved events 
book side of occurrence. Indeed, in a radical contrast with the high BA1/BA1* and AA1/AA1* 
persistence levels, we note a complete absence of BA1/AA1* and AA1/BA1* relationships. 
Similarly, while BC1/AA1* and AC1/BA1* appear highly persistent, we observe various levels 
of recurrence for BC1/BA1* and AC1/AA1* that go from sparse to persistent. In this context, 
since it meets our criteria on an insufficient number of trading days, AC1/AA1* is excluded from 
our BMW descriptive model. Trades w/o BPI effects on LOS w/ BPI also appear related to each 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

24 
 
event book side. Indeed, while Buy/BA1* and Sell/AA1* show an important level of persistence, 
Sell/BA1* and Buy/AA1* appear almost inexistent. Finally, the persistent Buy*/BA1* and 
Sell*/AA1* and frequent to persistent Sell*/BA1* and Buy*/AA1* relationships preliminarily 
suggest LOS w/ BPI events occurrence probability to be increased by the two types of Trades w/ 
BPI events. 
Representing the last elements of this preliminary results overview, Panels II to IX of Table 2 
present relationships involving LOS w/o BPI and LOC events as the successor counterpart. Since 
most of these results appear symmetrical for both sides of the book, we focus on dependent events 
taking place on the bid side of the book, which correspond to Panels II to V. These panels show 
that the recurrence level of some relationships sharing predecessor and successor events category 
may appear related to the depth levels over which these involved events take place. This translates 
into dependency zones delimited by predecessor and successor events depth level of occurrence 
over which, relationships may present increasing, decreasing, or similar levels of recurrence. 
As shown in Panels II to V, the number of event types affecting LOS w/o BPI and LOC arrival 
recurrently enough to be included in our descriptive models appears non monotonically decreasing 
as the depth level on which these successor events take place increases. For our liquid stocks, while 
presenting a peak regarding BA1 to BA4 and BC1 to BC4, the trend becomes generally decreasing 
when it comes to LOB events occurring on depth levels 5 to 12. Beyond this point, when greater 
than zero, the number of event types having a recurrent effect on the arrival of LOS w/o BPI and 
LOC is limited to one or two. Panels III and V show that depending on their category, successor 
events appear recurrently affected by the arrival of at least one predecessor event type up to a depth 
level rank lying between 16 and 19. BA11 to BA20 and BC11 to BC20 events arrival processes 
appear generally unaffected by other LOS w/o BPI and LOC occurrence, no matter the depth level 
on which these predecessor events take place. Still shown in Panels III and V, with three frequent 
and one persistent exceptions regarding LOS w/o BPI, the 1600 relationships of these natures that 
have been processed through our estimation methodology appear at most sparse. We observe 
important dependency zones over which relationships have not met our selection criteria on a 
single trading day. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

25 
 
Panels II to V also suggest LOS w/o BPI and LOS arrival to be generally affected by Trades and 
LOS w/ BPI events. We observe some of these events to have a recurrent effect on LOS w/o BPI 
arrival up to level 16 and LOC up to level 19. With rare exceptions, they remain the only events 
identified by our methodology as having a recurrent effect on LOB events taking place above level 
11. Leaving the detailed dynamics description to a subsequent section, we observe the absence, 
presence, and recurrence of these relationships to appear highly related to the LOB side affected 
by the involved events. Moreover, although presenting different patterns, the number of trading 
days over which relationships meet our selection criteria appear decreasing as we move higher in 
the depth levels. Taking the example of Trades w/ BIP / LOS w/o BPI, despite some minor 
discrepancies among our liquid stocks, while Buy* / BA1 to BA3 appear generally persistent, we 
note the Buy* effects recurrence level to go from frequent to sparse in the BA4 to BA7 successor 
events zone. Past this point, with some sparse exceptions, it becomes absent in the BA9 to BA20 
area. On the other hand, Sell* events present a generally frequent to highly persistent effect on 
BA1 to BA16. 
 Data fitting 
Having selected a complete descriptive model for each of our three liquid stocks, the second step 
of our methodology involves estimating their parameters on a trading day basis. In this section, we 
use the resulting set of estimated values to perform general data fitting analysis. Our models 
essentially serving descriptive purposes, we do not consider this paper in the best data fitting race. 
Indeed, we consider the basic exponential kernel appropriate for the achievement of our general 
events relationships analysis task. That being said, it remains obvious that each of our model 
should deliver a minimum data fitting performance to be considered as serious candidates. 
Fortunately, we demonstrate that various segments of our descriptive models do not only perform 
well when compared to the basic Poisson homogeneous model, they also offer satisfying 
performances in absolute terms. Widely used for point processes data fitting analysis, Figure 4 
presents a quantile-quantile plot (Q-Q plot) for each stock and explained event type pair. Since a 
perfect fitting would involve inter-event compensators to follow a unit mean and standard 
deviation exponential distribution, each graphic presents this theoretical distribution as the dotted 
diagonal line against which our descriptive model inter-event compensators are plotted on a 
quantile basis. For comparison purposes, we also present the quantiles obtained from 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

26 
 
homogeneous Poisson processes. For each model, inter-event compensators are computed using 
the corresponding trading day estimated parameters. 
In order to investigate the performance gap between our descriptive models and the homogeneous 
Poisson models, we follow Rambaldi et al. (2017) and introduce the adjusted baseline. In our 
context, this measure relates to the proportion of an event arrival process that may be related to its 
constant baseline component, which correspond to 𝜇𝑚 in equation (15). Having estimated 
expression (22) parameters on a daily basis, for each explained event 𝑚∈𝑆, we refer to 𝜇̂𝑑
𝑚 as the 
Hawkes intensity process estimated baseline on trading day 𝑑= 1, … , 61. For the same event type 
and trading day, 𝐸[𝜆𝑑
𝑚(𝑡)] reports the arrival process unconditional intensity expectation as 
defined in equation (17). Therefore, we define the adjusted baseline as 𝜇̂𝑑
𝑚𝐸[𝜆𝑑
𝑚(𝑡)]
⁄
, which, as 
introduced before, reports the proportion of trading day 𝑑 event 𝑚 intensity attributable to its 
constant baseline. Hence, in the absence of Hawkes effect in a descriptive model event arrival 
processes that would correspond to a Poisson process, this measure would take the constant value 
one. For each event type, Table 3 reports 𝜇̂𝑑
𝑚̅̅̅̅ and 𝜇̂𝑑
𝑚𝐸[𝜆𝑑
𝑚(𝑡)]
⁄̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
, the baseline and adjusted baseline 
daily average. Figure 5 complements this information with a visual presentation of most LOB 
events adjusted baseline daily average.  
Beginning with Trade w/ and w/o BPI events, Figure 4 Panel I Q-Q plots indicate that despite a 
performance appearing superior to that of homogeneous Poisson models, this segment of our 
descriptive models present some weaknesses regarding data fitting. Lu and Abergel (2018) results 
suggest that these specific events arrival processes could benefit from a double exponential kernel 
to improve these performance. However, despite these mitigated results, we still consider the 
simple exponential kernel adequate in our global analysis context. Given our methodology, 
nothing indicates that the identification of the presence or absence of relationships affecting the 
arrival of Buy*, Sell*, Buy and Sell events would be affected by the use of a more advanced kernel 
to describe their intensity processes. Moreover, it is essential to note that despite the fact that a 
Hawkes process model is considered as a whole, during the estimation step, each events arrival 
process modeling remains independent of that of the others. Indeed, this representation 
independence is enforced by the fact that explanatory events occurrence times are exogenous to 
each dependent event intensity processes. Consequently, in our descriptive context, Trades w/ and 
w/o BPI imperfect data fitting have no effect on the other 82 LOS and LOC successor event types 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

27 
 
present in our global framework, even if these former predecessor events appear to sometime play 
important roles in the latter successor events arrival. 
When it comes to limit order submission and cancellation events, Figure 4 Q-Q plots presents 
some interesting trends relative to the data fitting performance of our descriptive models and their 
Poisson homogenous counterparts. Beginning with LOS w/ BPI, Panel I shows an important 
performance improvement over Trades. Indeed, despite their previously described particularities, 
BA1* and AA1* appear adequately represented by our descriptive models. Further into our event 
types set, Panels II to V show that as we move from the highest to the deepest price levels of 
occurrence, our models LOS w/o BPI and LOC events arrival processes data fitting performance 
exhibit some general trends. Despite the facts that these tendencies appear not perfectly monotonic 
in events depth of occurrence and that each stock presents some idiosyncrasies, by dividing our 
LOB price levels into three depth segments, it is possible to highlight general patterns that apply 
to our three liquid stocks. First, our models absolute data fitting performance appears decreasing 
as we increase in depth level of occurrence. They exhibit their best performance regarding events 
occurring on low depth levels 1 to 5 with visual results that we consider highly adequate. Beyond 
this point, our models performance appears to gradually deteriorate. Indeed, Panels II to V show 
mixed performance regarding events occurring on the order book middle segment consisting in 
price levels 6 to 11. Despite not catastrophic, events taking place on depth levels 6 to 11 generally 
exhibit poorer data fitting than what have been observed on lower depth levels. Exceptions are 
observed for BA10 (AA10) and BC11 (AC11) that present satisfactory results. Afterward, for 
events taking place on depth levels 12 to 20, our models data fitting capacity appears generally 
suboptimal. It is interesting to note that in absolute terms, LOS w/o BPI and LOC events fitting 
performance present very similar characteristics. From an events arrival dynamics point of view, 
we consider fortunate that disregarding their types [72.2%; 78.8%; 66.8%] of our identified LOB 
events take place on depth levels 1 to 5, which correspond to the segment on which our descriptive 
models present their best performance. On the other hand, we also consider fortunate that only 
[7.0%; 4.1%; 8.1%] of our identified LOB events appear to occur on depth levels 12 to 20, which 
correspond to the LOB segment over which our models shows their least interesting data fitting 
performance. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

28 
 
The second tendency relates to our descriptive models performance relative to Poisson 
homogeneous models. As shown in Figure 4 Q-Q plots the data fitting gap between the two tested 
frameworks appears to decrease as we increase in LOS w/o BPI and LOC events depth level of 
occurrence. In addition to being attributable to our selected models deteriorating absolute 
performance, this trend may be attributed to the improving performance of the Poisson 
homogeneous models. As before, these tendencies monotonicity being imperfect, they are better 
perceived when we split the LOB into three depth segments. Back to the low depth levels 1 to 5 
events, it is actually possible to note that while our LOS w/o BPI and LOS events descriptive 
models exhibit their best performance, the Poisson homogeneous models display their poorest 
results. We relate these visually important gaps to our descriptive models processes low adjusted 
baseline values. Figure 5 shows that among all events represented, the descriptive models intensity 
processes of those taking place on the five lowest depth levels present the smallest average adjusted 
baseline with means of [0.28; 0.21; 0.30] for LOS w/o BPI and [0.22; 0.23; 0.32] for LOC events. 
Such low values indicate a relatively small Poisson homogeneous contribution and large Hawkes 
effects contribution to their arrival. Indeed, we have to keep in mind that in our current framework, 
for any event 𝑚∈𝑆 and trading day = 1, … , 61 , 1 −𝜇̂𝑑
𝑚𝐸[𝜆𝑑
𝑚(𝑡)]
⁄
 corresponds to the proportion 
of event 𝑚 arrival that may be related the Hawkes effects involved in its arrival process. For low 
levels LOS w/o BPI and LOC events, not only are these effects numerous, but they seems to bring 
relevant information to the models, which leads to our interesting data fitting results both relative 
and absolute. Once again, events taking place on the LOB middle segments present mixed results. 
Regarding these events which take place on depth levels 6 to 11, the decreasing performance gap 
relative to Poisson homogeneous processes appears mostly attributable to these last framework 
data fitting improvement. Figure 5 reveals some average adjusted baselines increased values with 
means of [0.46; 0.48; 0.41] for LOS w/o BPI and [0.41; 0.49; 0.48] for LOC events. This suggests 
a tendency for these middle depth events arrival to be slightly more driven by the constant 
components of our Hawkes processes based descriptive models, which may be related to the 
reduced visual Q-Q plot gap between them and Poisson homogeneous. 
Regarding the events occurring in the deep LOB segment, Figure 5 Q-Q plots show that overall, 
the quantiles related to our descriptive models events arrival processes are close to those of the 
Poisson homogeneous processes. We explain this global convergence by the reduced number of 
events relationships involved in the arrival process of the events taking place in this segment. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

29 
 
Indeed, as previously presented, these descriptive models processes include a maximum of two 
Hawkes components. To the extreme, our descriptive models arrival processes for LOS w/o BPI 
taking place on depth levels 17 to 20 include no Hawkes effects at all, which, as claimed before, 
leaves us with pure Poisson homogeneous processes. However, unlike events taking place on the 
two lowest LOB segment, we note an interesting difference between LOS w/o BPI and LOS events 
in the fact that while quantiles related to the events of the former category almost overlap those of 
Poisson homogeneous, Panels II to V Q-Q plots show a gap between quantiles related to events of 
the latter category and those of Poisson homogeneous. Despite subtle, this distinction suggests that 
on high depth levels, LOC events fitting performance stands out more from Poisson homogeneous 
than LOS w/o BPI. Leaving the actual events arrival dynamics implications to a subsequent 
section, we relate this difference to the more important constant baseline participation in LOS w/o 
BPI than in LOC events arrival processes that is observed in Figure 5. Disregarding the processes 
including no Hawkes component, this figure shows mean adjusted baseline averages of our 
descriptive models LOS w/o BPI events arrival of [0.75; 0.72; 0.76] while LOC events counterpart 
values equals to [0.52; 0.46; 0.50], which are closer to the values previously observed for events 
taking place in the middle depth LOB segments. These numbers suggest a less important constant 
baseline (more important Hawkes effects) contribution to LOC events arrival processes than to 
LOS w/o BPI. We consider these elements as a potential explanation for our descriptive models 
LOC events data fitting performance relative to Poisson that appears to be better than those of LOS 
w/o BPI when such events take place on depth levels 12 to 20. 
 Estimated parameters 
Having derived the adjusted baselines from the actual estimated constant baseline parameters, we 
now focus on Hawkes effects related parameters. On a stock basis, we define events 𝑚∈𝑆 and 
𝑛∈𝑆̂𝑚, where 𝑆̂𝑚⊆𝑆𝑚 corresponds to the set of explanatory events that have been selected for 
event 𝑚 descriptive model intensity process. Back to expression (22), these 𝑚/𝑛 relationships are 
daily characterized by the 𝛼𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 and 𝛽𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 parameters of which we denote the estimated values as 
𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 and 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚. Table 4 aggregates these parameters by providing their daily average. Each 2values cell relates to a selected event 𝑛 exponential Hawkes effect on an event 𝑚 arrival. For each 
𝑚/𝑛 effect, 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅  relates to the initial intensity increment and 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅, to the exponential decay 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

30 
 
factor. Although not always speaking for themselves, these values represent the core of our 
multivariate Hawkes events dependency structure. 
Regarding the temporal aspect of our several exponential Hawkes effects, Table 4 shows that for 
our liquid stocks, 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ranges from [2.70 to 979; 1.58 to 903; 11 to 946]. These values 
corresponding to exponential decay factors, it may be difficult to appreciate their implications. 
Therefore, we focus on the more interpretable half-life period (HL) as Hawkes effects duration 
measure. However, in order to avoid overweighting outlier 𝐻𝐿𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 values in the 𝑛/𝑚 Hawkes effect 
duration analysis, instead of computing the actual half-life period daily average 𝑙𝑛(2) 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚
⁄̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
, we 
use 𝑙𝑛(2) 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅
⁄
 in which equation (7) is applied on the exponential decay factor daily average.6 In 
this context, Figure 6 presents these values cumulative distribution functions for the [374; 328; 
366] Hawkes effects that have been selected as parts of our descriptive models. With [4.95 ms; 
5.91 ms; 5.64 ms] median values and [17.4 ms; 27.5 ms; 14.7 ms] 90th percentiles, these measures 
suggests important proportions of individual Hawkes effects to remain effective on very small time 
spans. Although useful as a general duration indicator, we have to keep in mind that effects subject 
to exponential decay remain effective past their half-life period. As said before, it actually takes 
about 6.64 half-life periods for these effects to lose 99% of their strength. From the previous 
median half-life periods, it is easy to establish that 50% of our daily estimated events effects almost 
totally vanish within [33 ms; 39 ms; 38 ms]. Moreover, it is possible to claim that about [99.4%; 
96.2%; 100%] of our estimated Hawkes effects dismiss over time periods shorter than 500 ms, 
which is considered by Moallemi and Sağlam (2013) as a reasonable estimation of the human 
reaction time. For technical considerations such as the exponential kernel shape and the mutuallyexciting capacity of our Hawkes processes based models, we consider more or less relevant to 
relate Hawkes effects average effectiveness periods to actual reaction times to events. However, 
from our point of view, such generalized low average values may suggest algorithm involvement 
in our three liquid stocks LOB events arrival dynamics. 
 
6 Outlier 𝐻𝐿𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 values result from irregular 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 estimated parameters that may originate from estimation 
convergence issues or trading days exceptional idiosyncrasy. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

31 
 
When it comes to instantaneous increment in events arrival intensity related to Hawkes effects, 
Table 4 shows that 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ values range from [0.31 to 170; 0.52 to 181; 1.18 to 153] events per 
second with [10.27; 9.49; 8.9] median values. These numbers represent [1.7 to 822; 1.4 to 1368; 5 
to 1091] times the involved predecessor event unconditional expected intensity 𝐸[𝜆𝑚
𝑑(𝑡)] with [74; 
58; 96] median values7. Like exponential decay factors and effects HL period, although suggesting 
potentially important instantaneous intensity increases, it is highly difficult to interpret the 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ 
values by themselves. Indeed, to adequately quantify an actual predecessor event 𝑛 impact on a 
successor event 𝑚 arrival on a trading day 𝑑, the initial intensity surge has to be placed in its 
temporal context, which relate to the exponential decay factor. Back to our daily aggregated 
context, Figure 7 Panel I shows a relation in the magnitudes of 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ and 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅, which makes 
comparing Hawkes effects with different effective periods very difficult. Adding the fact that 
several hundred relationships have been identified, it becomes obvious that an analysis directly 
based on these two parameters for each effect would be inconvenient. In this context, the branching 
ratio (BR) becomes an interesting measure of effect strength. As defined before, 𝐵𝑅𝑛/𝑚 
corresponds to the effect of a single event 𝑛 occurrence on event 𝑚 compensator. Therefore, it 
represents the expected number of event 𝑚 that may be related to the arrival of an event 𝑛. Back 
to our daily aggregated framework, Figure 7 Panel II shows that unlike what we have observed for 
𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅, the magnitude of 𝐵𝑅𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚
⁄̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
 appears stable in 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅, which makes our several 
Hawkes effects comparable when using this metric. Additionally, 𝐵𝑅𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 s.t. 𝑑= 1, … ,61 appears 
more stable than 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 and 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚. Figure 8 provides visual general examples for these metrics 
dispersion with respect to their daily average. Panel I presents [0.29; 0.28; 0.29] and [0.32; 0.28; 
0.27] coefficients of variation for 𝛼̂𝑑
𝐵𝑢𝑦∗/𝐵𝐴1∗ and 𝛽̂𝑑
𝐵𝑢𝑦∗/𝐵𝐴1∗. On the other hand, the 𝐵𝑅𝑑
𝐵𝑢𝑦∗/𝐵𝐴1∗ 
coefficients of variation are [0.16; 0.16; 0.15], which is [1.8; 1.7; 1.9] and [1.9; 1.7; 1.8] times 
smaller than those observed for the previous two estimated parameters.8 Such information suggests 
 
7 We exclude BA1*/BC11 and AA1*/AA11 relationships that we identify as outliers with 𝛼̂𝑑
𝐵𝐴1∗/𝐵𝐶11̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ values of 
[362; 322; 324] and 𝛼̂𝑑
𝐴𝐴1∗/𝐴𝐶11̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ values of [353; 317; 323]. 
8 Figure 8 Panel II presents the mirror Sell*/AA1* relationship example where the coefficients of variation for 
𝛼̂𝑑
Sell∗/AA1∗ and 𝛽̂𝑑
Sell∗/AA1∗ are [0.28; 0.26; 0.30] and [0.30; 0.26; 0.31], which are[1.9; 1.7; 2.0] and [2.0; 1.8; 2.0] 
times smaller than those [0.15; 0.15; 0.15] 𝐵𝑅𝑑
Sell∗/AA1∗ values. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

32 
 
𝐵𝑅𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ to be more representative of the daily results than 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ and 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ averages, which is 
fortunate for our next section analysis. 
8. Events dynamics 
In this section, we use our descriptive models estimation results to analyse different aspects of the 
events arrival dynamics. We also attempt to identify some patterns that may be related to trading 
strategies and market participant behaviors. In our exponential Hawkes framework, different 
events relationships patterns are possible. Indeed, it is possible for multiple predecessor events of 
the same type to combine and increase the arrival rate of a successor event as long as it is possible 
for this task to be performed by precursor events of different types. We first have the self-exciting 
case in which, since 𝑛= 𝑚, the 𝑛/𝑚 effect leads to events of the same type clustering phenomena. 
We also observe the second situation where 𝑛≠𝑚 and the presence of the reciprocal 𝑛/𝑚 and 
𝑚/𝑛 relationships potentially translate into mutually-exciting situations. We note a third situation 
in which 𝑛≠𝑚 but only one of the 𝑛/𝑚 or 𝑚/𝑛 relationships is present. And finally, we observe 
several situations that we qualify as plurally-exciting in which more than two events are involved 
in an arrival dependency structure. Taking the simple example of the simple self-exciting case, the 
same alpha and beta parameters are used to characterize the timing and strength impact of an 
orphan event occurring in an inter-exciting period as well as for the third event of a cluster. The 
same applies to another example in which three events are defined: 𝑚∈𝑆 and 𝑛1, 𝑛2 ∈𝑆𝑚∗ such 
that 𝑆𝑚∗⊆𝑆𝑚. As before, this definition involves the presence of 𝑛1/𝑚 and 𝑛2/𝑚 relationships, 
which we define as plurally-exciting. In this case, we denote essentially five scenarios through 
which events 𝑛1 and 𝑛2 may have an impact on event 𝑚 arrival. We have the orphan 𝑛1 or 𝑛2 
event, multiple 𝑛1 or 𝑛2 occurrences and finally, the cases where we observe a combination of 𝑛1 
and 𝑛2 events. Since each of theses events arrival structures may origin from various trading 
strategies, on a daily basis, the maximum likelihood estimation methodology have to result in the 
best overall data fitting. Therefore, while some relationships estimated parameters suggest the 
successor event arrival rate to reach very high levels over small periods, we have to keep in mind 
that they may be   generally part of intensive excitation periods involving several types of 
predecessor events. Therefore, with some exceptions covered in the next section, we consider 
generally irrelevant to focus on a predecessor event single occurrence effect on a successor event. 
Indeed, since dependant on the arrival context, from our point of view, isolating the marginal effect 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

33 
 
of an event 𝑛 occurrence on event 𝑚 arrival probability requires too many strong assumptions such 
as the certainty that no other event affecting the arrival of event 𝑚 would occur over an arbitrary 
chosen time period to provide reliable results. In this context, since constant through all possible 
states, once again, the branching ratio (BR) represent a choice measure for our analysis of the 
events arrival dynamics.  
However, while providing information on a single event 𝑛 occurrence effect on event 𝑚 expected 
number, this ratio provides no information on the total events 𝑛 involvement in events 𝑚 arrival 
over a complete trading day. Therefore, comparing event relationships using BR as the only 
measure may lead to some misinterpretations. Indeed, for the same 𝐵𝑅𝑛/𝑚 value, the 𝑛/𝑚 
relationship implications differ given that event 𝑚 is less, equally, or more frequent than event 𝑛. 
In this context, to complement the branching ratio in our relationships comparison, we use the 
following expression to define the adjusted branching ratio, which is based on  Rambaldi et al. 
(2017) adjusted kernel norm : 
 
Under this expression, 𝐵𝑅𝑛/𝑚 is adjusted through its multiplication by the ratio of event 𝑛 on event 
𝑚 unconditional expected arrival intensities. The resulting adjusted branching ratio 𝐵𝑅̃𝑛/𝑚 reveals 
the proportion of event 𝑚 intensity that may be related to occurrences of event type 𝑛. In opposition 
to the previously defined adjusted baseline who provides the proportion of event 𝑚 arrival that 
may be related to its constant baseline 𝜇𝑚, the sum of its effects adjusted branching ratios provides 
the share that may be related to its Hawkes components. 
From this point, we mainly focus on the effects that have been considered recurrent enough to be 
included in our descriptive models. Since they have met our selection criteria at least on every 
other trading day, we believe these relationships to act as potential pieces of the events arrival 
dependency structure, which is summarized in Figure 9. Adopting a top-down approach, we begin 
with Panel I that presents a very general picture of the interrelations among our high level events 
categories. Afterward, in order to generalize our observations, we work on the basis of 
relationships classes. As presented in Panel II, these classes group relationships by involved 
(23) 
𝐵𝑅̃𝑛/𝑚= 𝐵𝑅𝑛/𝑚
𝐸[𝜆𝑛(𝑡)]
𝐸[𝜆𝑚(𝑡)]. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

34 
 
successor and predecessor event types and affected book sides. Depending on the involved event 
categories, such relationship classes may encompass one events effect or more. We assign them 
an identifier that goes from A1 to S1. Based on the LOB side affected by the involved events, each 
class is present in two variations. As an example, we consider that Bid LOS effects on Bid LOS 
and Ask LOS effects on Ask LOS events belong to the dual relationship classes identified P1, 
which is present twice in Panel II. Once again, because of the strong symmetry observed so far in 
the relationships affecting the bid and ask LOB sides, we attempt to simplify the presentation by 
essentially focussing on the buyers’ related events. Therefore, while Panel II presents both 
variations of our relationship classes, a single version is visually represented in Panels III and IV. 
Panel III exposes the dynamics related to Buy*, Buy and BA1* events. Panel IV performs the 
same task for Bid LOS w/o BPI and Bid LOC events. Supplementing Figure 9 as the core of the 
next subsections, for our liquid stocks, Table 5 presents the actual average branching ratios (𝐵𝑅) 
and adjusted branching ratios (𝐵𝑅̃) characterizing the individual Hawkes effects relating Trades, 
LOS w/ BPI and, LOS and LOC events taking place up to depth level 11. 
 Trades 
As pointed out before, our descriptive models suggest Trades and Trades w/ BPI events arrival to 
be affected by a limited number of events. Although few in numbers, these effects identified as 
recurrent by our methodology bring their share of LOB dynamics elements. We relate Buy/Buy* 
(A1) and Buy/Buy (C1) relationships to the trades clustering phenomena covered by Hewlett 
(2006). The self-exciting component C1 suggests the probability of observing a Buy event to be 
increased after the occurrence of an event of the same type. Similarly, C1 indicates that following 
a Buy event occurrence, the probability of Buy* event is also increased. These Hawkes effects 
being additive, more Buy events taking place within their effective time period lead to even higher 
Buy and Buy* occurrence probabilities. Despite the fact that they do not take the number of 
involved shares in each situations into account, A1 and C1 are consistent with a trading strategy 
consisting into splitting the execution of a large parent order into small child orders. We use the 
simple example of an investor intending to acquire 1000 shares who chooses to perform this task 
by submitting five consecutive 200 shares child aggressive orders instead of a single 1000 shares 
order. In a first scenario where the best ask price level contains more than 1000 shares, this 
execution strategies would result in 5 consecutive Buy events, which is consistent with the selfElectronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

35 
 
exciting C1 relationship. In a second scenario where the best ask price level contains exactly 1000 
shares, four Buy events would be first observed, followed by a Buy* event. In addition to C1, this 
case would also involve the A1 relation that suggests the short term probability of observing a 
Buy* event to be increased after the occurrence of a Buy event. Finally, the same effects 
combination would be involved in a third situation where the best ask price level would contain 
less than 1000 shares, which would lead to one or more of the child aggressive orders to execute 
against liquidity available on at least one higher depth level. In this context, the Buy* event would 
be potentially followed by one or more Buy events that would be part of the whole cluster. This 
first events arrival dynamics case illustrates the complexity involved in relating our descriptive 
models results to actual trading situations because of the limited number of parameters available 
to characterize several complex situations. 
As presented in Figure 9, Trades arrival intensity also appear affected by LOS w/ BPI events. 
Detailed in Panels II and III, AA1*/Buy* (B2) and AA1*/Buy (D1) suggest an increase in the 
expected number of Trade with and without BPI after the submission of an ask limit order inside 
the spread creating a new best price ask depth level. On the other hand, BA1*/Buy* (B1) suggests 
a similar phenomenon to follow the arrival of a bid limit order inside the spread. Unlike previous 
A1 and C1 relationships, our liquid stocks descriptive models present some discrepancies when it 
comes to the effects of LOS w/ BPI. While B2 have appeared persistent enough to be included in 
our models for each of our liquid stocks, B1 have not met our selection criteria for SAP, with the 
consequence of not making its descriptive model. The same applies to D1 that is not part of the 
ADS model. Nevertheless, we examine the interpretation of these last two effects insofar as, in 
addition to having satisfied our selection criteria for two of the three stocks, back to Table 2, we 
do not observe an absolute absence of relationship regarding the third one. With the most important 
BR values among these relationships categories, we relate the persistent B2 relationship to 
situations where the submission of a best price improving ask limit order (AA1*) would be 
followed by its rapid total execution (Buy*). In the same way, we relate D1 to the eventual partial 
consumption of a similar incoming limit order. When considered with C1 and A1, it is possible to 
relate D1 and even B2, to a Buy events cluster that may eventually lead to the total consumption 
of the new price level. Finally, we relate B1 to a different dynamics. In this case, we consider the 
mid-quote price increase related to a new best bid depth level as an incentive to acquire the 
liquidity available at the best ask price quickly. From Table 5 Panel I, it is interesting to note that 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

36 
 
despite smaller 𝐵𝑅 values, the 𝐵𝑅̃ values ranges for B1, B2 and D1 are comparable to those of A1 
and C1, which suggests the contribution of these Hawkes effects in the Trades arrival processes to 
be similar. From equation (23), it is possible to relate this observation to the fact that BA1* and 
AA1* are more frequent than Buy* and Buy, which appear to compensate for their more limited 
individual occurrence effects. 
 Limit orders submissions with best price impact 
Panels II and III of Figure 9 shows that LOS w/ BPI arrival rate may be affected by the occurrence 
of events from our four main categories. From a mechanical point of view, it is not surprising to 
note that, as indicated by their BR values in Panel II of Table 5, Trades w/ BPI appear to have the 
more important events occurrence individual effects. These events resulting in an increased bidask spread, more room becomes available for the creation of a new best price level on both side of 
the book. Despite the fact that our models do not explicitly take the magnitude of the spread growth 
into account, we know for sure that it corresponds to at least one tick. First, we consider the highly 
persistent (see Table 2) Buy*/BA1* (E1) relationship as a part of a price following dynamics in 
which the mid-quote price increase caused by the Buy* event may be followed by the creation of 
a new best bid price level. On the other hand, we consider Sell*/BA1* (E2) as part of a LOB 
resilience dynamics where the total execution of the previous best bid price level resulting in a 
Sell* event may be followed by the creation of a new one, through a limit order submission that 
would be identified as a BA1* event. 
When it comes to Trades w/o BPI effect on BA1* (F1), we consider this relationship in a mutuallyexciting context. Indeed, because of the Hawkes effects additive nature and the previously 
described clustering phenomena related to Buy event that may lead to a Buy*, we consider possible 
for Buy events to be part of potential dynamics leading to the formation of a BA1* event favorable 
environment, once again, in a price following context. Despite less important in terms of individual 
events occurrence effect, G1 to I1 indicates that some LOS and LOC events taking place around 
the best price levels may have effects on BA1* arrival. First, BA1*/BA1* (G1) suggests the 
possibility for BA1* events to occur in clusters. We consider successive BA1* events consistent 
with a book liquidity replenishment situation that may follow, as an example, a Sell* event (E2) 
resulting from a transaction having consumed more than one bid price levels. Regarding 
BA1/BA1* (H1), we consider the presence of its reciprocal BA1*/BA1 (N1) relationship (see 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

37 
 
Table 5 Panel II) as an indicator that BA1 and BA1* events occurrence may be favorited under 
similar circumstances. Both event types involve added liquidity on the best bid price level, actual 
or new. Finally, we relate I1 and I2 to the bid-ask spread enlargement that may result from BC1 
and AC1 events in situations where the cancelled limit order is the only constituent of the best 
price level. Shown in Table 5 Panel II, we consider the total absence of BA1*/BC1 and AA1*/AC1 
relationship for our liquid stocks as an indication that, in general, the cancellation of limit order 
creating a new best bid or ask price level does not immediately follow its submission. 
LOB events 
Having highlighted some interesting characteristics of Trades and LOS w/ BPI events arrival 
process, the main goal of this section is to perform a similar analysis for LOB events. Depending 
on the predecessor events, we observe relationships involving LOS w/o BPI and LOC as the 
successor event to present different characteristics. First, we study the effects of Trades and LOS 
w/ BPI on LO submissions and cancellations. Afterward, we achieve a similar task through the 
analyze of LOB events effects on each other arrivals. Finally, we take a look at each of these event 
categories contribution to the LOB events arrival. 
Figure 10 presents the effects of Trades w/ BPI, Trades w/o BPI, and LOS w/ BPI on LOS w/o 
BPI and LOC events taking place on depth levels 1 to 20 in terms of branching ratios. In line with 
our previous visual representations, J1 to K2 relationship classes are detailed through the inner 
graphics displaying the corresponding labels. Still working from the buyer point of view, we focus 
on Panels I, III and V that exhibit the effects of a single occurrence of Buy*, Buy and BA1* events. 
By concentrating on these predecessor events similarities, differences, and effects on LOB events 
arrival, we attempt to characterize the dynamics surrounding their occurrence. Basically, we relate 
the Buy*, Buy and BA1* events through the fact that they all result from an aggressive buyer 
action. Consuming at least one complete price level, we consider a Buy* event as very aggressive. 
Similarly, resulting from the partial execution of the best price level, we qualify the Buy event as 
aggressive. And, although it does not immediately lead to an actual transaction, since it results 
from the submission of the most aggressive limit order at a given time, we consider BA1* to 
immediately follow the two former events on our aggressiveness scale. When not related to only 
one of these events, the other properties relevant to our dynamics description are shared on an 
events pair basis. First, while Buy* and Buy affect the ask side of the book, BA1* have an impact 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

38 
 
on the bid side. Second, Buy* increases, BA1* decreases, and Buy has no effect on the bid-ask 
spread. Third, unlike Buy that does not affect the price structure, by respectively leading to a 
change in the best ask and bid prices, Buy* and BA1* increase the mid-quote price. When it comes 
to the effects on LOB events arrival, we identify these characteristics as more important than the 
actual liquidity execution involved in Buy* and Buy. Figure 10 suggests BA1* effects on LOB 
events arrival to be more important in numbers and in intensity than those related to Buy. However, 
one may expect Buy event effects to be closer to these of Buy* since they both involve actual 
liquidity execution, which appears inaccurate according to our descriptive models results. Indeed, 
while Buy* stands out as the most important predecessor event in terms of individual occurrence 
effects, it is immediately followed by BA1*. Since Buy is left behind, we identify the mid-quote 
price increase and the change in the LOB structure specific to the other two events as important 
determinants of the events arrival dynamics. With these LOB impacts in mind, we first distinguish 
two sets of similar relationship classes involving our three predecessor events. While J1, L1, and 
N1 suggest Buy*, Buy, and BA1* to affect bid LOS arrival, K2, M1, and O2 do the same regarding 
ask LOC. 
Beginning with bid LOS, as shown in Figure 10, the most important effects in terms of number of 
affected events and branching ratios belong to J1 and N1. These relationships suggest Buy* and 
BA1* events to be immediately followed by increased probabilities of bid LO submissions 
respectively taking place on depth levels 1 to 5 and 1 to 7. We relate these effects to eventual 
buyers submitting their limit orders in an environment where the stock price may appear to be 
increasing. Indeed, Buy* and BA1* events being accompanied by a mid-quote price increase, we 
consider these potential buyers to submit their limit orders behind this new price, in an attempt to 
follow this possible upward trend. At this point and all over the current analysis, we have to keep 
in mind that we denote increases in the expected number of bid LOS events following Buy* and 
BA1* occurrences, which highly differs from an actual systematic limit orders flow 
simultaneously taking place on these multiple depth levels. We assume that the depth levels on 
which such potential limit orders would be submitted would be determined by their owners 
patience level and trading strategy. Regarding the Buy predecessor event, as presented in Figure 
10 Panel III, L1 suggests it only affects bid LOS arrival taking place on depth levels 1 to 3 through 
effects that present smaller BR values than those attached to Buy* and BA1*. We relate these less 
important effects to the previously described absence of individual Buy event structural LOB 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

39 
 
effect. The transactions leading to the identification of these events only partially affect the best 
ask price level. However, we relate their presence to the fact that, as for Buy*, Buy events 
occurrence may suggest the presence of an impatient buyer, which may sometime be interpreted 
by patient sellers as a potentially increasing price signal. Also, we have to consider the previously 
established self-exciting nature of the Buy event that could lead to an addition of these effects over 
short time periods. 
Regarding the second group of relationships similar for our three predecessor events, as claimed 
before, K2, M1 and O2 suggest Buy*, Buy and BA1* to have an effect on ask LOC events arrival 
on various depth levels. These events potentially carrying signs of an increasing price, we consider 
the fact that they appear to favor the cancellations of sell limit orders intriguing. Indeed, it suggests 
that some market participants tend to cancel their limit orders as their execution probability 
increases. From our point of view, this phenomenon may be related to different situations. First, 
we consider possible for some orders to be owned by market makers with the intention of providing 
liquidity in the LOB without a real interest in seeing their orders executed. Second, they may be 
part of complex trading strategies potentially involving LO submissions and cancellations on both 
sides of the book. Finally, Buy*, Buy and BA1* suggesting the presence of impatient buyers, we 
consider possible for patient sellers already present on the ask side to cancel their limit order in an 
attempt to take more advantage of the potentially increasing price. In this last case, the cancelled 
limit orders would be eventually resubmitted with higher prices. Although Figure 10 suggests these 
relationships to be related to Buy*, Buy and BA1* events, it indicates Buy* to have the most 
important underlying effects. Indeed, while appearing to affect ask LOC events up to the ninth 
depth level, Buy* effects seem atypically strong for LOC taking place on levels 1 to 3. Actually, 
with average branching ratios generally above 0.8, the highest BR values observed in our entire 
system belong to Buy* effects on AC1 and AC2 events arrival. We relate this important K2 
relationship class to the fact that the Buy* event directly affect the ask side of the book by 
completely consuming one or more price levels, which is not the case for Buy and BA1*. A Buy* 
event occurrence has for consequence that all existing ask limit orders rank relative to the best ask 
price is improved by the number of price levels actually consumed by the underlying transaction. 
In our framework context, this rank correspond to the depth level number. No matter the trading 
strategies behind K2 effects, it is a certainty that the potentially involved limit orders have become 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

40 
 
closer to the best ask price before their cancellation. In this context, we consider possible for some 
systematic trading strategies to use limit orders depth level as a trigger to launch their cancellations. 
As presented through J2, Buy* events favor ask LOS through numerous relationships which, in 
some cases, may also be qualified as important in BR values terms. While observed up to depth 
level 16, these effects present more important BR values for AA1 to AA10. Back to Figure 10 
Panels III and IV, we observe a complete absence of similar effects involving Buy and BA1*. In 
line with a possible upward price trend, we relate these increased probabilities to eventual patient 
sellers submitting limit orders in an attempt to obtain an even better price than the actual new best 
ask price. The different depth levels over which the LOS probabilities are affected suggest various 
levels of patience, which may depend on the concerned investors’ characteristics and their trading 
strategies. Considering the previous scenario where a still patient seller would attempt to take a 
chance at a possibly increasing price. In an ask side reorganization context, a cancelled ask limit 
order could be submitted on a higher depth level. Despite speculative because of the lack of 
information sequentially relating K2 and J2, a part of J2 induced probability increases could be 
attributed to these resubmitted orders. 
We end the analysis of Trades and LOS w/ BPI impacts on LOB events arrival with relationship 
classes K1 and O1, which correspond to Buy* and BA1* effects on bid LOC. Panel III shows such 
effects to be totally absent when it comes to the Buy predecessor event. While K1 and O1 involve 
bid LOC probabilities increases up to depth level 19, we relate the absence of such effect regarding 
Buy to the fact that by definition, it does not change the best bid and ask prices and by extension, 
the mid-quote price. We relate bid LOC events that may arise in the K1 and O1 contexts to 
situations where limit orders would be cancelled by buyers observing an adverse move in the stock 
price. The unusually high number of depth levels over which LOC probabilities appear affected 
suggests various patience levels among the potentially concerned investors over time. Regarding 
K1, similar to what happens on the ask side where existing orders become closer to the best ask 
price as represented by K2, a Buy* event has for consequence that the limit orders already present 
on the bid side become farther from the best ask price. Therefore, depending on an investor 
patience level and trading strategy, a given distance from the best ask or mid-quote price may act 
as a threshold to trigger a limit order cancellation. From our point of view, unlike K2 where the 
cancelled limit orders were getting too close to the action for still patient sellers, K1 cancelled limit 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

41 
 
orders seem to get too far from the action to be kept alive by patient buyers seeing their execution 
probability reduced. In the O1 case, we observe some of the effects to be characterized by BR 
larger than those seen in K1. We explain this situation by the fact that unlike Buy* which affects 
the ask side of the book, BA1* events have a direct impact on the bid side through the addition of 
a new depth level that becomes the best price level. All existing bid limit orders are then affected 
by being automatically shifted one price level away from the best bid price. These effects strength 
suggests a limit order distance from its book side best price to be more monitored and used as a 
cancellation trigger than its distance from the opposite book side best price. Moreover, we consider 
the BA1*/BC11 important BR value as an indication that the 11th price level relative to the best 
price may be used by several algorithms as a threshold to determine that a limit order has become 
too far away (above level 10) from the action and, must be cancelled. We relate this strong 
relationship to the particularly good data fitting performance of our descriptive models regarding 
BC11 and AC11 (see Figure 4), which suggests an adequate representation of this dynamics. 
Additionally, O1 graphic suggests that reaching depth levels 2, 4 and 6 could also be single out as 
limit orders cancellation triggers. 
Regarding LOB events effects on each other arrival, we summarize these impacts through 
relationship classes P1 to S1. Figure 10 Panel IV provides a general idea of how bid LOS and LOC 
are related to other events of the same classes taking place on both sides of the book. In the 
previously described cases of Trades and LOS w/ BPI events, the absence of reciprocal 
counterparts to relationship classes J1 to O2 allowed the assumption of some forms of causality. 
While Trades and LOS w/ BPI appear to affect the arrival of LOB events in different ways, only 
few relationships going the other way have been observed. Indeed, with the exceptions of H1 to 
I2 that suggest best price levels LOS w/o BPI and LOC effects on BA1* and AA1* arrival, Trades 
and LOS w/ BPI generally appear unaffected by LOB events. However, it is possible to observe 
that some of the P1 to S1 relationship classes, which involve LOB events only, act as each other 
reciprocal. The resulting mutual-excitation phenomenon affect various events sets going from 
pairs of individual events of the same type to events groups of different types taking place on both 
sides of the book. By grouping extracts from Table 5, Table 6 summarizes the two most extended 
cases of mutually exciting zones present in our events dependency maps. While Panel I presents 
interrelations among bid LOS and ask LOC, Panel II does the same regarding ask LOS and bid 
LOC. Insofar as this phenomenon appears concentrated on the first three price levels, we solely 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

42 
 
focus on this segment of the LOB. Panel I shows that for each of our three liquid stocks, multiple 
relationships are present in the BA1 to BA3 / AC1 to AC3 zone, which correspond to the ask Q2 
relationship class. In a reciprocal way, the bid R2 class reveals several effects in the AC1 to AC3 
/ BA1 to BA3 zone. The situation increases in complexity when we also consider the bid P1 and 
ask S1 relationship classes that correspond to BA1 to BA3 / BA1 to BA3 and AC1 to AC3 / AC1 
to AC3. Although the involved individual effects do not present particularly high BR values, we 
conclude in an important level of interrelation among them. While Table 6 examples generally 
exhibit some individual relationships absence, Panel II shows total interconnection among AA1 to 
AA3 and BC1 to BC3 events in the BMW case. In this specific situation, all events occurrences 
seem to affect their own event type arrival and the arrival of each of the other event types present 
in the set. Although not all involving total interconnection, each Table 6 example involves a 
complex multi-event mutually excitation chains whose detailed interpretation may become very 
challenging. Consequently, in such situations, it becomes difficult to go further than assuming that 
the involved events tend to occur under the same circumstances. It is important to note that these 
circumstances may involve the occurrence of Trades and LOS w/ BPI events, or not. Indeed, 
although possible that J1 to O2 capture an important part of the Trades and LOS w/ BPI effects on 
LOB events, in our exponential Hawkes models context, P1 to S1 rely on the same parameters set 
to describe dependency among LOB events arrival whether or not they are part of a dynamic 
related to J1 to O2. However, Trades and LOS w/ BPI events being generally less frequent than 
LOB events, we consider possible for P1 to S1 relationship classes to be more related to situations 
taking place outside these events dynamics. 
As detailed through Panels III to VI, relationship classes P1 to S2 sometime have a black box 
appearance. However, although impossible for us to interpret each individual effect, we are still 
able to observe some general patterns. First, reminding the complete absence of Buy/Sell*, 
Sell/Buy*, Buy/Sell and Sell/Buy relationships, we denote the almost total nonappearance of 
recurrent relationships between bid and ask LOS events. A similar situation is observed regarding 
bid and ask LOC events, which occurrences also appear unrelated. It is true that we have observed 
the pairs of relationships (J1, J2), (K1, K2) and (O1, O2) that suggest some of these events to tend 
to follow the same Trades and LOS w/ BPI events. However, we consider that the difference in 
the BR values patterns specific to these relationships pairs consistent with this absence of 
interrelation among the affected events. As claimed before, these absences suggest opposite sides 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

43 
 
LOS and LOC to occur generally under distinct circumstances. Since these two class of events 
suggest different strategies and reading of the market conditions, it would be consistent for market 
participants to do not tend to perform the underlying actions concurrently. At the opposite, P1 
suggests that LOS taking place on the same side of the book tend to occur in similar contexts. As 
exposed by S1, the same phenomenon appears to apply to same side LOC events. As shown in 
Panels III and V, for both P1 and S1, the intensive mutual-excitation zone previously described 
appears to take place up to depth level four. Beyond this point, the same side LOS/LOS and 
LOC/LOC recurrent effects appear concentrated around the diagonal, which suggest that 
individual effects mostly relate events taking place on nearby depth levels. While same side 
LOC/LOC relationships appear diffuse and tend to vanish around depth levels 6 to 8, we observe 
recurrent LOS/LOS effects to follow a straight line up to depth level 10. It is interesting to note 
that this line is different from the actual diagonal that would encompass self-exciting Hawkes 
effects through which LOS events taking place on a given level would tend to follow each other. 
In fact, we observe an offset in the BA3 to BA9 / BA4 to BA10 line that suggests LOS occurrences 
on a given depth level to be followed by an increase in the arrival probability of LOS taking place 
one level higher. The depth level number being relative, it is unfortunately impossible for us to 
establish whether there is a price difference between the orders involved in these relationships or 
not. 
Regarding  relationships involving limit orders submission and cancellation events taking place on 
the same book side, since they respectively encompass LOS/LOC effects and their reciprocal 
counterparts LOC/LOS, for a given book side, we consider Q1 and R1 relationship classes as 
paired. Back to Table 5, Panels III to VI show that R1 includes more recurrent effects than Q1, 
which suggests a tendency for LOS events to follow LOC. This is consistent with our previous 
hypothesis suggesting that certain systematic strategies may reposition limit orders following 
certain changes in market conditions that may be driven by Trades w/ BPI and LOS w/ BPI. 
Finally, as introduced before, Q2 and R2 relate LOS and LOC events taking place on both sides 
of the LOB. As presented in Panels III to VI, each of these relationship classes involves an 
important mutual excitation zone that generally extends up to the third or fourth depth levels. Back 
to Figure 10, we have seen that relationship class pairs (J1, K2), (L1, M1) and (N1, O2) suggest a 
tendency for opposite sides LOS and LOC events to follow the same Trades and LOS w/ BPI 
events. The pairwise BR values patterns presenting similarities, we consider these Trades and LOS 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

44 
 
w/ BPI events arrival as circumstances under which these LOS and LOC events may tend to occur 
together. Taking place inside these contexts or not, these aggregated reciprocal relationships 
remain difficult to interpret since as usual, it is impossible to establish if the LOS and LOC events 
origin from the same market participants or not. However, they would be consistent with any 
strategy involving the cancellation of limit orders present on one side of the book and submission 
of new ones on the other side. As for all dynamics discussed in this section, the exact motivation 
and timing of such actions would depend on their trading strategies. 
Having focused on specific types of events relationships, we close this section with an overview 
of global event categories contribution to the arrival of LOB events. Figure 11 shows the average 
proportions of Trades w/ BPI, Trades w/o BPI, LOS w/ BPI and LOB events to the arrival of LOS 
w/o BPI and LOC events. For a given category, this measure sums the adjusted branching ratio of 
the included effects and reports the daily average. No distinction is made between the effects 
involving predecessor events impacting the LOB bid side and those affecting the ask side. These 
results are related to those presented in Figure 5 as for each successor event and trading day, the 
effects contribution sum essentially equals to one minus the adjusted baseline value. Proceeding 
in the usual order, we first observe a general steadiness regarding Trades w/ BPI contribution to 
the arrival of both LOS w/o BPI and LOC events taking place on depth levels 1 to 8. Beyond this 
point, we note a general increase in this contribution that afterward, remains generally constant 
until it vanishes among the highest considered levels. It is interesting to note that despite some 
very important individual effects, the contribution of Trades w/o BPI appears relatively small. 
Buy* effects on AC1 and AC2 represent good examples of this situation. Back to Figure 10 Panel 
I, we have seen that they present the most important individual events occurrence impact with 
average branching ratio values of [0.81 and 0.85; 0.83 and 0.92; 0.74 and 0.79]. However, when it 
comes to contribution, the average adjusted branching ratios fall to [0.11 and 0.10; 0.11 and 0.10; 
0.11 and 0.12]. Using expression (23), it is possible to relate this phenomenon the relative 
infrequence of the Buy* event with regard to BC1 and AC1. This applies to Trade w/ BPI effects 
on LOS w/o BPI and LOC events taking place on several depth levels. In fact, because of their 
generally significant individual effects on LOB events and small relative number of occurrences, 
we identify Trade w/ BPI effects as periodical LOB activity boosters. On the other hand, in line 
with their small individual impacts, we denote a marginal Trades w/o BPI contribution to LOB 
events arrival. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

45 
 
When it comes to the LOS w/ BPI contributions to LOS w/o BPI and LOC events arrival, although 
appearing more important for cancellations, they remain generally similar for both categories 
regarding events occurring on depth levels 1 to 5. Beyond this point, while rapidly vanishing for 
LOS w/o BPI, for LOC they show increasing trends as the distance from the best prices also 
increases. From our point of view, these phenomena suggest that even on the deepest depth levels, 
orders cancellations may be more related to automatic actions than orders submissions. The 
important LOS w/ BPI events contribution to these LOC events may once again be related to 
systematic trading strategies monitoring their own limit orders rank relative to the same or opposite 
book side best price. And, based on their rank, take the decision to cancel limit orders or not. A 
good representation of this mechanics could be related to the fact that as seen before, our 
descriptive models seem to deliver a better fitting performance for LOC than LOS w/o BPI events, 
especially on the deep price levels. 
Back to Figure 11, we note a similarly important aggregated LOB events contribution to the arrival 
of both LOS w/o BPI and LOC events taking place on depth levels 1 to 5. Despite the previously 
presented small individual LOB events / LOS w/o BPI and LOB events / LOC relationships 
contribution, since these effects are numerous to be part of our descriptive models, once combined, 
they represent the main drivers for this segment of the dynamics. Beyond depth level 5, their 
cumulated contribution to LOS w/o BPI and LOC arrival becomes different. Indeed, while 
remaining important determinants of LOS w/o BPI arrival at least up to depth level 10, their 
contribution to LOC arrival decreases until it vanishes around depth level 8. 
9. Conclusion 
In this paper, we analyze the limit order book events arrival dependency structure. Our set of 
potentially interconnected events consists in Trades, Limit Order submissions and Limit Order 
cancellations taking place on the first twenty depth levels of the book. 
At every step of our process, we observe a generalized symmetry regarding events affecting the 
bid and the ask sides in terms of Hawkes effects recurrence and strength. We consider this as a 
sign that similar trading strategies probably operate on both sides of the book. Similarly, despite 
some idiosyncrasies among our three stocks, we note that the absent and the highly recurrent 
relationships generally turn out to be the same for each of them. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

46 
 
Once our descriptive models estimated, we find that beyond depth levels 1 to 6 where our 
descriptive models offer a satisfactory data fitting performance for order submissions and 
cancellations, this performance shows a general decreasing trend as we move in events depth level 
of events occurrence. On the same depth levels, the Poisson homogenous comparative models 
show an improving fitting performance. We relate this performance convergence to a decrease in 
the Hawkes effects contribution to the concerned events arrival that comes together with an 
increase in the constant baseline contribution. 
Through the investigation of the global events arrival dynamics, we confirm that while trades and 
limit order submissions having an effect on the best price sometimes affect limit order submissions 
and cancellations up to the deepest segment of the order book, these events appear almost totally 
unaffected by events taking place beyond the second depth level. We show that while both trades 
and limit order submissions with best price impact may affect limit order book submissions and 
cancellation up to the highest depth levels, the effect of their counterpart events without best price 
impact is less extended. 
We also find that both in terms of individual occurrence effects and global contribution, limit order 
cancellations appear particularly affected by the events having a best price impact. We relate this 
observation to the possibility for cancellations to be systematically launched on the basis of criteria 
that may be well represented by our models. With their branching ratios that may be considered as 
outliers, we consider the case of the effects of limit order submissions with best price impact on 
limit order cancellations taking place on the depth level 11 of the same book side as particularly 
revealing on the matter. Indeed, we explain these very strong relationships by the possibility for 
some trading strategies to mark the 10th depth level as a the farthest from the best price a limit 
order can be before its cancellation is automatically triggered. 
Finally, we observe segments of our events dependency structure over which several event types 
appear to affect each other’s arrival, which we qualify as mutually-exciting zones. Based on the 
involved events type and the relationships characteristics, in these cases, we rule out the causality 
and consider these events as potentially related to the same factors. 
In the forthcoming extension, we will use the elements presented in this paper as the foundations 
for a complete limit order books simulator in which the different types of event arrival will be 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

47 
 
dictated by Hawkes processes models. The current paper having mainly focussed on the events 
arrival, we now have to concentrate on the characteristics of the orders underlying to these events 
such as the number of shares included in a submitted limit order or consumed by a trade. We also 
have to define some dynamics such as the choice of the order targeted by a limit order cancellation 
assuming several orders standing on the concerned depth level. Once these issues figured out, we 
expect to use real limit order book states as starting points for the simulations. Then, it will be 
possible to employ different sets of daily estimated parameters to produce and analyze prices 
trajectories. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

48 
 
References 
Almgren, Robert F. (2003). "Optimal execution with nonlinear impact functions and tradingenhanced risk." Applied Mathematical Finance 10(1): 1-18. 
Almgren, Robert F., Neil, Chriss (2000). "Optimal execution of portfolio transactions." Journal of 
Risk 3(2): 5-39. 
Bacry, E., S. Delattre, M. Hoffmann and J. F. Muzy (2013). "Modelling microstructure noise with 
mutually exciting point processes." Quantitative Finance 13(1): 65-77. 
Bertsimas, Dimitris and Andrew W. Lo (1998). "Optimal control of execution costs." Journal of 
Financial Markets 1(1): 1-50. 
Bowsher, Clive G. (2007). "Modelling security market events in continuous time: Intensity based, 
multivariate point process models." Journal of Econometrics 141(2): 876-912. 
Carstensen, Lisbeth (2010). PhD thesis Hawkes processes and combinatorial transcriptional, 
University of Copenhagen. 
Cheng, Xue, Marina Di Giacinto and Tai-Ho Wang (2017). "Optimal execution with uncertain 
order fills in Almgren-Chriss framework." Quantitative Finance 17(1): 55-69. 
Cont, Rama, Sasha Stoikov and Rishi Talreja (2010). "A Stochastic Model for Order Book 
Dynamics." Operations Research 58(3): 549-563. 
Embrechts, Paul, Thomas Liniger and Lu Lin (2011). "Multivariate Hawkes processes: an 
application to financial data." Journal of Applied Probability 48(A): 367-378. 
Fauth, Alexis; Tudor, Ciprian A. (2012) "Modeling First Line Of An Order Book With 
Multivariate Marked Point Processes." eprint arXiv:1211.4157. 
Hawkes, Alan G. (1971). "Spectra of Some Self-Exciting and Mutually Exciting Point Processes." 
Biometrika 58(1): 83-90. 
Hawkes, Alan G. and David Oakes (1974). "A Cluster Process Representation of a Self-Exciting 
Process." Journal of Applied Probability 11(3): 493-503. 
Hewlett, Patrick (2006). "Clustering of order arrivals, price impact and trade path optimisation." 
In Workshop on Financial Modeling with Jump processes, Ecole Polytechnique. 
Huang, He (2012). Modeling Order Book Dynamics Using Queues And Point Processes. Ph.D., 
The Florida State University. 
Huang, Weibing, Charles-Albert Lehalle and Mathieu Rosenbaum (2015). "Simulating and 
Analyzing Order Book Data: The Queue-Reactive Model." Journal of the American Statistical 
Association 110(509): 107-122. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

49 
 
Large, Jeremy (2007). "Measuring the resiliency of an electronic limit order book." Journal of 
Financial Markets 10(1): 1-25. 
Lu, Xiaofei and Frédéric Abergel (2018). "High-dimensional hawkes processes for limit order 
books: Modelling, empirical analysis and numerical calibration", Quantitative Finance, 18(2): 249264. 
Moallemi, Ciamac C. and Mehmet Sağlam (2013). "Or forum - the cost of latency in highfrequency trading", Operations Research, 61(5): 1070-1086. 
Muni Toke, Ioane and Nakahiro Yoshida (2017). "Modelling intensities of order flows in a limit 
order book." Quantitative Finance 17(5): 683-619. 
Obizhaeva, Anna A. and Jiang Wang (2012). "Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand 
dynamics." Journal of Financial Markets 16(1): 1. 
Ogata, Y. (1981). "On Lewis' simulation method for point processes." IEEE Transactions on 
Information Theory 27(1): 23-31. 
Rambaldi, Marcello, Emmanuel Bacry et Fabrizio Lillo (2017). "The role of volume in order book 
dynamics: A multivariate hawkes process analysis", Quantitative Finance, 17(7): 999-922. 
Shek, H.H. (2011). "Modeling high frequency market order dynamics using self-excited point 
process." SSRN Electronic Journal. 
Toke, Ioane Muni (2011). “Market Making” in an Order Book Model and Its Impact on the Spread. 
Econophysics of Order-driven Markets: Proceedings of Econophys-Kolkata V. F. Abergel, B. K. 
Chakrabarti, A. Chakraborti and M. Mitra. Milano, Springer Milan: 49-64. 
Toke, Ioane Muni and Fabrizio Pomponio (2012). "Modelling trades-through in a limit order book 
using hawkes processes." Economics - The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal 6(22): 123. 
Vinkovskaya, Ekaterina (2014). A point process model for the dynamics of limit order books. 
Dissertation/Thesis. 
 
Zheng, Ban, François Roueff et Frédéric Abergel (2014). "Modelling bid and ask prices using 
constrained hawkes processes: Ergodicity and scaling limit", SIAM Journal on Financial 
Mathematics, (5): 99-136. 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

50 
 
Figure 1 LOB inter-updates durations empirical CDF 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

51 
 
Figure 2 Fictional events examples and their LOB effects 
Panel I : Buy trade with best price impact (Trade w/ BPI) - Buy* 
 
 
Panel II : Buy trade without best price impact (Trade w/o BPI) - Buy 
 
 
Panel III : Ask limit order submission with best price impact (LOS w/ BPI) - AA1* 
 
 
Panel IV : Ask limit order submission on depth level 2 (LOS w/o BPI) - AA2 – Case 1 
 
 
 
Quantity
Price
Buy* trade event
Quantity
Price
Pre-trade LOB
Quantity
Price
Post-trade LOB
Quantity
Price
Pre-trade LOB
Quantity
Price
Buy trade event
Quantity
Price
Post-trade LOB
Quantity
Price
Pre-event LOB
Quantity
Price
AA1* Event
Quantity
Price
Post-event LOB
Quantity
Price
Pre-event LOB
Quantity
Price
AA2 Event
Quantity
Price
Post-event LOB
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

52 
 
Panel V : Ask limit order submission on depth level 2 (LOS w/o BPI) - AA2 – Case 2 
 
 
Panel VI : Ask limit order submission on depth level 2 (LOS w/o BPI) - AA2 – Case 3 
 
 
Panel VII : Bid limit order cancellation on depth level 1 (LOC) - BC1 
 
 
 
 
Quantity
Price
Pre-event LOB
Quantity
Price
AA2 Event
Quantity
Price
Post-event LOB
Quantity
Price
Pre-event LOB
Quantity
Price
AA2 Event
Quantity
Price
Post-event LOB
Quantity
Price
Pre-event LOB
Quantity
Price
BC1 Event
Quantity
Price
Post-event LOB
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

53 
 
Figure 3 Events occurrences count daily averages 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

54 
 
Figure 4 Descriptive models Q-Q Plots 
Panel I: Trades w/ BPI, Trades w/o BPI and LOS w/ BPI 
BMW 
SAP 
ADS 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

55 
 
Panel II: Bid side LOS w/o BPI 
BMW 
SAP 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

56 
 
ADS 
Panel III: Ask side LOS w/o BPI 
BMW 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

57 
 
SAP 
ADS 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

58 
 
Panel IV: Bid side LOC 
BMW 
SAP 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

59 
 
ADS 
Panel V: Ask side LOC 
BMW 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

60 
 
SAP 
ADS 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

61 
 
Figure 5 Events arrival process adjusted baseline daily average 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

62 
 
Figure 6 Hawkes effects half-life daily average CDF 
 
 
Figure 7 Hawkes effects Alpha parameters and Branching ratio with respect to 
Beta 
 
Panel I : 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 daily average with respect to 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 daily average. Panel II : 𝐵𝑅𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 daily average 
with respect to 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 daily average. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

63 
 
Figure 8 Daily estimated parameters dispersion examples 
Panel I: Buy*/BA1* 
 
Panel II: Sell*/AA1* 
 
  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

64 
 
Figure 9 General events dynamics 
Panel I: High-level dynamics 
 
Panel II: Events relationships classes 
 
 
 
(a) Trades
w/ BPI
(c) LO 
Submissions
w/ BPI
(b) Trades 
w/o BPI
(e) LO 
Cancellations
(d) LO 
Submissions 
w/o BPI
LOB Events
Buy* Sell*
Buy
Sell
BA1* AA1*
Buy*
E1
E2
Sell*
E2
E1
Buy
A1
C1
F1
Sell
A1
C1
F1
BA1*
B1
B2
D1
G1
AA1*
B2
B1
D1
G1
Bid
LOS
w/o
BPI
Ask
LOS
w/o
BPI
Bid
LOC
Ask
LOC
H1
I1
I2
R2
R1
I1
I2
S1
P1
Q2
Q1
R1
R2
S1
H1
N1
N1
O2
P1
Q1
Q2
O1
M1
M1
O2
K1
O1
K2
J2
J1
L1
L1
Bid LOS 
w/o BPI
Ask LOS 
w/o BPI
Bid LOC
Ask LOC
K2
J1
J2
K1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

65 
 
Panel III: Buyer side Trades w/ BPI, Trades w/o BPI and LOS w/ BPI 
 
 
Panel IV: Buyer side LOS w/o BPI and LOC 
 
 
 
BA1*
BUY
BUY*
AA1*
SELL
SELL*
A1
B2
B1
C1
D1
E1
G1
BA1
BC1
AC1
H1
I1
I2
E2
F1
AA1
BA1*
BUY
AA1*
SELL
SELL*
BUY*
Bid LOS
w/o BPI
Ask LOS
w/o BPI
Bid LOC
Ask LOC
P1
S1
R2
Q2
Q1
N1
O1
R1
O2
J1
K1
J2
L1
K2
M1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

66 
 
Figure 10 Trades and LOS w/ BPI effects branching ratio daily average 
Panel I: Buy* 
 
Panel II: Sell* 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

67 
 
Panel III: Buy 
 
Panel IV: Sell 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

68 
 
Panel V: BA1* 
 
Panel VI: AA1* 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

69 
 
Figure 11 Category aggregated Hawkes effects contributions to LOB events arrival 
daily average 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

70 
 
Table 1 Potential explanatory events sets definition 
 
 
 
BA1 BA4 BA7 BA11AA1AA4 AA7 AA11 BC1 BC4 BC7 BC11 AC1 AC4 AC7 AC11
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
BA3 BA6 BA10 BA20AA3AA6AA10AA20 BC3 BC6 BC10 BC20 AC3 AC6 AC10 AC11
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BA1 … BA3
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BA4 … BA6
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BA7 … BA10 ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BA11 … BA20 ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
AA1 … AA3
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
AA4 … AA6
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
AA7 … AA10 ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
AA11 … AA20 ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BC1 … BC3
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BC4 … BC6
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BC7 … BC10
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BC11 … BC20
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
AC1 … AC3
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
AC4 … AC6
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
AC7 … AC10 ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
AC11 … AC11 ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BA1* AA1*
Buy*
Sell*
Trades 
w/o BPI
BA1*
AA1*
Buy Sell
Buy
Sell
Trades 
w/ BPI
Buy* Sell*
LOS w/ BPI
Bid LOS
Ask LOS
Bid LOC
Ask LOC
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

71 
 
Table 2 Descriptive Model Selection 
Panel I: Trades, BA1* and AA1* 
 
This table presents the number of trading days for which a given events relationship meets our selection 
criteria. Each column represents an explained event and each row, an explanatory event. The tone scale 
relates to the following categories: white: 0 to 6 days; pale grey: 7 to 30 days; dark grey: 31 to 54 days; 
black: 55 to 61 days. 
 
Buy* Sell*
Buy
Sell BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell*
Buy
Sell BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell*
Buy
Sell BA1* AA1*
Buy*
6
0
11
11
61
55
2
1
2
19
61
54
4
1
7
17
61
50
Sell*
1
2
8
7
52
61
1
1
14
4
57
61
1
1
10
8
53
58
Buy
59
0
56
2
51
0
61
0
60
3
59
0
56
0
52
1
48
1
Sell
0
59
2
57
0
57
0
61
1
59
0
58
0
52
1
47
1
51
BA1*
45
61
4
44
49
5
25
61
5
45
21
3
50
60
8
26
55
5
AA1*
61
36
49
5
2
50
59
17
54
13
4
17
57
51
30
11
4
56
BA1
1
0
0
0
59
0
1
0
0
0
61
0
3
0
0
0
58
0
BA2
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
27
0
BA3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
BA4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA9
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA11
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
BA12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA13
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
BA15
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA17
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA18
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA19
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
AA1
0
2
0
0
0
61
0
3
0
0
0
60
0
8
0
0
0
58
AA2
0
1
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
20
AA3
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
AA4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
AA5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA7
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA8
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA11
3
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
AA13
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA15
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
AA17
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
AA18
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA19
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

72 
 
Panel I: Trades, BA1* and AA1* (cont.) 
 
 
 
Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell
BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell
BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell
BA1* AA1*
BC1
0
0
0
0
34
61
0
0
2
0
36
56
1
0
1
0
54
61
BC2
0
0
0
0
1
6
0
2
0
0
0
2
0
1
0
0
5
9
BC3
0
10
0
0
0
4
0
6
0
0
0
1
1
13
0
0
0
7
BC4
0
15
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
4
0
0
0
1
BC5
0
6
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
5
BC6
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
3
0
1
0
0
1
5
0
2
0
1
BC7
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
BC8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
0
1
0
1
BC9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
BC10
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
BC11
2
2
1
3
0
0
1
5
1
8
0
1
2
2
4
2
1
0
BC12
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
BC13
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
BC14
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC15
2
1
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
BC16
1
0
1
0
4
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
BC17
0
1
0
1
2
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
1
BC18
1
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
BC19
0
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
0
BC20
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
1
AC1
0
0
0
0
60
28
0
0
0
0
58
34
0
0
0
0
61
56
AC2
0
0
0
0
6
0
2
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
12
1
AC3
9
0
1
0
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
8
1
AC4
10
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
4
0
AC5
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
4
1
AC6
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
0
0
0
0
AC7
3
0
1
0
0
0
4
0
1
0
1
0
6
0
0
0
2
1
AC8
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
AC9
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
AC10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
AC11
1
2
3
1
1
1
2
2
7
1
2
0
4
2
6
1
0
0
AC12
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
0
0
2
AC13
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
AC14
0
3
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
AC15
0
1
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
AC16
0
5
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
AC17
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC18
2
1
1
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
AC19
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
3
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
AC20
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

73 
 
Panel II: BA1 to BA10 
 
Notes: Each column represents the depth level number on which the explained Bid order Added event 
occurs. Hatched cells correspond to relationship subject to the model initial restrictions. The same applies 
to absent explanatory events. 
 
BA 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Buy* 61 61 60 59 48 26 22 10 1
0 60 61 52 44 47 25 16 14 1
1 60 61 61 60 47 28 17 21 2
0
Sell* 61 39 61 54 44 34 30 42 60 61 61 33 55 40 39 46 38 45 54 60 61 31 55 53 31 23 27 44 61 61
Buy
55 59 58 27 7
2
1
2
0
0 55 48 32 1
3
0
0
0
0
0 57 55 44 17 8
5
4
3
0
0
Sell
22 15 12 5
4
8
3
3
3
6 37 17 8
3
2
3
1
1
0 12 25 4
7
4
4
2
0
2
0
6
BA1* 61 61 61 60 53 59 28 4
0
1 59 59 60 58 48 42 32 4
1 12 59 61 61 61 49 51 44 9
1
1
AA1* 21 23 47 14 3 23 22 25 13 17 13 23 23 8
9 11 11 5 43 19 7 19 8 12 8 12 23 21 24 20
BA1
61 61 61 57 14 0
1
0
0
0 61 60 59 13 8
1
0
0
0
2 56 61 61 47 23 2
1
1
0
0
BA2
47 59 59 21 5
0
1
0
0
0 39 19 50 13 4
0
0
0
0
0 29 54 55 11 2
3
2
0
0
0
BA3
26 59 60 35 6
1
1
0
0
0
4 51 40 41 17 0
1
0
0
0 18 43 55 43 23 16 10 1
0
0
BA4
25 51 3
3
0
0
0
7 38 0
0
0
0
0
7 32 9
4
0
0
0
BA5
49 17 47 6
1
2
3
3
0 29 0
0
0
0
29 8 43 4
1
0
0
BA6
13 24 2 42 10 1 14
3
3
1 32 3
0
2
3 38 1 45 5
0
5
BA7
0 52 7
9
0 43 2
5
1 53 4
6
BA8
9
1 58 7
7
0 39 5
6
1 55 9
BA9
10 32 1 59
1 12 0 53
3 28 1 58
BA10
9
4
0
0
4
2
0
0
3
2
0
0
AA1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA2
0
1
7
2
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA3
0
0 49 11 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 22 6
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
3
1
0
0
0
AA4
27 0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
18 0
0
0
0
0
0
AA5
8
8
2
1
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
0
1
0
0
0
AA6
4
2
2
0
0
0
0
4
4
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA7
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA8
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA9
2
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
AA10
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
9
1
0
0
0
BC1
61 55 61 29 24 18 12 23 2 59 61 48 60 31 8 35 13 19 0 56 61 61 53 32 26 10 29 45 19 58
BC2
34 42 60 37 1
2 24 14 24 0 39 45 56 49 13 2 13 3 52 0 48 55 60 42 5
5 26 41 58 0
BC3
21 59 60 59 23 4 11 10 0 59 12 38 61 56 39 1
2
1
0
2 21 54 30 61 20 5
7 19 0 60
BC4
46 51 17 5
5
0
0
61 36 36 0
0
0
0
28 50 14 4
4
0
0
BC5
50 57 19 4
2
8
0
29 59 23 8
0
1
0
60 57 33 3
2 10 0
BC6
55 11 57 0
4
0
1
43 14 61 11 0
0
0
59 26 59 9
1
0
8
BC7
42 6
0
0
43 5
0
0
43 15 4
1
BC8
0 43 14 3
8 37 1
2
7 39 16 7
BC9
2
4 19 3
3
1
8
0
5
3 18 5
BC10
4
0
1 12
1
0
2
4
3
2
8 18
AC1
61 61 61 59 28 0
0
0
0
0 61 58 58 41 3
0
0
0
0
0 61 61 61 61 53 4
0
0
0
0
AC2
54 57 59 22 1
0
0
0
0
0 44 51 52 7
0
0
0
0
0
0 33 56 56 39 3
1
0
0
0
0
AC3
57 60 61 46 3
0
1
0
0
0 29 33 54 3
1
0
0
0
0
0 37 53 59 36 9
0
0
0
0
0
AC4
26 3
0
1
0
0
0
3
2
2
0
0
0
0
31 6
6
2
0
0
0
AC5
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
8
1
4
0
0
0
10 6
5
5
1
0
0
AC6
19 0
0
0
1
0
0
5
3
1
6
0
0
0
20 0
0
3
1
0
0
AC7
1
7
2
0
1
5
0
0
0
1
4
0
AC8
0
1
1
2
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
AC9
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
2
1
3
0
1
AC10
6
5
1
0
7
7
3
3
1
1
1
1
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

74 
 
Panel III: BA11 to BA20 
 
Note: Due to the general absence of relationships involving these explanatory events, BA11 to BA20 and 
AA11 to AA20 are omitted. 
 
BA 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Buy*
0
0
2
6
0
1
2
0
0 12 2
2 25 12 0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
6
3
2 10
Sell* 38 27 34 40 46 32 14 4
1
0 42 36 44 51 45 33 7
0
0
0 47 31 37 32 43 44 24 5
3
0
Buy
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Sell
46 1
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 56 1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 43 0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA1*
0
2
2
3 14 19 17 1
0
0
5
1
7 17 11 0
0
0
0
0
0
0 10 6
9 13 18 20 9
7
AA1* 11 9
6
7
2
1
1
0
0
0 14 2
2 12 16 14 0
0
0
0
7 13 11 10 8
4
2
0
0
0
BC1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC2
1
0
0
0 20 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0 18 0
0
0
0
0
BC3
0
3
0
0
0 31 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0 27 0
0
0
0
BC4
56 0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 51 0
0
0
0
1
5
0
0
0
BC5
0 14 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 17 0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC6
0
0
3
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC7
0
0
1
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
2
3
2
0
0
1
0
0
BC8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
BC9
3
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC10
0
5
1
9
7
0
0
1
0
2
0
2
9
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
1
3
3
2
3
0
0
1
BC11
1
1
3
3
7 20 9
1
0
0
6
2
9 36 16 0
0
0
0
0
1
0
3
1
1 13 15 15 11 5
BC12
0
6
2
3
4
0
0
0
0
2
0
1 14 7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
3
1
3
3
0
3
0
4
BC13
0
3
6
4 14 14 1
0
0
2
0
0
9
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
5
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
BC14
0
0
0 15 3
1
2
0
0
1
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
5
3
0
3
0
0
0
BC15
0
0
1
0 25 0
0
0
0
2
2
0
1
0 15 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 10 0
2
0
0
0
BC16
0
1
2
0
3 27 0
0
0
2
1 22 2
3
0 21 1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 11 0
0
0
0
BC17
0
3
4
2
1
0 14 1
0
0
0 15 6
3
0
0
7
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1 11 0
0
1
BC18
0
1 14 5
4
3
0
7
1
4
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
6
6
1
2
0
3
1
1
BC19
0
1
1 17 5
0
3
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
4 11 4
3
3
4
1
2
BC20
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
AC1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC9
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
AC10
3
2
6
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
0
0
0
2
6
1
2
1
0
1
1
0
0
AC11
1
6
6 11 1
0
0
0
0
0 11 1
0
8
8
6
0
0
0
0
7
4
1
6
4
1
0
0
0
0
AC12
4
5
3
6
3
2
3
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
2
6
1
1
1
3
1
0
0
AC13
0
2
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
1
1
3
0
0
0
0
AC14
1
2
1
1
2
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
AC15
2
1
2
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
2
0
1
1
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
AC16
2
4
4
3
0
0
3
1
0
0
2
1
1
1
4
2
0
1
0
0
1
3
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC17
5
6
3
3
2
2
1
0
0
0
3
2
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
3
4
2
1
0
0
0
0
AC18
5
2
1
4
1
0
0
1
0
0
3
1
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
AC19
2
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
AC20
0
1
3
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

75 
 
Panel IV: BC1 to BC10 
 
 
 
BC 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Buy* 15 34 44 48 49 33 21 22 33 52 19 27 40 51 57 34 31 16 29 52 13 42 45 52 51 32 16 25 34 47
Sell* 61 61 61 60 60 61 60 50 46 13 61 61 61 59 58 59 54 33 17 29 61 61 61 61 61 59 58 47 35 21
Buy
12 19 21 15 13 5
2
1
0
1
4 11 7 21 8
4
3
2
0
0
9 15 15 7 10 11 0
0
0
0
Sell
59 58 61 57 49 45 31 36 23 0 59 61 58 53 44 30 20 14 0
0 58 56 53 40 29 33 19 13 8
0
BA1* 23 61 61 61 61 61 61 60 61 61 12 61 58 61 58 61 61 59 58 61 9 58 59 61 61 61 60 57 60 60
AA1* 61 61 61 60 59 44 13 5
4
1 61 60 54 51 42 27 23 6
1
2 61 61 61 60 57 54 31 5
2
0
BA1
57 55 27 40 8
1
1
0
0
0 61 36 32 27 2
0
0
0
0
0 52 33 4
5
2
0
0
0
0
0
BA2
0 38 2 11 16 10 15 0
0
0
0 55 6 17 8
4 14 0
0
0
4 24 4
3
1
4 22 7
0
1
BA3
0
2 40 0
1
1
0
4
0
0
0
5 55 6
8
1
0
0
0
0
0
3 26 4
1
2
2 22 8
0
BA4
29 0
2
0
3
4
0
59 2
0
0
0
0
0
10 2
1
0
0 12 0
BA5
0 41 1
0
0
7
4
1 59 0
0
0
0
0
2 28 0
0
1 10 12
BA6
0
0 25 1
0
0
3
0
0 57 0
1
0
0
1
1 16 1
0
1
4
BA7
2
3
0
1
2
8
1
1
3
5
1
4
BA8
1
2
0
0
0
4
4
0
0
0
2
1
BA9
0
0
2
0
2
3
4
0
0
0
4
0
BA10
2
0
0
1
1
0
0
5
1
0
0
3
AA1
60 61 61 29 3
0
0
0
0
0 61 60 42 8
1
0
0
0
0
0 61 60 59 25 10 4
1
0
0
0
AA2
52 54 52 21 1
1
0
0
0
0 53 55 22 4
0
0
0
0
0
0 51 49 49 22 7
2
0
0
0
0
AA3
35 51 54 6
0
0
0
0
0
0 27 49 20 2
1
0
0
0
0
0 40 52 52 19 4
3
0
0
0
0
AA4
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
1
1
0
0
0
AA5
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
AA6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA7
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA8
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA9
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA10
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC1
61 61 61 60 49 2
2
0
0
0 61 61 61 50 27 5
0
0
0
0 61 61 61 61 58 25 5
1
1
0
BC2
61 61 61 36 17 0
0
0
0
0 61 61 60 43 14 1
0
0
0
0 61 60 61 37 41 18 1
0
0
0
BC3
59 61 60 60 46 36 8
0
0
0 43 60 50 45 46 3
0
0
0
0 55 61 60 49 48 44 23 2
0
0
BC4
52 48 43 18 3
0
1
6 25 20 0
0
0
0
35 46 46 31 8
1
0
BC5
47 19 43 15 14 0
0
37 2 19 2
0
0
0
52 22 50 34 11 4
0
BC6
23 36 25 43 10 2
1
6 17 9 28 1
0
0
25 30 2 32 26 3
0
BC7
33 16 5
4
19 22 6
0
16 30 23 8
BC8
21 7
6
3
8
1
9
5
25 1 15 9
BC9
2 13 1
4
5 14 3
5
1 12 1 11
BC10
19 14 28 6
8 11 14 2
8
5 26 3
AC1
5 32 29 44 15 2
4
0
1
6
0 11 24 39 11 1
0
1
0
1
3 16 8 33 5
0
0
0
0
3
AC2
0
4
6
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
3 11 7
5
2
0
0
0
0
2
4
3
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
AC3
1 20 39 16 6
2
0
0
0
0
0 15 32 16 3
0
0
0
0
0
7
8 12 3
5
4
2
0
0
3
AC4
16 16 2
0
0
0
2
28 16 1
0
0
0
0
4
1
0
0
1
0
1
AC5
6
4
1
0
0
0
0
14 12 3
0
0
0
0
5
3
1
0
0
0
2
AC6
3
4
2
0
0
0
0
5 10 1
0
0
0
0
4
2
1
0
0
0
0
AC7
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
AC8
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
AC9
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
3
0
0
1
4
AC10
0
6
3
0
4
9
2
3
3
1
3
4
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

76 
 
Panel V: BC11 to BC20 
 
Note: Due to the general absence of relationships involving these explanatory events, BA11 to BA20, AA11 
to AA20, BC1 to BC10 and AC1 to AC10 are omitted. 
 
BC 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Buy* 54 51 44 36 41 40 29 30 15 1 42 39 35 43 37 49 38 23 3
0 57 50 38 28 42 44 34 31 12 10
Sell*
7
5
7
6
1
0
0
0
0
0 15 3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5 10 7
9
8
0
0
1
0
0
Buy
3
1
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Sell
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 14 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA1* 60 59 51 36 34 39 53 46 33 0 61 50 29 30 42 40 42 17 0
0 61 59 52 40 38 41 50 52 49 15
AA1*
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 11 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA5
0
0 22 1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0 21 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA6
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
1
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA7
0
0
4
2
0
0
0
5
9
0
0
0
4 18 13 4
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
3
0
BA8
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA10 14 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 21 1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 25 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC11
2
1
4 11 16 9 12 16 8
0
0
7 28 14 12 20 16 1
0
0
6
2
2
7
3 12 8 15 10 2
BC12
4
2
1
7
8
4
5
5
3
3
1
2
0 15 7
2
2
0
0
0
5
1
6
4
7
5
4
8
4
2
BC13
1
2
4
0
7 14 13 4
0
3
1
0
2
3
8
0
0
0
0
0
3
1
1
1
3
1
3
1
2
0
BC14
1
4
6
4
1
2
1
5
0
0
1
3
4
0
2
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
2
4
2
5
0
2
0
BC15
1
2
2
2 12 1
2
2
1
0
1
3
6
2
7
9
4
0
0
0
1
3
1
3
4
2
4
1
3
0
BC16
6
3
1
4
3
8
2
4
1
1
1
3 11 3
4 16 3
2
2
0
0
0
2
2
3
7
3
1
2
0
BC17
4
3
5
5
3
2 10 4
3
4
1
4
5
6
5
2 14 1
0
0
0
3
1
4
1
1 16 5
2
0
BC18
1
1
4
9
0
6
4 12 7
1
1
2
2
2
3
7
3
1
0
0
1
1
2
4
4
1
2
7
4
1
BC19
1
3
5
2
3
0
7
6
2
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
5
4
1 10 3 10 5
2
BC20
0
0
2
4
4
2
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
2
0
1
1
1
2
0
AC11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC12
3
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
1
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
AC13
1
7
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC14
1
4
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC15
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
AC16
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
AC17
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
AC18
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC19
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
AC20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

77 
 
Panel VI: AA1 to AA10 
 
 
 
AA 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Buy* 61 36 59 55 46 32 29 40 59 61 61 31 58 53 43 49 39 52 49 61 60 35 57 52 35 21 31 41 60 61
Sell* 61 61 60 58 49 21 14 11 0
1 61 60 51 48 50 31 21 10 2
0 61 61 61 59 54 31 18 16 4
1
Buy
15 12 18 10 6
6
5
2
1
5 39 13 5
4 10 4
4
3
0 11 23 4 14 3
5
3
1
0
1
9
Sell
58 59 52 29 9
1
0
1
0
0 51 53 26 4
0
0
0
0
0
0 50 54 41 15 6
2
2
3
0
0
BA1* 25 30 53 11 13 19 28 25 11 21 30 38 23 14 11 12 18 11 45 19 4 24 12 12 12 15 20 22 20 25
AA1* 61 61 61 61 56 55 23 4
0
1 53 61 61 60 44 31 26 5
2
9 60 61 61 61 52 48 34 9
2
1
BA1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA2
0
2
3
3
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
BA3
0
1 54 7
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2 39 4
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
0
0
BA4
18 1
0
1
0
0
0
16 2
0
0
0
0
0
17 0
0
0
0
0
0
BA5
9 12 2
0
0
0
1
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
1
0
0
0
0
BA6
15 4
1
1
0
0
0
7
2
1
0
0
0
0
3
0
4
0
0
0
0
BA7
1
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
BA8
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA9
3
0
0
1
2
0
2
4
1
1
0
0
BA10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 12
0
0
0
1
AA1
61 61 61 59 7
0
0
0
0
0 59 61 58 21 11 0
0
0
0
8 51 61 61 45 20 5
1
1
0
0
AA2
54 61 59 19 5
0
0
0
0
0 39 18 41 18 6
1
0
0
0
0 25 57 57 13 4
3
1
0
0
0
AA3
31 60 59 37 6
0
2
0
0
0
6 59 43 48 9
2
1
1
0
0 20 48 56 34 25 14 11 1
0
0
AA4
29 51 2
1
0
0
0
7 38 2
1
0
1
0
10 37 12 3
0
0
0
AA5
44 19 44 3
0
3
5
0
0 25 0
1
3
2
30 7 47 4
0
0
3
AA6
12 28 6 42 11 3 14
10 1
0 27 5
1
3
3 30 2 46 0
0
6
AA7
0 50 9
7
2 26 4
3
1 55 2
2
AA8
8
1 56 4
5
2 37 2
8
1 57 3
AA9
6 30 1 59
2 13 1 52
3 26 1 58
AA10
6
3
0
0
3
3
0
1
6
4
1
0
BC1
61 61 61 59 28 0
1
0
0
0 61 60 61 43 11 1
0
0
0
0 61 61 60 61 49 4
0
0
0
0
BC2
53 57 57 32 0
0
0
0
0
0 41 51 51 3
1
0
0
0
0
0 22 59 57 32 8
0
0
0
0
0
BC3
57 60 60 49 4
0
0
0
0
0 24 39 48 8
3
0
0
0
0
0 32 51 59 40 8
0
0
0
0
0
BC4
34 4
0
0
0
0
0
4
8
3
0
0
0
0
33 7 10 4
0
0
0
BC5
13 0
0
0
1
0
0
5
7
7
2
0
0
0
16 8
5 10 1
0
0
BC6
27 0
0
0
2
0
0
12 4
3
4
1
0
0
18 0
0
3
1
0
0
BC7
2
5
2
0
1
4
0
0
1
3
5
0
BC8
1
0
2
2
1
4
0
1
0
0
0
1
BC9
2
0
0
0
0
3
0
1
1
0
1
0
BC10
10 10 0
0
6 13 6
1
3
3
0
0
AC1
61 59 61 28 21 17 16 14 1 59 61 43 58 32 14 21 7 13 0 57 61 59 53 29 27 15 22 39 14 58
AC2
25 39 60 35 2
1 20 11 21 0 32 42 58 34 10 6 13 2 50 0 41 55 61 47 5
5 27 37 58 0
AC3
14 60 59 61 26 4 12 8
0 59 10 35 61 59 42 2
2
2
0
4 24 51 31 61 17 6 10 11 1 60
AC4
46 51 18 4
1
1
0
61 44 48 1
1
0
0
34 54 13 4
0
1
1
AC5
53 57 9
4
1 10 0
41 61 27 6
2
1
0
58 57 31 6
1 12 0
AC6
58 9 57 0
0
0
0
49 41 61 14 3
0
1
58 31 58 19 1
0
5
AC7
46 6
0
0
39 7
1
0
47 11 3
0
AC8
1 43 14 5
12 31 0
0
5 42 14 2
AC9
0
4 21 3
2
4
7
1
1
2 16 2
AC10
3
2
5 11
1
2
2
1
6
0
4 10
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

78 
 
Panel VII: AA11 to AA20 
 
 
 
AA 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Buy* 43 33 29 39 45 31 10 3
0
0 47 30 47 47 46 33 5
0
0
0 45 27 34 37 40 42 27 4
3
0
Sell*
0
0
2
8
3
2
2
0
0
8
1
1 25 12 1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
4
1
2
2 13
Buy
4
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Sell
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA1*
6
8
7 12 2
1
0
0
0
0 12 5
2 12 16 8
0
0
0
0
4 12 9
8
7 10 3
0
0
0
AA1*
0
2
3
8 16 23 17 1
0
0
3
1
7 23 6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
4 10 14 13 13 3
4
BC1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC8
0
0
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC9
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC10
3
2
2
6
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
2
1
1
5
4
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
BC11
6
5
3
8
0
2
0
0
0
0
6
1
0
1
5
6
0
0
0
0
2
4
4
7
1
3
0
0
0
0
BC12
4
6
3 11 5
2
4
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
7
3
3
4
0
0
0
0
BC13
1
2
0
1
2
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC14
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
BC15
0
1
1
2
0
1
1
1
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
BC16
1
5
2
3
3
1
1
4
0
0
6
1
1
2
3
3
1
0
2
0
1
1
1
4
0
0
0
1
0
0
BC17
2
5
4
8
2
0
3
0
0
1
2
3
0
1
5
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
1
2
0
1
1
1
0
0
BC18
3
6
3
2
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
2
0
0
0
0
0
BC19
4
3
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
3
1
0
1
0
1
0
BC20
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC2
0
0
0
0 17 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 24 0
0
0
0
0
AC3
0
1
0
0
1 19 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
3 30 1
0
0
0
AC4
56 0
0
0
0
1
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 54 0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
AC5
0 11 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 15 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC6
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC7
1
0
3
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
2
5
3
0
0
0
0
0
AC8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
AC9
4
0
2
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
AC10
2
2
2
5
6
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
5
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
AC11
0
3
3
2
6 20 14 0
0
0
6
2
9 37 22 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
4 15 17 20 12 4
AC12
0
7
3
2
5
1
0
1
0
5
0
1 11 7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
0
3
1
1
1
1
5
AC13
0
1
7 10 17 11 1
0
0
1
0
1
5
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
1
1
0
2
0
0
0
AC14
0
2
1 11 8
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
6
1
1
0
2
0
0
AC15
0
1
0
0 23 0
0
0
0
2
0
2
1
0 17 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 14 1
1
0
0
1
AC16
0
0
2
0
1 25 0
0
0
1
1 13 1
4
1 23 0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2 14 1
0
0
2
AC17
0
0
3
0
2
1
8
0
1
0
3
9
4
1
0
0
4
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
4
1 11 0
0
3
AC18
0
3 11 10 2
6
1
4
0
1
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
5
2
2
2
1
3
0
1
AC19
0
0
2 15 3
3
2
0
6
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
6
6
2
1
3
3
2
2
AC20
0
0
0
1
1
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

79 
 
Panel VIII: AC1 to AC10 
 
 
 
AC 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Buy* 61 61 61 60 59 61 59 48 43 10 61 61 61 61 61 60 51 30 14 24 61 61 61 60 60 59 56 47 34 18
Sell* 11 35 47 54 43 33 21 25 31 51 26 37 40 51 57 31 27 23 25 53 16 51 50 48 46 32 23 29 32 51
Buy
59 61 58 50 47 44 23 30 16 0 61 58 59 47 40 32 15 9
0
0 60 53 54 37 25 33 23 19 6
1
Sell
13 28 18 18 15 3
4
1
1
0 10 14 11 14 10 2
0
0
0
0
4 12 9
5
7
9
0
0
0
0
BA1* 61 61 61 59 54 36 9
3
1
0 61 60 51 48 42 23 18 7
2
0 61 61 61 61 58 58 34 10 4
0
AA1* 17 61 60 61 60 61 61 60 61 61 10 61 59 59 57 61 61 57 56 60 7 59 59 61 61 61 61 59 59 61
BA1
61 61 61 37 3
0
0
0
0
0 61 60 50 10 1
0
0
0
0
0 61 60 60 29 11 4
0
0
0
0
BA2
51 57 50 15 1
0
0
0
0
0 50 40 22 4
1
0
0
0
0
0 52 51 49 20 10 4
0
0
0
0
BA3
26 53 54 3
0
0
0
0
0
0 18 39 34 3
0
0
0
0
0
0 35 45 56 22 9
0
0
0
0
0
BA4
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA5
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA6
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
5
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA7
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA8
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
BA9
1
0
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
BA10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA1
54 56 21 37 9
2
1
0
0
0 60 28 19 22 15 3
0
0
0
0 48 26 1
4
4
1
0
0
0
0
AA2
0 39 2
6 14 5 11 1
0
0
0 46 5
5
6
4 16 2
0
0
1 26 2
2
1
4 27 12 0
3
AA3
1
0 41 1
0
2
0
3
0
0
0
1 55 10 1
2
1
6
0
1
0
0 29 4
3
6
4 25 5
0
AA4
16 0
2
0
8
6
0
59 1
0
0
0
0
0
10 0
0
0
2
8
0
AA5
1 37 2
0
0 10 4
3 60 0
0
0
1
0
1 29 0
0
1
7
5
AA6
0
0 27 0
0
0
3
0
3 46 0
0
1
0
2
0 11 1
0
1
3
AA7
2
4
0
2
4
6
1
0
2
9
1
3
AA8
0
3
2
0
0
3
3
0
0
1
2
0
AA9
0
0
3
0
4
1
4
0
0
0
1
1
AA10
0
0
0
5
1
0
1
6
0
0
0
0
BC1
2 35 30 48 16 1
5
1
0
2
1 19 26 34 10 2
1
2
1
1
7
9
5 24 12 5
0
0
0
6
BC2
0 10 6
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 11 14 9 10 0
0
0
0
1
3
1
4
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
BC3
4 18 39 11 5
5
0
1
0
3
3 16 27 20 9
1
0
0
0
0
7 16 17 5
5
3
0
1
0
0
BC4
18 15 0
0
0
0
0
31 21 6
0
0
0
0
5
8
1
0
0
0
0
BC5
13 9
1
0
0
0
1
18 16 1
0
0
0
0
7
3
2
0
0
1
1
BC6
5
4
1
0
0
1
0
15 14 8
0
0
0
0
5
3
0
0
0
0
0
BC7
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
BC8
0
0
1
1
0
1
2
1
0
0
1
1
BC9
0
0
1
3
1
2
2
3
0
0
1
2
BC10
2
1
2
1
8
8
4
3
1
4
4
8
AC1
61 61 61 61 45 3
4
0
0
0 61 61 60 54 29 5
0
0
0
0 61 61 61 59 58 26 6
4
1
0
AC2
60 61 61 33 12 1
0
0
0
0 61 61 60 43 13 4
0
0
0
0 60 60 61 38 37 12 1
1
0
0
AC3
54 61 61 60 51 31 3
0
0
0 31 60 55 44 46 7
4
2
0
0 48 60 61 54 46 44 10 0
0
0
AC4
45 47 46 27 2
0
0
7 32 20 1
1
1
0
38 46 47 37 7
0
3
AC5
44 22 45 21 6
0
1
18 2 21 7
3
5
0
43 18 53 38 14 0
0
AC6
26 39 25 47 21 1
0
6 20 8 25 6
1
0
21 24 2 37 24 5
0
AC7
32 20 3
3
18 22 7
1
7 27 17 4
AC8
22 2
9
9
8
4 11 2
29 1 17 10
AC9
5 12 1
3
2
6
1
5
3
8
0
6
AC10
21 17 31 1
3
1 13 6
8 11 17 2
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

80 
 
Panel IX: AC11 to AC20 
 
 
 
AC 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Buy*
8 10 12 11 2
0
0
0
0
0 15 5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
7 11 11 6
0
0
0
0
0
Sell* 52 55 45 39 42 49 35 28 15 6 44 48 33 39 31 46 43 24 5
0 60 49 40 37 35 48 38 28 13 8
Buy
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
Sell
4
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA1*
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA1* 61 59 42 30 29 32 54 48 35 0 60 42 32 22 41 34 42 21 2
0 61 58 49 37 40 41 50 57 48 11
BA1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BA9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
BA10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 10 0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
AA2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
AA3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA5
0
0 17 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0 23 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA7
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
7
0
0
0
5 22 15 6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
9
0
AA8
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA9
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA10 14 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 30 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 27 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC13
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC14
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
BC15
0
1
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC16
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
BC17
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
BC18
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
BC19
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
BC20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
AC11
1
1
2 10 8 12 10 9
5
0
3
9 25 17 23 24 5
6
0
0
2
1
7
8
8 10 13 9 10 3
AC12
6
0
2
6
4
9
4
7
3
0
2
0
1 11 7
1
0
2
2
0
2
0
1
3
4
4
8
5
6
2
AC13
1
3
2
1
4
8
9
4
2
0
2
3
3
4
1
3
1
0
0
0
2
2
0
1
3
3
4
1
3
1
AC14
1
1
1
2
4
4
5
6
3
1
1
5
1
1
3
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
4
2
0
2
3
2
3
2
AC15
4
2
0
2
8
2
7
0
0
0
3
2
5
2
9
8
5
1
0
0
1
2
2
5
5
1
2
1
0
0
AC16
6
1
2
0
1
3
2
2
3
0
2
3
8
4
4 15 3
1
0
0
1
1
2
1
0
6
2
2
1
0
AC17
0
5
2
8
4
2 10 5
4
2
1
0
6
1 10 5 10 1
0
0
1
2
3
3
0
1 10 6
4
1
AC18
2
3
4 15 3
2 12 9 10 0
1
2
5
3
2
0
3
0
0
0
1
3
1
5
2
5
5 11 2
1
AC19
4
1
2
3
3
4
5
9
5
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
2
1
0
1
0
1
4
4
6
2
6
6
0
AC20
2
2
1
4
0
2
2
3
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
3
3
0
0
0
2
2
1
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

81 
 
Table 3 Descriptive models parameters - baselines 
Panel I : Trades and LOS w/ BPI 
 
 
Panel II : LOS w/o BPI and LOC 
 
 
 
Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell BA1* AA1*
0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.04
0.56 0.55 0.63 0.61 0.32 0.36 0.67 0.67 0.61 0.61 0.29 0.28 0.56 0.57 0.79 0.80 0.36 0.35
BMW
SAP
ADS
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝑚
BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11 BA12 BA13 BA14 BA15 BA16 BA17 BA18 BA19 BA20
0.10 0.12 0.12 0.08 0.07 0.04 0.06 0.03 0.03 0.05 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01
0.23 0.34 0.24 0.20 0.33 0.35 0.61 0.37 0.40 0.37 0.47 1.00 0.78 0.76 0.78 0.56 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11 AA12 AA13 AA14 AA15 AA16 AA17 AA18 AA19 AA20
0.10 0.12 0.12 0.07 0.07 0.04 0.06 0.03 0.03 0.05 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01
0.22 0.32 0.24 0.18 0.35 0.36 0.65 0.44 0.41 0.37 0.50 0.76 1.00 0.77 0.79 0.84 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11 BC12 BC13 BC14 BC15 BC16 BC17 BC18 BC19 BC20
0.08 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00
0.17 0.18 0.20 0.28 0.23 0.27 0.36 0.56 0.46 0.44 0.26 0.54 0.54 0.51 0.51 0.51 0.52 0.42 0.42 1.00
AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11 AC12 AC13 AC14 AC15 AC16 AC17 AC18 AC19 AC20
0.09 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00
0.19 0.19 0.21 0.24 0.23 0.26 0.37 0.58 0.38 0.45 0.26 0.54 0.53 0.70 0.72 0.50 0.43 0.44 0.42 1.00
BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11 BA12 BA13 BA14 BA15 BA16 BA17 BA18 BA19 BA20
0.09 0.08 0.08 0.06 0.05 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
0.24 0.22 0.15 0.16 0.21 0.25 0.49 0.44 0.28 0.37 0.68 0.74 0.84 0.54 0.74 0.72 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11 AA12 AA13 AA14 AA15 AA16 AA17 AA18 AA19 AA20
0.09 0.08 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.03 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
0.24 0.22 0.14 0.16 0.22 0.29 0.60 0.52 0.26 0.39 0.79 1.00 0.84 0.54 0.74 0.76 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11 BC12 BC13 BC14 BC15 BC16 BC17 BC18 BC19 BC20
0.07 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00
0.18 0.17 0.18 0.22 0.29 0.35 0.50 0.55 0.63 0.50 0.22 0.45 0.65 0.66 0.40 0.36 0.36 1.00 1.00 1.00
AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11 AC12 AC13 AC14 AC15 AC16 AC17 AC18 AC19 AC20
0.07 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00
0.18 0.17 0.17 0.21 0.27 0.34 0.56 0.65 0.63 0.50 0.21 0.44 0.41 0.67 0.42 0.33 0.35 1.00 1.00 1.00
BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11 BA12 BA13 BA14 BA15 BA16 BA17 BA18 BA19 BA20
0.08 0.06 0.08 0.05 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
0.32 0.33 0.30 0.22 0.31 0.32 0.52 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.48 0.75 0.75 0.73 0.75 0.78 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11 AA12 AA13 AA14 AA15 AA16 AA17 AA18 AA19 AA20
0.08 0.06 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
0.33 0.32 0.27 0.20 0.34 0.32 0.44 0.35 0.35 0.37 0.52 1.00 0.75 0.74 0.76 0.79 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11 BC12 BC13 BC14 BC15 BC16 BC17 BC18 BC19 BC20
0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.03 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00
0.19 0.23 0.28 0.33 0.42 0.41 0.44 0.64 0.55 0.51 0.25 0.51 0.55 0.61 0.52 0.49 0.48 0.42 0.46 1.00
AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11 AC12 AC13 AC14 AC15 AC16 AC17 AC18 AC19 AC20
0.05 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.03 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00
0.19 0.25 0.28 0.36 0.42 0.42 0.45 0.64 0.55 0.51 0.25 0.51 0.56 0.54 0.50 0.47 0.45 0.51 0.47 1.00
ADS
BMW
SAP
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 
𝜇𝑑
𝑚
 𝐸𝜆𝑑
𝑚𝑡
⁄
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

82 
 
Table 4 Descriptive models parameters – Hawkes events effects 
 
Panel I: Buy*, Sell*, Buy, Sell, BA1* and AA1* 
 
For each Hawkes effect 𝑛𝑚
⁄
, this figure presents estimated parameters 𝛼̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 and 𝛽̂𝑑
𝑛/𝑚 daily average. 
 
 
Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell* Buy
Sell BA1* AA1*
Buy*
27
5.5
31
12
26
12
101
29
118
86
90
92
Sell*
8.9
28
11
35
13
27
71
103
76
123
88
89
Buy
38
8.5
10
19
8.8
11
34
4.9
14
162
45
87
107
41
108
169
27
113
Sell
36
9.0
11
20
7.8
11
33
4.1
14
154
42
86
113
37
106
164
23
101
BA1*
3.5
17
1.6
15
14
1.9
3.7
9.1
20
63
218
47
341
144
38
69
155
348
AA1*
17
3.4
1.5
15
11
1.9
8.5
3.6
19
215
61
44
298
108
33
137
62
337
BA1
11
12
8.5
232
269
198
AA1
8.2
12
8.5
147
268
188
BC1
2.0
14
0.6
10
4.7
12
74
309
16
283
93
237
AC1
14
11
0.8
12
5.1
327
299
24
233
113
BMW
SAP
ADS
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝑚
𝑛
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

83 
 
Panel II: BA1 to BA10 
 
 
 
BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10
Buy*
95
78
56
35
17
89
69
46
21 9.5
68
69
55
43
21
212 233 183 158
94
201 194 146 137
95
170 200 148 182 115
Sell*
111 6.7
89
11
11 5.7
7.2 4.6
88 129
10 103
12
14 7.5 5.6 7.6
10
68
65 7.8
80
11
15
8.8
10
83
348 132 313
69
63
26
29
23 333 328 190 263
52
81
57
33
39 109 242 268 132 286
88
67
68
63 281
Buy
45
60
32
28
37
14
54
57
29
207 475 369
184 401 240
273 434 293
Sell
3.8
60
BA1*
39
65 101
41
21 9.3
19
48 115
17 4.7 2.8 4.2
28
40
97
43
22 9.0 5.9
269 393 322 179 130
98
197 287 231
76
39
36
76
217 345 320 195 185
80
71
AA1*
10
4.5
316
171
BA1
26
34
52
19
16
39
24
16
22
24
11
353 604 770 506
240 593 463
247 486 434 426
BA2
3.0 6.0 8.6
2.5
13
9.0 5.9
53 106 136
64
262
216 124
BA3
5.5 7.9 2.2
13
14 6.4
8.1 8.2 3.5
105 107
50
308 209 163
266 177
99
BA4
3.7
2.8
2.3
71
91
70
BA5
9.3
3.6
3.4
221
58
62
BA6
3.3
1.5
13
2.3
29
39
344
30
BA7
3.3
1.9
3.0
34
30
49
BA8
5.8
3.4
5.0
41
109
42
BA9
6.6
18
12
16
109
56
49
59
AA3
2.6
83
BC1
61
24
34
28
44
15
33 9.5
3.3
24
46
23
39 6.6
8.2
35
626 769 531
572 496 564 461 341
117
560 442 555 517 249
244
538
BC2
1.4
12
61 2.2
0.8 2.2
39
13
19
2.9
13
54 2.0
2.7
17
50 516 975
57
17
50 825 370
681
63 447 884
47
75 362
BC3
31 5.7
45
39
14 0.9
10 8.1
20
14
31
865 135 582
840
514 6.2 165 177
592
139
597
BC4
8.5
11
0.5 4.1 2.7
13
229 174
1.6
96
77
235
BC5
67 4.0
0.8
68 2.8 4.9
897
40
2.2
875
35
76
BC6
4.0
2.8
2.4
1.4
3.0
1.3
67
36
24
6.7
16
11
BC7
4.1
1.3
2.3
38
18
19
BC8
3.3
1.4
2.7
45
33
46
AC1
42
31
41
24
30
27
28 8.1
27
16
26
19 7.1
458 552 561 491
356 401 427 248
283 328 333 375 166
AC2
5.2
11
22
2.6 6.2
10
3.2 6.9
12 6.9
127 313 507
63 131 211
74 200 264 234
AC3
4.1
11
18 7.5
2.9 3.3
1.8 2.8
10 5.3
89 220 205 196
64
57
43
81 182 157
AC4
3.6
123
BMW
SAP
ADS
𝑚
𝑛
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

84 
 
Panel III: AA1 to AA10 
 
 
 
AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9AA10 AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9AA10 AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9AA10
Buy*
115 8.0
96
11
13 6.7
7.9 5.2
95 139 8.8
94 9.1
17 7.9 5.0 5.8
12
86
67
10
88
11
14
7.4
10 8.5
94
338 183 315
79
71
30
29
26 352 332 185 260
42 110
46
26
32 121 269 274 168 322
86
66
34
78
49 308
Sell*
88
76
54
31
16
78
61
44
21
11 4.7
64
64
55
42
19 6.6
193 223 174 162
89
174 166 135 125
94
91
149 181 138 174 107
52
Buy
3.9
66
Sell
44
55
29
24
35
55
54
27
203 436 333
159 366
272 405 281
BA1*
10
14
5.0
285
263
174
AA1*
36
61 107
37
18 8.6
14
41
99
19 4.6 2.2
21
40
94
43
19 7.4 4.8
253 344 321 169 122 101
110 221 196
80
38
42
163 330 320 199 180
75
73
BA3
2.7
3.0
81
117
AA1
25
33
52
17
16
36
24
12
19
22
10
332 559 763 530
244 528 484
172 416 398 421
AA2
3.3 5.5 8.4
2.5
9.1
10 6.0
61
91 130
56
179
237 133
AA3
1.1 5.4 7.1 2.5
14
13 5.1
7.5
10 2.9
30 106
91
61
338 203 151
212 231
78
AA4
4.6
3.5
2.9
80
112
81
AA5
12
3.5
3.7
302
53
64
AA6
3.6
2.5
34
51
AA7
3.5
3.2
41
52
AA8
6.5
3.9
5.6
45
43
48
AA9
19
11
14
57
55
56
BC1
41
34
41
23
27
27
29 6.9
24
17
28
18 6.6
448 565 554 559
328 419 443 208
245 328 345 366 151
BC2
5.3
11
23 6.9
2.6 6.0 9.2
7.5
12 6.7
136 274 516 290
61 125 202
205 264 234
BC3
4.3
11
17 8.4
2.2 3.1
1.2 3.6
10 5.8
96 200 191 280
46
55
24 102 178 170
BC4
4.0
3.5
135
131
AC1
59
24
35
29
48
14
30 6.0
26
47
25
45
8.5
37
575 761 530
585 542 585 466 170
551 492 593 558
278
547
AC2
13
60 1.5
0.8 3.3
43
10
20
3.1
14
56 3.7
2.6
19
511 979
31
20
83 903 344
659
72 479 946
98
79 410
AC3
33 6.2
46
38
14 1.4
15 6.6
19 5.4
14
34
864 131 620
831
525 8.4 268 175
610 215 127
649
AC4
10
11
0.8 3.6 3.6
8.2
14
279 163
2.2
78
72
268 251
AC5
60 3.2
16 2.5
65 4.1 4.9
914
32
311 7.6
896
63
86
AC6
4.1
3.3
2.6 8.8 4.7
2.9
11 1.7
76
45
24 124
21
18 240
18
AC7
4.4
1.5
2.5
43
19
29
AC8
3.4
1.5
4.3
51
33
89
BMW
SAP
ADS
𝑚
𝑛
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

85 
 
Panel IV: BC1 to BC10 
 
 
 
BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10
Buy*
10
18
24
14 7.5
4.2
5.0
16
21
13 5.0 6.1
8.2
10
10
16
10 8.1
4.8
6.0
94 145 169 105
77
33
34
164 144
88
36
47
57
70
64 110
68
76
38
39
Sell*
119 167
78
39
24
19
14 8.2 5.1
108 181
60
36
22
16
10 2.8
113 151
69
33
22
17
15 8.2 5.6
149 199 142 158 124 185 114
78
81
125 193 152 164 132 112 110
61
153 185 143 123 102 116 161
71
85
Buy
Sell
16
63
51
32
15 9.3 9.2
11
13
63
36
17 8.9
25
54
43
18
7.2
84 403 330 246 183 138 134 167
87 357 289 239 150
145 364 291 206
88
BA1*
57
30 128
40
10
12
10
15
39
61
24 138
21 8.1 6.5 7.7 6.5
18
15
20 103
24 8.3 9.3 6.9
10
27
250 298 496 327
27
43
56 115 236
255 250 444 142
24
28
55
68 207
87 187 450 258
37
48
50
93 187
AA1*
121
63
53
25
11 5.6
116
59
28
11 6.3
72
45
47
20 8.4 5.9 3.6
421 360 356 242 156 145
383 262 223 149 107
270 243 277 202 113
98
91
BA1
5.2
26
18
3.4
16
19
4.8
10
53 891
648
18 619 708
66 324
BA2
6.8
1.1
223
7.6
BA3
2.6
0.8
81
5.8
BA4
2.5
46
BA5
0.3
3.2
2.9
32
BA6
0.6
2.7
AA1
24
36
34
19
24
12
18
16
13
392 682 687
289 414 370
271 333 320
AA2
7.1 6.7 7.2
4.5 3.0
6.1 3.7 3.7
205 199 235
115
65
154 111 101
AA3
1.4 2.2 3.2
1.4
2.3 3.5 3.8
39
65
91
26
64
96
96
BC1
67
93
57
27 8.9
46
70
24
10
57
86
37
14 7.9
391 460 552 593 260
303 393 376 317
348 462 382 297 194
BC2
10 7.6
17 4.6
8.8
22
10 2.6
11
10
14 4.8 3.3
133
80 284 158
158 290 190
76
157 149 213 151 110
BC3
5.0
10
15 8.1 4.4 2.9
1.0
11
13 5.3 1.5
3.0 8.1 7.9 5.0 4.5 3.6
87 125 192 154 121
92
25 213 244 147
26
62 137 110 102 122
96
BC4
6.8 4.2 2.7
3.6 3.1 3.5 2.7
128
99
70
76
67
90
74
BC5
4.6
3.4
9.0
6.7
4.6 4.0
70
81
296
147
103 114
BC6
2.4
4.7
3.8
55
89
115
BC7
1.7
19
BC8
BC9
BC10
AC1
10
21
13
10
420
569
387
329
AC2
AC3
7.3
2.2
217
61
AC4
BMW
SAP
ADS
𝑚
𝑛
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

86 
 
Panel V: AC1 to AC10 
 
 
 
AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10
Buy*
117 170
72
36
22
19
13 8.8 5.2
104 170
62
34
23
17
10
119 153
71
31
21
16
15 8.7 5.8
146 200 139 161 126 182 110
83
88
126 185 164 161 157 124 105
162 194 156 126 106 123 169
76
92
Sell*
10
18
21
12 7.7
7.1
5.5
13
20
22
14 5.2
8.5
16
11
16
12 9.5
5.6
5.9
98 141 150
79
77
65
37
192 138 144
97
40
56
101
68
82
73
82
45
38
Buy
17
63
50
28
13 8.1
11
61
33
13 7.8 5.5
19
51
37
17
5.3
87 422 347 259 178 139
69 369 310 214 154
98
97 386 276 216
75
Sell
BA1*
117
69
57
24
10 5.3
112
63
27
12
11
67
48
48
20 8.3 6.0 3.5
397 380 368 262 150 133
386 294 232 172 118
267 256 283 210 114
96
83
AA1*
55
26 130
35 9.0
11 9.3
14
36
61
20 118
14 8.3 7.0 6.6 5.0
16
11
17
99
21 7.7 7.9 6.7 9.1
27
234 263 495 304
25
40
50 124 228
244 196 425
98
22
24
43
49 179
70 156 395 215
36
42
46
84 190
BA1
22
39
34
13
19
28
12
17
17
14
313 683 694 497
280 467 366
278 361 342
BA2
6.9 7.5 8.5
5.5 3.4
5.4 4.2 4.2
179 234 291
168
78
153 115 125
BA3
2.1 2.9
2.1 1.7
2.1 3.5 4.5
56
82
47
50
57
89 113
AA1
5.2
26
14
3.1
3.8
57 856
515
20
52
AA2
9.3
1.0
279
6.8
AA3
3.9
1.1
105
7.6
AA4
2.5
44
AA5
0.3
2.7
2.7
48
AA6
0.5
1.6
BC1
11
20
13
411
607
373
BC2
BC3
7.3
219
BC4
1.0
42
AC1
64
93
56
26 8.9
41
68
24 6.0
58
89
38
14 7.8
354 455 572 676 275
272 365 364 173
352 465 397 310 192
AC2
8.0 7.3
16 4.2
7.9
14
11 3.5
8.8 9.1
14 5.0 3.5
95
79 282 160
127 166 232
97
134 119 212 153 117
AC3
3.4 9.3
16 8.3 4.6 3.0
1.7
15
13 6.2 1.5
2.6 8.1 7.3 5.8 4.0 3.5
51 117 185 160 125 100
49 254 230 170
27
53 136
98 117 109
98
AC4
5.7 4.2 3.1
3.2
4.0 3.1 3.7 3.0
101
96
80
106
73
68
93
82
AC5
3.7
3.8
5.6
4.9 4.2
58
87
122
105 122
AC6
1.7
5.9
5.0
34
100
143
AC7
1.3
15
AC8
AC9
AC10
1.4
15
BMW
SAP
ADS
𝑚
𝑛
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

87 
 
Panel VI: BA11 to BA20, AA11 to AA20, BC11 to BC20 and AC11 to AC20 
 
 
BA11 BA12 BA13 BA14 BA15 BA16 BA17 BA18 BA19 BA20 BA11 BA12 BA13 BA14 BA15 BA16 BA17 BA18 BA19 BA20 BA11 BA12 BA13 BA14 BA15 BA16 BA17 BA18 BA19 BA20
Buy*
Sell*
5.4
1.4 3.3 7.6 3.9
3.3 0.8 2.6 4.7 7.0 3.1
6.3 3.4 1.8 3.0 6.3 6.8
66
26
41
67
88
52
20
51
64
74
67
62
39
26
35
56
63
Buy
Sell
24
25
24
351
413
310
BA1*
AA1*
AA11 AA12 AA13 AA14 AA15 AA16 AA17 AA18 AA19 AA20 AA11 AA12 AA13 AA14 AA15 AA16 AA17 AA18 AA19 AA20 AA11 AA12 AA13 AA14 AA15 AA16 AA17 AA18 AA19 AA20
Buy*
5.2 2.3
3.2 7.3 5.7
3.4
2.6 4.5 6.7 3.3
5.9
1.8 3.3 6.3 6.9
66
35
43
68
73
56
54
68
76
79
65
29
38
58
66
Sell*
Buy
Sell
BA1*
AA1*
BC11 BC12 BC13 BC14 BC15 BC16 BC17 BC18 BC19 BC20 BC11 BC12 BC13 BC14 BC15 BC16 BC17 BC18 BC19 BC20 BC11 BC12 BC13 BC14 BC15 BC16 BC17 BC18 BC19 BC20
Buy*
7.5 7.1 4.0 3.9 5.2 5.8
2.6 3.1 1.8 2.5 2.7 5.5 3.9
8.3 7.9 4.0
4.4 5.1 4.6 3.8
40
54
42
50
62
60
23
42
17
23
40
83
86
43
61
43
63
59
51
53
Sell*
Buy
Sell
BA1*
362
12 4.8 2.5 2.3 3.8 4.8 2.2 0.6
322 3.0
3.1 2.3 2.8
324
13 4.8 2.7 2.0 2.8 4.7 3.8 2.5
578 148
80
44
55
72
55
28
15
532
57
50
35
82
513 148
86
44
55
66
84
65
39
AA1*
AC11 AC12 AC13 AC14 AC15 AC16 AC17 AC18 AC19 AC20 AC11 AC12 AC13 AC14 AC15 AC16 AC17 AC18 AC19 AC20 AC11 AC12 AC13 AC14 AC15 AC16 AC17 AC18 AC19 AC20
Buy*
Sell*
7.4 7.8 4.5 4.3 4.7 6.0 3.9
2.5 3.7 2.1 2.8 3.0 6.5 3.9
8.7 7.9 3.9 3.8 4.1 5.7 4.9
40
61
46
32
39
63
54
21
47
31
25
40
83
76
44
59
41
50
55
59
54
Buy
Sell
BA1*
AA1*
353
11 3.8
3.4 4.5 2.3 0.6
317 2.8 1.3
3.3 2.1 2.5
323
11 4.6 2.0 2.3 2.6 4.7 4.4 2.6
570 137
64
69
66
31
16
510
59
26
50
29
73
510 141
86
47
61
62
77
58
41
SAP
ADS
BMW
𝑚
𝑛
𝑚
𝑛
𝑛
𝑚
𝑚
𝑛
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛼̂𝑛/𝑚
𝛽̂𝑛/𝑚
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

88 
 
Table 5 Depth Levels 1 to 11 descriptive models effects metrics 
Panel I: Trades and LOS w/ BPI 
 
For each Hawkes effect, this figure presents the daily average branching ratio and adjusted branching ratio. 
 
 
Buy* Sell* Buy Sell BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell* Buy Sell BA1* AA1* Buy* Sell* Buy Sell BA1* AA1*
Buy*
0.27
0.23
0.27
0.17
0.29
0.19
0.11
0.10
0.13
0.08
0.11
0.07
Sell*
0.18
0.28
0.17
0.28
0.18
0.31
0.07
0.12
0.08
0.14
0.07
0.11
Buy
0.22
0.20
0.13
0.17
0.22
0.10
0.20
0.21
0.13
0.12
0.20
0.03
0.13
0.22
0.04
0.11
0.21
0.03
Sell
0.23
0.23
0.13
0.18
0.23
0.11
0.21
0.20
0.15
0.12
0.23
0.03
0.13
0.23
0.04
0.11
0.20
0.03
BA1* 0.06 0.08
0.04 0.06
0.10
0.06
0.06 0.06
0.07
0.14 0.19
0.17 0.06
0.21
0.16
0.15 0.17
0.07
AA1* 0.08 0.06 0.04
0.07 0.10
0.06
0.07 0.06
0.06
0.19 0.14 0.17
0.07 0.21
0.16
0.18 0.16
0.06
BA1
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.15
0.16
0.11
AA1
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.18
0.17
0.11
BC1
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.03
0.06
0.05
0.12
0.14
0.17
0.13
0.14
0.12
AC1
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.14
0.12
0.17
0.12
0.14
ADS
SAP
BMW
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

89 
 
Panel II: Trades and LOS w/ BPI effect on LOB events 
 
 
 
BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10BA11 BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10BA11 BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10BA11
Buy* 0.45 0.34 0.31 0.22 0.18
0.44 0.36 0.33 0.16 0.11
0.40 0.35 0.38 0.24 0.18
0.06 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.05
0.06 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.03
0.06 0.07 0.06 0.04 0.05
Sell* 0.32 0.14 0.26 0.17 0.23 0.31
0.33 0.41 0.27 0.08 0.39 0.06 0.36 0.30 0.21 0.16 0.20 0.20 0.13 0.42 0.10 0.25 0.09 0.25 0.14 0.22
0.18 0.28 0.30 0.10
0.04 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.06 0.14
0.24 0.36 0.13 0.14 0.05 0.01 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.08 0.14 0.25 0.16 0.25 0.20 0.04 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.06
0.11 0.21 0.13 0.16
Buy
0.19 0.13 0.15
0.13 0.09 0.11
0.20 0.13 0.11
0.01 0.01 0.01
0.01 0.01 0.01
0.02 0.02 0.01
Sell
0.07 0.08
0.06
0.08
0.06 0.01
0.12
0.07
BA1* 0.17 0.16 0.29 0.24 0.17 0.10
0.12 0.17 0.48 0.29 0.18 0.10 0.08
0.15 0.11 0.28 0.23 0.12 0.14 0.10
0.05 0.06 0.08 0.08 0.11 0.11
0.03 0.05 0.10 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.10
0.06 0.06 0.11 0.10 0.09 0.13 0.12
AA1*
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.08
AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10AA11 AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10AA11 AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10AA11
Buy* 0.34 0.06 0.28 0.18 0.21 0.30
0.34 0.40 0.27 0.08 0.42 0.14 0.33 0.26 0.17 0.21 0.26 0.25 0.13 0.42 0.09 0.24 0.08 0.26 0.15 0.23
0.28 0.17 0.29 0.30 0.09
0.04 0.01 0.03 0.03 0.06 0.14
0.25 0.37 0.13 0.15 0.06 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.10 0.18 0.28 0.15 0.26 0.21 0.04 0.02 0.04 0.03 0.06
0.13 0.11 0.22 0.13 0.16
Sell* 0.45 0.34 0.32 0.20 0.19
0.45 0.37 0.34 0.17 0.13 0.08
0.44 0.37 0.41 0.25 0.20 0.19
0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.05
0.06 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.03
0.07 0.07 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.07
Buy
0.13
0.01
Sell
0.20 0.12 0.10
0.15 0.10
0.28 0.13 0.18
0.01 0.01 0.01
0.01 0.01
0.02 0.01 0.01
BA1*
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.09
AA1* 0.17 0.17 0.32 0.23 0.16 0.09
0.14 0.19 0.49 0.28 0.20 0.11
0.15 0.12 0.27 0.22 0.11 0.13 0.09
0.05 0.06 0.09 0.08 0.11 0.10
0.04 0.06 0.10 0.08 0.08 0.10
0.06 0.06 0.11 0.10 0.08 0.12 0.10
BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10BC11 BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10BC11 BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10BC11
Buy*
0.12 0.13 0.15 0.14 0.14
0.13 0.15 0.19
0.10 0.16 0.17 0.14 0.14
0.14 0.12
0.16 0.17 0.15 0.16 0.11
0.13 0.16 0.20
0.01 0.02 0.03 0.05 0.05
0.13 0.15 0.09
0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.10
0.21 0.07
0.02 0.03 0.03 0.05 0.04
0.11 0.14 0.09
Sell* 0.80 0.84 0.55 0.24 0.19 0.11 0.14 0.11 0.08
0.87 0.94 0.43 0.22 0.18 0.16 0.10 0.10
0.75 0.82 0.49 0.27 0.23 0.16 0.09 0.12 0.08
0.11 0.10 0.09 0.05 0.06 0.04 0.07 0.09 0.08
0.11 0.10 0.07 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.10
0.11 0.12 0.09 0.06 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.08 0.07
Buy
Sell
0.20 0.16 0.16 0.13 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.07
0.16 0.18 0.13 0.08 0.07
0.21 0.15 0.15 0.10
0.09
0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.03
0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
0.02
BA1*
0.21 0.10 0.25 0.12 0.36 0.28 0.17 0.15 0.17 0.61
0.23 0.10 0.30 0.19 0.34 0.23 0.16 0.10 0.09 0.59
0.17 0.10 0.22 0.10 0.22 0.19 0.15 0.12 0.15 0.61
0.06 0.04 0.12 0.09 0.32 0.33 0.32 0.33 0.41 0.65
0.05 0.03 0.11 0.10 0.26 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.29 0.71
0.07 0.05 0.13 0.08 0.21 0.25 0.27 0.27 0.35 0.66
AA1* 0.29 0.17 0.15 0.10 0.07 0.04
0.31 0.23 0.14 0.07 0.07
0.27 0.18 0.17 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.04
0.09 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.04
0.08 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.04
0.10 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06
AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10AC11 AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10AC11 AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10AC11
Buy* 0.81 0.85 0.52 0.22 0.18 0.10 0.13 0.11 0.08
0.83 0.92 0.41 0.23 0.16 0.15 0.11
0.74 0.79 0.46 0.25 0.20 0.15 0.09 0.12 0.08
0.11 0.10 0.08 0.05 0.06 0.04 0.07 0.08 0.07
0.11 0.10 0.06 0.04 0.04 0.06 0.07
0.11 0.12 0.08 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.08 0.07
Sell*
0.14 0.12 0.14 0.15 0.14
0.11 0.16 0.19
0.15 0.13 0.16 0.17 0.15
0.15 0.13
0.16 0.18 0.20 0.17 0.11
0.14 0.16 0.21
0.02 0.02 0.03 0.05 0.05
0.11 0.16 0.09
0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
0.22 0.08
0.02 0.03 0.05 0.05 0.04
0.12 0.14 0.09
Buy
0.20 0.15 0.14 0.11 0.08 0.07
0.17 0.16 0.11 0.12 0.07 0.07
0.21 0.13 0.14 0.09
0.11
0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02
0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
0.02
Sell
BA1* 0.30 0.18 0.15 0.09 0.06 0.04
0.29 0.21 0.12 0.07 0.09
0.25 0.19 0.17 0.10 0.07 0.07 0.05
0.09 0.05 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.04
0.08 0.05 0.04 0.02 0.04
0.10 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.07
AA1*
0.21 0.10 0.25 0.11 0.35 0.28 0.18 0.13 0.16 0.60
0.24 0.11 0.27 0.21 0.37 0.29 0.17 0.11 0.09 0.60
0.16 0.10 0.24 0.10 0.21 0.19 0.16 0.12 0.14 0.61
0.06 0.04 0.12 0.09 0.32 0.34 0.33 0.29 0.39 0.65
0.05 0.03 0.09 0.10 0.27 0.37 0.35 0.37 0.28 0.71
0.06 0.05 0.15 0.09 0.20 0.25 0.28 0.27 0.35 0.66
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

90 
 
Panel III: LOB Events effects on Bid LOS w/o BPI 
 
 
 
BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11 BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11 BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11
BA1
0.08 0.06 0.07 0.04
0.09 0.07 0.05
0.07 0.05 0.06 0.03
0.08 0.07 0.06 0.04
0.09 0.07 0.04
0.07 0.06 0.06 0.03
BA2
0.13 0.07 0.08
0.12
0.06
0.04 0.07
0.11 0.07 0.06
0.12
0.04
0.04 0.05
BA3
0.06 0.08 0.10
0.05 0.07 0.05
0.05 0.05 0.07
0.08 0.08 0.12
0.06 0.07 0.07
0.06 0.05 0.08
BA4
0.08
0.05
0.07
0.15
0.08
0.11
BA5
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.05
0.15
0.11
BA6
0.18
0.09
0.07
0.11
0.23
0.13
0.05
0.14
BA7
0.14
0.12
0.11
0.18
0.20
0.15
BA8
0.19
0.15
0.17
0.24
0.15
0.20
BA9
0.14
0.36
0.33
0.30
0.11
0.19
0.18
0.18
AA1
AA2
AA3
0.04
0.04
AA4
AA5
AA6
AA7
AA8
AA9
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

91 
 
Panel III: LOB Events effects on Bid LOS w/o BPI (cont.) 
 
 
 
BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11 BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11 BA1 BA2 BA3 BA4 BA5 BA6 BA7 BA8 BA9 BA10 BA11
BC1
0.10 0.03 0.06
0.05
0.10 0.03 0.07 0.04
0.03
0.04
0.11 0.04 0.07 0.03
0.03
0.06
0.10 0.04 0.06
0.17
0.11 0.03 0.05 0.04
0.11
0.20
0.11 0.06 0.07 0.03
0.14
0.19
BC2
0.07 0.02 0.06 0.06
0.08 0.12 0.05 0.04
0.03
0.06 0.03 0.06 0.05
0.04 0.05
0.08 0.03 0.06 0.07
0.10 0.16 0.05 0.06
0.32
0.07 0.05 0.06 0.06
0.16 0.25
BC3
0.04 0.06 0.11
0.05
0.06 0.31 0.11 0.05
0.03
0.14
0.05
0.04 0.04 0.10
0.15
0.06 0.21 0.09 0.08
0.04
0.12
0.13
BC4
0.08 0.08
0.04
0.43 0.07 0.04
0.06
0.04
0.05 0.10
0.33
0.34 0.09 0.10
0.07
0.29
BC5
0.08 0.23
0.40
0.08 0.21 0.07
0.04 0.19
0.37
0.04 0.18 0.08
BC6
0.22
0.20
0.15
0.31
0.19
0.36
0.09
0.24
0.05
0.38
0.09
0.35
BC7
0.15
0.12
0.25
0.16
0.13
0.23
BC8
0.11
0.10
0.13
0.10
0.11
0.11
BC9
AC1
0.09 0.05 0.07 0.05
0.08 0.07 0.07 0.04
0.09 0.05 0.08 0.05 0.04
0.09 0.07 0.07 0.06
0.08 0.07 0.05 0.04
0.09 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.08
AC2
0.06 0.04 0.05
0.07 0.07 0.06
0.08 0.04 0.05 0.03
0.06 0.05 0.05
0.09 0.09 0.06
0.08 0.06 0.05 0.04
AC3
0.09 0.06 0.09 0.05
0.14 0.12
0.11 0.05 0.06 0.05
0.08 0.06 0.07 0.04
0.13 0.08
0.09 0.06 0.05 0.04
AC4
0.05
0.03
AC5
AC6
AC7
AC8
AC9
AC10
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

92 
 
Panel IV: LOB Events effects on Ask LOS w/ BPI 
 
 
 
AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11 AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11 AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11
BA1
BA2
BA3
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.03
BA4
BA5
BA6
BA7
BA8
BA9
AA1
0.08 0.06 0.07 0.03
0.10 0.07 0.05
0.09 0.05 0.06 0.03
0.08 0.07 0.06 0.04
0.10 0.07 0.04
0.09 0.06 0.05 0.03
AA2
0.10 0.07 0.08
0.12
0.07
0.05 0.07
0.08 0.07 0.06
0.11
0.05
0.05 0.05
AA3
0.10 0.06 0.08 0.08
0.04 0.07 0.05
0.05 0.05 0.08
0.11 0.08 0.08 0.10
0.06 0.07 0.06
0.07 0.05 0.09
AA4
0.07
0.05
0.06
0.13
0.08
0.11
AA5
0.09
0.11
0.09
0.05
0.18
0.11
AA6
0.16
0.10
0.20
0.13
AA7
0.16
0.11
0.20
0.15
AA8
0.18
0.18
0.17
0.22
0.17
0.19
AA9
0.36
0.29
0.30
0.18
0.16
0.17
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

93 
 
Panel IV: LOB events effects on Ask LOS w/o BPI (cont.) 
 
 
 
AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11 AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11 AA1 AA2 AA3 AA4 AA5 AA6 AA7 AA8 AA9 AA10 AA11
BC1
0.09 0.06 0.07 0.04
0.08 0.06 0.07 0.04
0.09 0.05 0.08 0.05 0.04
0.09 0.07 0.07 0.05
0.09 0.07 0.05 0.04
0.10 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.08
BC2
0.06 0.05 0.05 0.03
0.07 0.07 0.08
0.04 0.05 0.04
0.06 0.06 0.05 0.04
0.10 0.10 0.08
0.06 0.05 0.04
BC3
0.09 0.06 0.09 0.03
0.13 0.14
0.14 0.05 0.06 0.04
0.07 0.07 0.07 0.03
0.12 0.09
0.12 0.06 0.05 0.04
BC4
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03
BC5
BC6
BC7
BC8
BC9
AC1
0.11 0.03 0.06
0.05
0.09 0.03 0.06 0.04
0.04
0.10 0.04 0.08
0.03
0.07
0.11 0.04 0.06
0.17
0.10 0.03 0.04 0.04
0.20
0.10 0.06 0.07
0.13
0.19
AC2
0.03 0.06 0.05
0.07 0.10 0.05 0.04
0.03
0.06 0.03 0.06 0.05
0.03 0.05
0.04 0.06 0.07
0.09 0.14 0.05 0.05
0.32
0.07 0.04 0.06 0.05
0.15 0.25
AC3
0.04 0.06 0.10
0.04
0.04 0.28 0.09 0.05
0.03 0.05 0.14
0.05
0.04 0.05 0.10
0.14
0.04 0.19 0.08 0.08
0.04 0.04 0.13
0.13
AC4
0.06 0.08
0.04
0.41 0.06 0.05
0.09 0.06
0.04
0.04 0.10
0.36
0.33 0.08 0.15
0.06 0.07
0.31
AC5
0.08 0.24
0.08 0.37
0.07 0.19 0.07
0.03 0.20
0.05 0.34
0.04 0.16 0.08
AC6
0.22
0.17
0.15 0.11 0.27
0.17 0.08 0.31
0.09
0.21
0.05 0.06 0.33
0.08 0.06 0.30
AC7
0.13
0.21
0.22
0.15
0.22
0.21
AC8
0.11
0.18
0.11
0.11
0.19
0.10
AC9
AC10
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

94 
 
Panel V: LOB events effects on Bid LOC 
 
 
 
BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11 BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11 BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11
BA1
0.13 0.03
0.03
0.19 0.03 0.03
0.15 0.03
0.13 0.03
0.05
0.19 0.02 0.03
0.15 0.03
BA2
0.06
0.17
0.04
0.13
BA3
0.07
0.15
0.09
0.22
BA4
0.23
0.28
BA5
0.17
0.32
0.20
0.34
BA6
0.34
0.27
BA7
BA8
BA9
AA1
0.06 0.05 0.05
0.07 0.06 0.03
0.06 0.05 0.04
0.06 0.05 0.06
0.06 0.04 0.04
0.06 0.04 0.05
AA2
0.04 0.04 0.04
0.05 0.09
0.04 0.05 0.06
0.03 0.03 0.04
0.05 0.06
0.03 0.03 0.05
AA3
0.07 0.06 0.06
0.09
0.05 0.06 0.06
0.07 0.06 0.07
0.09
0.05 0.06 0.08
AA4
AA5
AA6
AA7
AA8
AA9
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

95 
 
Panel V: LOB events effects on Bid LOC (cont.) 
 
 
 
BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11 BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11 BC1 BC2 BC3 BC4 BC5 BC6 BC7 BC8 BC9 BC10 BC11
BC1
0.17 0.20 0.10 0.05 0.03
0.15 0.18 0.06 0.04
0.16 0.18 0.10 0.05 0.04
0.17 0.18 0.12 0.07 0.09
0.15 0.14 0.08 0.05
0.16 0.18 0.12 0.07 0.09
BC2
0.08 0.10 0.06 0.03
0.06 0.09 0.06 0.05
0.07 0.08 0.07 0.04 0.03
0.09 0.10 0.08 0.06
0.08 0.09 0.09 0.09
0.07 0.08 0.09 0.06 0.07
BC3
0.07 0.09 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.03
0.10 0.07 0.09 0.05 0.07
0.07 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.04
0.06 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08
0.08 0.05 0.09 0.06 0.12
0.06 0.06 0.08 0.08 0.06 0.08
BC4
0.06 0.04 0.05
0.07 0.07 0.05 0.04
0.06 0.07 0.10
0.07 0.09 0.07 0.08
BC5
0.14
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.05 0.04
0.09
0.09
0.04
0.05
0.06 0.06
BC6
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.06
BC7
0.13
0.13
BC8
BC9
AC1
0.02
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.06
0.05
0.05
AC2
AC3
0.04
0.10
0.04
0.11
AC4
AC5
AC6
AC7
AC8
AC9
AC10
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

96 
 
Panel VI: LOB events effects on Ask LOC 
 
 
 
AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11 AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11 AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11
BA1
0.07 0.06 0.05 0.03
0.07 0.06 0.04
0.06 0.05 0.04
0.07 0.05 0.06 0.04
0.07 0.05 0.04
0.06 0.05 0.05
BA2
0.05 0.04 0.04
0.04 0.09
0.04 0.05 0.06
0.04 0.03 0.03
0.04 0.06
0.03 0.03 0.05
BA3
0.06 0.06
0.08 0.10
0.06 0.05 0.06
0.06 0.08
0.08 0.15
0.05 0.05 0.07
BA4
BA5
BA6
BA7
BA8
BA9
AA1
0.13 0.03
0.03
0.17
0.16
0.13 0.03
0.05
0.17
0.15
AA2
0.05
0.17
0.04
0.12
AA3
0.07
0.15
0.09
0.22
AA4
0.23
0.28
AA5
0.17
0.31
0.20
0.33
AA6
0.34
0.27
AA7
AA8
AA9
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

97 
 
Panel VI: LOB events effects on Ask LOC (cont.) 
 
 
AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11 AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11 AC1 AC2 AC3 AC4 AC5 AC6 AC7 AC8 AC9 AC10 AC11
BC1
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.05
0.05
BC2
BC3
0.04
0.05
BC4
0.09
0.09
BC5
BC6
BC7
BC8
BC9
AC1
0.18 0.20 0.10 0.04 0.03
0.15 0.19 0.07 0.05
0.17 0.19 0.10 0.05 0.04
0.18 0.18 0.12 0.06 0.09
0.15 0.14 0.08 0.06
0.17 0.19 0.12 0.07 0.09
AC2
0.09 0.10 0.06 0.03
0.07 0.10 0.06 0.05
0.07 0.08 0.07 0.03 0.03
0.10 0.10 0.08 0.05
0.09 0.10 0.09 0.07
0.07 0.08 0.09 0.05 0.07
AC3
0.09 0.09 0.09 0.05 0.04 0.03
0.10 0.07 0.09 0.04 0.07
0.07 0.07 0.09 0.05 0.04 0.04
0.07 0.07 0.09 0.07 0.08 0.08
0.09 0.05 0.09 0.05 0.11
0.06 0.06 0.09 0.07 0.07 0.08
AC4
0.08 0.05 0.05
0.04
0.07 0.07 0.04 0.04
0.08 0.08 0.10
0.06
0.07 0.09 0.07 0.08
AC5
0.15
0.07
0.07
0.06 0.04
0.09
0.09
0.05
0.06 0.06
AC6
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.07
0.08
0.05
AC7
0.14
0.14
AC8
AC9
AC10
0.15
0.15
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526

98 
 
Table 6 Multi-events mutual-excitation examples 
Panel I: Levels 1 tot 3 Bid LOS w/o BPI and Ask LOC 
 
 
Panel II: Levels 1 tot 3 Ask LOS w/o BPI and Bid LOC 
 
 
 
BA1 BA2 BA3 AC1 AC2 AC3
BA1 BA2 BA3 AC1 AC2 AC3
BA1 BA2 BA3 AC1 AC2 AC3
BA1 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.05
BA1 0.09 0.07 0.05 0.07 0.06 0.04
BA1 0.07 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.04
0.08 0.07 0.06 0.07 0.05 0.06
0.09 0.07 0.04 0.07 0.05 0.04
0.07 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05
BA2 0.13 0.07 0.08 0.05 0.04 0.04
BA2 0.12
0.06 0.04 0.09
BA2
0.04 0.07 0.04 0.05 0.06
0.11 0.07 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.03
0.12
0.04 0.04 0.06
0.04 0.05 0.03 0.03 0.05
BA3
0.06 0.08
0.06 0.06
BA3
0.05 0.07
0.08 0.10
BA3
0.05 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.06
0.08 0.08
0.06 0.08
0.06 0.07
0.08 0.15
0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.07
AC1 0.09 0.05 0.07 0.18 0.20 0.10
AC1 0.08 0.07 0.07 0.15 0.19 0.07
AC1 0.09 0.05 0.08 0.17 0.19 0.10
0.09 0.07 0.07 0.18 0.18 0.12
0.08 0.07 0.05 0.15 0.14 0.08
0.09 0.07 0.08 0.17 0.19 0.12
AC2 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.09 0.10 0.06
AC2 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.07 0.10 0.06
AC2 0.08 0.04 0.05 0.07 0.08 0.07
0.06 0.05 0.05 0.10 0.10 0.08
0.09 0.09 0.06 0.09 0.10 0.09
0.08 0.06 0.05 0.07 0.08 0.09
AC3 0.09 0.06 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09
AC3
0.14 0.12 0.10 0.07 0.09
AC3 0.11 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.09
0.08 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.09
0.13 0.08 0.09 0.05 0.09
0.09 0.06 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.09
BMW
SAP
ADS
AA1 AA2 AA3 BC1 BC2 BC3
AA1 AA2 AA3 BC1 BC2 BC3
AA1 AA2 AA3 BC1 BC2 BC3
AA1 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.05
AA1 0.10 0.07 0.05 0.07 0.06 0.03
AA1 0.09 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.04
0.08 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.06
0.10 0.07 0.04 0.06 0.04 0.04
0.09 0.06 0.05 0.06 0.04 0.05
AA2 0.10 0.07 0.08 0.04 0.04 0.04
AA2 0.12
0.07 0.05 0.09
AA2
0.05 0.07 0.04 0.05 0.06
0.08 0.07 0.06 0.03 0.03 0.04
0.11
0.05 0.05 0.06
0.05 0.05 0.03 0.03 0.05
AA3 0.10 0.06 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.06
AA3
0.04 0.07
0.09
AA3
0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06
0.11 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.07
0.06 0.07
0.09
0.07 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.08
BC1 0.09 0.06 0.07 0.17 0.20 0.10
BC1 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.15 0.18 0.06
BC1 0.09 0.05 0.08 0.16 0.18 0.10
0.09 0.07 0.07 0.17 0.18 0.12
0.09 0.07 0.05 0.15 0.14 0.08
0.10 0.07 0.08 0.16 0.18 0.12
BC2 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.08 0.10 0.06
BC2 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.09 0.06
BC2
0.04 0.05 0.07 0.08 0.07
0.06 0.06 0.05 0.09 0.10 0.08
0.10 0.10 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.09
0.06 0.05 0.07 0.08 0.09
BC3 0.09 0.06 0.09 0.07 0.09 0.08
BC3
0.13 0.14 0.10 0.07 0.09
BC3 0.14 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.08
0.07 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.07 0.08
0.12 0.09 0.08 0.05 0.09
0.12 0.06 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.08
BMW
SAP
ADS
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3744526
