Design of a Quantitative Futures Trading Model Incorporating Multimodal 
Feature Fusion and Tail Risk Control
 
Jinning Yang 
Qilu Normal University, Jinan, 250200, China, 19707728293@163.com 
Xizhen Deng* 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109, United States, xizhen@umich.edu 
Abstract 
The price dynamics of futures markets are driven by heterogeneous information sources, whereas the 
traditional single-source models do not capture the complex interaction between yield and risk accumulation. 
In order to overcome this limitation, we propose a new approach that combines multimodal features with tail 
risk awareness. The new approach is to incorporate tail risk signals into the feature representation process, 
which allows for dynamic re-weighting of multimodal inputs.The model combines price based technology, text 
sentiment embedding, and market structure characteristics, and is assessed on the basis of a continuous 
historical period, including stock index and commodity futures. This paper uses a rolling-window backtesting 
framework with out-of-sample verification to guarantee the robustness of the system and prevent the 
information from leaking. LSTM, Transformer, and traditional multimodal models with no risk awareness 
modulation are used as the benchmark.The experimental results show that the Sharpe ratio is 2.25, and the 
maximum draw is kept under 18%, which is superior to the baseline approach in terms of return stability and 
risk control. The results show that multimodal integration can improve the quality of prediction signals, and 
tail risk awareness can restrain the extreme loss exposure and enhance the robustness of the market. 
Keywords 
quantitative trading; multimodal fusion; tail risk; attention mechanism 
1 Introduction 
Price developments in futures markets are inherently driven by multiple and diverse sources of information, 
such as price dynamics, text sentiment, and micro-structural signals. Due to the significant differences in time 
scale, statistical distribution, and noise characteristics, these flows produce complex nonlinear interactions 
that cannot be captured by conventional modeling methods. Traditional single-time-series models, which rely 
mainly on historical price data, often do not sufficiently represent cross-modal dependencies, and are thus 
limited in their capacity to model volatility clustering, regime shifts, and extreme market movements. In recent 
years, multimodal feature fusion has been proposed as a promising tool to improve the performance of the 
system. 
Recent work has shown that multimodal modeling is effective in the field of financial forecasting. Farimani et 
al. [1] (2024) proposed an adaptive multimodal learning framework to jointly model heterogeneous financial 
signals. Bentaleb et al. [2] (2025) proposed a modal fusion network to improve the identification of trends. Lee 
et al. [3] (2023) has integrated macro-economic variables into a multimodal transformer architecture, thus 
increasing the robustness of market orientation classification. Badal et al. [4] (2026) extended the concept of 
multimodal learning to cryptocurrency markets, highlighting their versatility across asset classes. Zheng et al. 
[5] (2025) introduced cross-modal interaction mechanisms, which allow for further integration of 
heterogeneous features. The results show that multimodal representations can significantly improve the 
performance of prediction signals by capturing diverse market information. 
In spite of this progress, most of the existing multimodal approaches are focused on improving the performance 
of the return prediction, while ignoring the explicit modeling of the tail risk transfer mechanism. Thus, the 

resulting trading signals are usually more sensitive to extreme fluctuations in the market, resulting in an 
amplified draw and a loss of stability. Moreover, the contribution of different modes is usually determined by 
static or weakly adaptive weighting schemes, which do not take into account the dynamic variation of risk. In 
particular, the lack of a risk-driven adjustment mechanism limits the ability of the model to suppress noise and 
avoid excessive exposure to adverse events in extreme samples or abnormal market conditions. 
In order to overcome these limitations, a novel approach is proposed to combine multimodal features and tail 
risk awareness. In contrast to traditional approaches that apply risk control in the post-decision phase, this 
approach incorporates tail risk signals into the feature representation and fusion process. This design allows 
dynamic re-weighting of multimodal inputs based on real time risk conditions, thus enhancing the model's 
sensitivity to extreme market states while maintaining the integrity of informative signals. In this paper, a risk 
sensitive decision mechanism is proposed, which combines multi-source feature coding and cross-modal 
interaction. Through this integrated approach, the proposed framework is designed to enhance the accuracy 
and robustness of prediction, and to provide a more stable basis for quantitative trading in complex and volatile 
markets. 
2. Foundations of Multi-modal Feature-Driven Futures Market Modeling 
The dynamic evolution of futures price series is driven by heterogeneous information from multiple sources, 
and there is a marked difference in time scale and statistical distribution, which makes it impossible to capture 
the joint mechanism of return and risk accumulation. In order to solve this problem, multimodal modeling 
constructs a unified representation space in which time-aligned features are integrated into a state tensor, 
defined as: 
 
Ωτ=Concat(Pτ
(r),Nτ
(s),Mτ
(q)) 
(1) 
wherePτ
(r) denotes the price technical indicator matrix,Nτ
(s) denotes the text sentiment embedding matrix,Mτ
(q) 
denotes the microstructure feature matrix, andr,s,q represent the corresponding feature dimensions. The 
concatenation is carried out in synchronous time windows and normalized feature scales to ensure time 
consistency and comparability between modalities.However, even with uniform representation, extreme 
market fluctuations are not fully captured, as conventional feature aggregation lacks an explicit mechanism for 
modeling tail risk propagation. Thus, a tail enhancement mechanism is introduced to quantify the extreme loss 
intensity by the combined effect of return bias, volatility amplification and liquidity contraction [6], which is 
formulated as: 
 
Rτtail=
1
H ∑
[max ( 0,θ-ρτ-h+1)]
2
H
h=1
× exp ( κντ-h+1)× (1+
1
λτ-h+1+ε) (2) 
whereρτ-h+1 denotes the standardized return, θ is the tail loss threshold,ντ-h+1 represents the volatility 
intensity,κ is the volatility amplification coefficient,λτ-h+1 denotes the liquidity level, andε is a stability 
constant. This formulation captures the nonlinear amplification effect of extreme losses, which is conceptually 
consistent with the tail-risk measures such as conditional loss expectation. The resultant tail risk signal is used 
as a dynamic modulation factor in the subsequent cross-modal fusion and attention weight allocation, which 
provides a framework for risk sensitive feature reweighting. 
3 Design of a Quantitative Trading Model for Multi-modal Feature Fusion and Tail Risk Control 
3.1 Overall Model Architecture Design 
In order to integrate multimodal features into spatially consistent state tensors, QFT is proposed as a structural 
pipeline composed of feature coding, cross-modal interaction, and risk-conscious decision modulation. The 
overall architecture is shown in Figure 1. The model receives price sequence, text sentiment, and micro 
structure signals via a multi-branch input unit. The feature encoding layer extracts the temporal and semantic 
representations, and then sends them to the cross-modal interaction module to perform the unified 

information fusion [7].During the fusion phase, the unified state vector is transformed into a decision 
representation through a weight mapping function, defined as: 
 
zτ=σ(Wf⋅Ωτ+bf)⊙Γτ (3) 
Where zτ denotes the fused decision feature vector, Wf denotes the feature mapping matrix, (Wf⋅Ωτ+bf) 
denotes the bias term,σ(·) denotes the nonlinear activation function,⊙ denotes the element-wise product 
operation, andΓτ denotes the tail-risk modulation vector, whose values are mapped from the aforementioned 
tail-risk intensity function.In contrast to the conventional approach, which incorporates risk adjustment after 
signal generation, the proposed approach introduces risk signals directly into the feature transformation 
process, allowing for dynamic reweighting of multimodal representations.By integrating multimodal 
information with risk-aware modulation, the architecture adjusts the feature contributions in high risk 
situations, enabling the model to suppress noise amplification in extreme market fluctuations while preserving 
informative signals. This design establishes a uniform computing foundation for subsequent decisions, 
improving both return stability and robustness in volatile environments. 
 
Figure 1 Architecture Diagram of the Multimodal Quantitative Trading Model 
3.2 Multimodal Feature Encoding and Representation Methods 
Multimodal feature coding is a key technology to translate heterogeneous information into a uniform 
and learnable representation. Price Sequence Channel uses a sliding window mechanism to capture local 
trends, short term fluctuations, and trading density, thus preserving temporal dependencies and cross-cycle 
dynamics. The coding layer performs normalization, temporal alignment, and dimension compression, so 
that the heterogeneous input is projected into a common latent space, while maintaining the modalityspecific properties and ensuring the consistency of the later interactions [8]. Specifically, the text 
information is aligned with the time of release, and the asynchronous signal is adjusted in a controlled time 
window to avoid misalignment.Furthermore, a risk-sensitive label is constructed by integrating return bias, 
volatility intensity, and liquidity conditions at the end of the coding phase, and is embedded as an auxiliary 
signal in the feature cache. These labels are not directly involved in prediction, but are used as a guide for 
subsequent attention based weighting, which allows the model to differentiate high risk samples. The 
overall coding process can be summarized as follows: 
for t in time_index: 
price_vec = encode_price(price_window[t]) 
text_vec = encode_text(news_window[t]) 
micro_vec = encode_micro(orderbook_window[t]) 
 
price_vec = normalize(price_vec) 
text_vec = align_time(text_vec, t) 
micro_vec = compress_dim(micro_vec) 

 
fused_input[t] = { 
"price": price_vec, 
"text": text_vec, 
"micro": micro_vec, 
"tail_tag": build_tail_tag(return_series[t], vol_series[t], liquidity_series[t]) 
} 
3.3 Design of the Cross-Modal Feature Fusion Mechanism 
Cross-modal feature fusion is very important for the integration of heterogeneous information and the 
construction of uniform decision-making. Price coding vector captures trend momentum and volatility, text 
semantic vector represents event driven shocks and sentiment changes, and microstructural vector represents 
liquidity contraction and order imbalance. Only when these modes are coupled in a shared decision space can 
the model establish a coherent computational foundation for return forecasting and risk identification. [9] To 
achieve this, a gated interaction mechanism is used to carry out dynamic modal reweighting while suppressing 
redundant and conflicting information. Its core formulation is given in Equation (4): 
 
uτ=ϕ(Apeτ
(p)+Aneτ
(n)+Ameτ
(m))⊙Softmax(Bc[eτ
(p);eτ
(n);eτ
(m)]) 
(4) 
Here,uτ represents the fused output vector, whileeτ
(p),eτ
(n), andeτ
(m) denote the price, text, and microstructure 
encoding results, respectively.Ap,An, andAm are the modal mapping matrices,Bc is the interaction weight 
matrix,ϕ(·) is the nonlinear activation function, and⊙ denotes the element-wise weighted operation. The 
Softmax-based weighting term generates adaptive contribution coefficients between modes, which allows the 
model to focus on informative signals and mitigate inconsistent or noisy inputs.This mechanism achieves 
feature level adaptive weighting instead of simple concatenation. The resulting fused representation forms a 
decision-consistent feature space and provides a structured input for subsequent risk-aware attention 
modulation, thus improving the model's ability to maintain stability under extreme volatility. 
3.4 Tail Risk-Oriented Attention Control Mechanism 
The Tail Risk-Oriented Attention Control Mechanism is designed to detect extreme volatility samples and make 
dynamic adjustments in representation level. As shown in Figure 2, the relationship between the real time tail 
risk score and the subsequent drawdown results suggests that the integration of risk constraints results in a 
more structured separation of extreme loss regions, which improves the resolution of high risk states. The 
attention weights are defined as: 
 
ατ,j
(r)=
exp(ψ1hτ,j+ψ2 ωτ-+ψ3 lτ
s)
∑
exp(ψ1hτ,v+ψ2 ωτ-+ψ3 lτ
s)
d
v=1
 (5) 
whereατ,j
(r) denotes the risk attention weight for theατ,j
(r) th fusion feature channel at timeτ ,hτ,j denotes the 
interaction response intensity of the corresponding channel, ωτ- denotes the downside tail perturbation 
index, lτ
s denotes the liquidity pressure index,ψ1、ψ2、ψ3 denotes the learnable modulation coefficient, andd 
denotes the fusion feature dimension. 

 
Figure 2 Comparison of Risk-Aware Adjustment Control 
3.5 Trading Signal Generation and Risk Constraint Strategy 
Trading Signal Generation Phase converts the Fusion Feature Representation and Risk Awareness Weights into 
Executable Position Decisions. In this phase, the decision-making level takes into account the return signal and 
the risk constraint, so as to avoid excessive exposure in extreme market conditions. After undergoing risksensitive feature modulation, the fused feature vector uτ * produces a net exposure score defined as: 
 
χτ= tanh(q⊤uτ*+c0) -η1Rτtail-η2ςτ (6) 
Whereχτ denotes the net exposure score at timeτ ,uτ* denotes the fused feature vector recalibrated by tail 
attention,q denotes the decision projection parameter,c0 denotes the bias term,Rτtail denotes the tail risk 
intensity,ςτ denotes the instantaneous impact cost metric, andη1 andη2 denote the risk and transaction 
friction penalty coefficients. The position allocation module performs continuous position control based on the 
score magnitude, and the position function is expressed as: 
 
πτ=clip (
χτ
ξτ+ϵ0 ,-Πmax,Πmax) (7) 
Whereπτ denotes the target position,ξτ denotes the conditional volatility measure,ϵ0 denotes the stability 
constant,Πmax denotes the maximum allowable leverage limit, andclip(·) denotes the interval truncation 
operator. The volatility normalization term is used to prevent over-leverage in high-variance periods, and the 
truncation mechanism imposes strict position limits in extreme circumstances. [10] Through the integration of 
return signal, tail risk intensity and transaction cost into a unified decision-making function, the proposed 
strategy builds a dynamic allocation mechanism which is driven by information quality, risk level, and market 
influence. The proposed approach improves the consistency of decision making, improves the robustness of 
the regime shift, and provides a stable foundation for the assessment of return, drawdown, and generalization 
within a coherent risk-return framework.. 
4 Experimental Design and Results Analysis 
4.1 Experimental Data and Parameter Settings 
The experimental data is designed to support the joint modeling of price dynamics, textual information, and 
structural patterns in futures markets. The data set is composed of large liquid futures contracts, such as stock 
index and commodity futures, covering multiple market regimes over a continuous period to ensure that trends, 
clustering and structural shocks are adequately represented. The text channel is used to aggregate and preprocess financial news and announcements, and then sentiment coding, while the micro channel reconstructs 

high frequency state sequences on the basis of order book depth, bid-ask spread, trading direction, and order 
imbalance. In this paper, a rolling-window training scheme is proposed, in which the model parameters are 
trained on the historical data, and then evaluated on the later unseen periods. Furthermore, the transaction 
related factors, such as market influence and execution costs, are integrated into the data representation by 
means of microstructural characteristics, ensuring compliance with the actual trading conditions.Model 
parameters are set to balance stable learning and risk-sensitive optimization. Key hyperparameters, such as 
coding dimension, fusion layer width, attention head, batch size, learning rate, risk penalty factor, and location 
limit, are determined by a validation based search with early stopping criteria to avoid overfitting. The 
experimental setup ensures that the model is able to reflect both the prediction performance and the 
robustness under various market conditions. 
4.2 Multimodal Fusion and Return Performance Analysis 
Backtesting was performed with a rolling time-window training scheme coupled with strict out-of-sample 
sequential verification. The proposed Multimodal Fusion Framework, as shown in Figure 3, presents a stable 
and consistent pattern of risk return throughout the assessment period. The equity curve shows a continuous 
upward trend with limited breaks in volatility, and the drawdown profile is well under control. In quantitative 
terms, the strategy achieves a Sharpe ratio of 2.25, keeping the maximum draw under 18 per cent, which 
suggests a favourable balance between yield and risk exposure.The improved performance can be attributed 
to two core mechanisms embedded in the framework. Firstly, multimodal feature integration allows the model 
to construct a more informative and structured representation of the market by jointly coding trend dynamics, 
sentiment signals, and micro-structural information. Such a uniform representation improves the signal to 
noise ratio and enables the model to capture both the short term direction and the short term. Thus, the 
proposed model can produce more reliable prediction signals than single-modality approaches, which often 
suffer from incomplete information representation.Secondly, the integration of the tail risk-aware modulation 
mechanism is crucial to the stabilization of the return trajectory. Through dynamic adjustment of feature 
contributions based on real time risk intensity, the model is effective in containing excessive exposure in 
periods of unusual volatility or liquidity contraction. Such an adaptive control mechanism reduces the 
magnitude and duration of drawdowns, as shown in Figure 3, as shown in Figure 3. In contrast, conventional 
multimodal fusion approaches that do not have explicit risk modulation tend to amplify the noise, resulting in 
a sharper decline in equity.Generally speaking, the combination of multi-modality information and risksensitive feature reweighting can not only improve the prediction precision but also improve the robustness 
of the transaction. The combination of these results in more stable NAV developments and greater resilience 
to changes in the market regime, which shows that the proposed framework is effective in balancing 
profitability and risk management within a single modeling framework. 
 
Figure 3 Backtesting Performance and Risk Results 
4.3 Tail Risk Control and Stability Analysis 

Rolling backtests were conducted under highly volatile market conditions to systematically evaluate the 
effectiveness of the proposed tail risk control mechanism across different temporal stages and structural 
regimes. As illustrated in Figure 4, the risk-aware model demonstrates a substantial reduction in extreme loss 
exposure compared with the baseline framework, confirming the effectiveness of integrating tail risk signals 
into the feature representation and decision process. Specifically, the 95% Value-at-Risk (VaR) improves from 
−6.84% to −4.12%, reflecting a clear contraction of the left-tail distribution and a reduced probability of 
severe losses. Meanwhile, the maximum daily loss decreases from −4.96% to −2.71%, and the frequency of 
extreme loss events, defined as returns exceeding the VaR threshold, declines significantly from 7.3 to 3.1, 
indicating enhanced robustness against abnormal shocks. In addition, the volatility fluctuation metric is 
reduced from 2.18% to 1.36% in range-bound market scenarios, suggesting improved stability in price 
dynamics and reduced sensitivity to short-term disturbances. Although the average return experiences a 
moderate decline from 3.02% to 2.11%, the overall return distribution becomes more consistent and less prone 
to abrupt downside deviations. This is further supported by the improvement in tail skewness from −0.62 to 
−0.21, which implies a reduction in asymmetric downside risk and a more balanced risk-return profile. Overall, 
the results confirm that the proposed risk-conscious attention mechanism effectively enhances the model’s 
capability to identify, quantify, and mitigate tail risk, thereby improving stability without significantly 
compromising return performance. 
 
Figure 4 Backtesting Comparison of Market Risk Metrics 
4.4 Ablation Studies and Model Generalization Analysis 
Ablative research is carried out to assess the contribution of each of the core modules. Key components are 
gradually removed and tested for different asset classes, as shown in Table 1. When the text mode is excluded, 
the average return of the model is reduced from 21.6% to 16.3%, and the information ratio is reduced from 
1.84 to 1.29. The win ratio drops to 55.2 per cent when the microstructural mode is eliminated, which reflects 
a reduced ability to capture short term trading opportunities and execution times.Further analysis indicates 
that the removal of the tail risk attention mechanism results in a worsening of risk metrics. The average 
maximum drawdown is increased from -2.71% to -3.98%, the return dispersion (P95 – P5) is increased from 
6.12% to 8.47%, and the standard deviation is increased from 1.42% to 2.06%. Furthermore, the maximum 
number of consecutive loss days increased from 3.2 to 5.7, which further confirms that tail risk control is 
important in stabilizing the return trajectory. The whole model maintains a Sharpe ratio within the range of 
1.42 to 1.58 across different contracts, while simplified variants show higher drawdown variability and longer 
loss streaks. The results show that multimodal integration improves the robustness of different asset classes, 
and the tail risk-aware attention mechanism is crucial to maintaining the same performance in different market 
structures. 
Table 1 Comparison of Ablation Experiment Results and Generalization Capabilities 

Model 
Configuration 
Annualized 
Return (%) 
Information 
Ratio 
Win 
Rate 
(%) 
Mean 
Maximum 
Drawdown 
(%) 
P95–P5 
Percentile 
Difference 
(%) 
Standard 
Deviation of 
Returns (%) 
Maximum 
Consecutive 
Loss Days 
Full Model 
21.6 
1.84 
62.7 
-2.71 
6.12 
1.42 
3.2 
Text-free 
modality 
16.3 
1.29 
58.4 
-3.15 
7.08 
1.73 
4.1 
Microstructural 
Modes 
18.7 
1.51 
55.2 
-3.42 
7.56 
1.88 
4.6 
Tail Risk 
Attention 
19.2 
1.47 
59.1 
-3.98 
8.47 
2.06 
5.7 
5 Conclusions 
In this paper, multimodal feature fusion and tail risk awareness are combined to optimize the yield generation 
and risk control in quantitative futures trading. The model establishes a risk-sensitive decision-making 
mechanism at the representation level by building a unified representation space that integrates price 
dynamics, text sentiment, and microstructure information, which is characterized by an improvement in 
Sharpe ratio and a reduction in drawdown, while maintaining stable performance in various market regimes. 
The ablative and generalizability analyses further show that multimodal integration can improve the quality of 
prediction, while the tail risk-aware attention mechanism is essential in restraining the extreme loss exposure 
and stabilizing the return path. 
In spite of these improvements, there are still some limitations. The high frequency data noise can influence 
the performance stability, and the time delay of text information can make the response of the market less 
responsive. Furthermore, the model may show limited adaptability in the context of a rapidly changing regime 
with structural breaks.Further work will focus on the development of more robust temporal alignment 
strategies and the integration of real-time semantic updating mechanisms. Furthermore, it is possible to 
explore adaptive risk modulation in the context of regime-switching, which will allow the model to perform 
consistently in more complex and dynamic markets. 
References: 
[1] Farimani S A, Jahan M V, Fard A M. An adaptive multimodal learning model for financial market price 
prediction[J]. IEEE Access, 2024, 12: 121846-121863. 
[2] Bentaleb K, Houad M B, Mestari M. An Adaptive Modality Fusion Network for Stock Trend Prediction[J]. IEEE 
Access, 2025, 13: 213052-213066. 
[3] Lee T W, Teisseyre P, Lee J. Effective exploitation of macroeconomic indicators for stock direction classification 
using the multimodal fusion transformer[J]. IEEE Access, 2023, 11: 10275-10287. 
[4] Badal D, Busalim A, Lee D. An Explainable Multimodal Framework for Real-Time Bitcoin 
Forecasting[C]//Proceedings of the 2026 Conference on Human Centred Artificial Intelligence-Education and Practice. 
2026: 100-106. 
[5] Zheng, X., Chen, X., Gong, S., Griffin, X., & Slabaugh, G. (2025, September). Xfmamba: Cross-fusion mamba 
for multi-view medical image classification. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and ComputerAssisted Intervention (pp. 672-682). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. 
[6] Shu M, Wang Z, Liang J. Early warning indicators for financial market anomalies: A multi-signal integration 
approach[J]. Journal of Advanced Computing Systems, 2024, 4(9): 68-84. 
[7] Battazza I F C, Rodrigues C M O, Oliveira J F L. A Framework for Market State Prediction with Ontological 
Asset Selection: A Multimodal Approach[J]. Applied Sciences, 2025, 15(3): 1034. 
[8] Odunaike A. Integrating real-time financial data streams to enhance dynamic risk modeling and portfolio decision 
accuracy[J]. Int J Comput Appl Technol Res, 2025, 14(08): 1-16. 
[9] Гао Ц, Юй Х. EXAMINING THE ROLE OF TEXT ANALYSIS IN SOYBEAN OIL FUTURES PRICE 
PREDICTION[J]. Financial and credit activity problems of theory and practice, 2025, 5(64): 261-286. 
[10] Friday I K, Pati S P, Mishra D, et al. A Meta-Adaptive Framework Combining Gated Attention Mechanisms and 
Feature-Wise Modulation for Multi-Horizon Stock Price Movement Prediction[J]. IEEE Access, 2026, 14: 2658126603. 
