Speed and Learning in High-Frequency Auctions
Marlene Haas, Mariana Khapko, and Marius Zoican∗
April 21, 2020
Abstract
Faster trading improves liquidity in periodic call auction markets, in contrast to continuous-time
markets. We build a model where high-frequency traders (HFTs) engage in duels to trade on
stale quotes. More frequent periodic auctions increase the likelihood that a single HFT arrives in
any given auction and subsequently acts as a monopolist on information. Higher trading speed
increases the expected number of arbitrageurs participating in auctions, promoting competition
between snipers and improving liquidity. We ﬁnd that faster trading and longer auction intervals
are substitute instruments to reduce bid-ask spreads. Relative to continuous-time trading,
periodic batch auctions reduce HFT informational rents.
∗Marlene Haas is aﬃliated with Cornerstone Research, 2001 K Street NW, North Tower, Suite 800, Washington,
DC 20006, United States. Mariana Khapko is aﬃliated with University of Toronto Scarborough and the Rotman
School of Management. Marius Zoican is aﬃliated with University of Toronto Mississauga and the Rotman School
of Management. Marlene Haas can be contacted at mhaas@cornerstone.com. Mariana Khapko can be contacted at
mariana.khapko@rotman.utoronto.ca. Marius Zoican can be contacted at marius.zoican@rotman.utoronto.ca. The
views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reﬂecting
the views of Cornerstone Research. The paper received the 2016 Josseph de la Vega Prize from the Federation of
European Securities Exchanges under the title “Discrete or continuous trading? HFT competition and liquidity on
batch auction markets.” We have greatly beneﬁted from discussion on this research with Matthieu Bouvard, Eric
Budish, J´erˆome Dugast, Carole Gresse, Bj¨orn Hagstr¨omer, Mario Milone, Sophie Moinas, Klaus Ritzberger, and Bart
Yueshen Zhou. We are grateful to two anonymous referees, seminar participants at the Universit´e Paris-Dauphine and
Bank of England for insightful comments, as well as conference participants at the 2016 New York Stern Microstructure
meeting, the 2016 IFABS meeting, the 2016 Northern Finance Association conference, and the EUROFIDAI Paris
December 2016 Finance Meeting. Mariana Khapko and Marius Zoican gratefully acknowledge Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council for an Insight Development Grant (430-2018-00125). Marius Zoican acknowledges
ﬁnancial support from Quantitative Management Research Initiative (QMI) under the aegis of the Fondation du
Risque, a joint initiative by Universit´e Paris-Dauphine, l’´Ecole Nationale de la Statistique et de l’Administration
ParisTech, Addstones Groupe Fran¸cais d’Informatique et La Fran¸caise Investment Solutions.

Speed and Learning in High-Frequency Auctions
Abstract
Faster trading improves liquidity in periodic call auction markets, in contrast to continuous-time
markets. We build a model where high-frequency traders (HFTs) engage in duels to trade on
stale quotes. More frequent periodic auctions increase the likelihood that a single HFT arrives in
any given auction and subsequently acts as a monopolist on information. Higher trading speed
increases the expected number of arbitrageurs participating in auctions, promoting competition
between snipers and improving liquidity. We ﬁnd that faster trading and longer auction intervals
are substitute instruments to reduce bid-ask spreads. Relative to continuous-time trading,
periodic batch auctions reduce HFT informational rents.
Keywords: High-frequency trading, batch auction markets, liquidity, adverse selection
JEL Codes: D43, D47, G10, G14

1
Introduction
Is continuous-time trading inherently ﬂawed? Modern exchanges are largely organized as continuoustime limit order books: One can buy and sell assets at any given time. Traders who react ﬁrst
to proﬁtable opportunities have a comparative advantage. Consequently, continuous-time trading
generates incentives for each trader to become marginally faster than her competitors. As a result,
an “arms’ race” emerged between high-frequency traders: The round-trip trading times between
New York and Chicago dropped from 16 milliseconds in 2010 to 8.02 milliseconds in July 2015. A
London-based trader can buy stocks in Frankfurt within just 2.21 milliseconds. As a benchmark,
light needs 2.12 milliseconds to travel the same distance.1
Such arms’ race is not necessarily benign: Ever higher trading speeds come at a non-trivial
social cost. In 2010, Spread Networks spent USD 300 million building a straight-line ﬁber optic
cable between New York and Chicago for a 3 millisecond latency gain. Moreover, faster trading
does not necessarily improve market quality (see, for example, Ye, Yao, and Gai, 2013; Shkilko and
Sokolov, Forthcoming).
Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) argue that the “arms’ race” for speed is a by-product of
continuous-time trading, which is the prevailing market design for securities trading around the
world. Their proposed alternative is a periodic batch auction market, i.e., a series of call auctions
throughout the day. While traders can submit orders at any time, the batch auction market clears
at discrete intervals, for example every second, through a uniform auction. Therefore, a batch
auction market eliminates the “inherent ﬂaw” of the continuous-time limit order book: the discrete
advantage from being marginally (e.g., one nanosecond) faster than competitors. Consequently, the
scope for an HFT “arms’ race” is limited.
Our paper “zooms in” on high-frequency batch auction markets, where the market clearing
frequency is of the same order of magnitude as traders’ speed to respond to arbitrage opportunities.2
We complement Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) and consider the role of learning frictions in
1Sources for this paragraph: McKay Brothers Microwave Latencies Table and Bloomberg: “Wall Street Grabs
NATO Towers in Traders Speed-of-Light Quest.”
2To understand the order of magnitude, we note that in 2011 the median arbitrage opportunity in U.S. index
futures had a duration of 7 milliseconds (Budish, Cramton, and Shim, 2015).
1

batch auctions. Whereas in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) all high-frequency traders become
informed simultaneously, we allow for HFTs to learn the news at heterogeneous times. For very short
auctions, there is a positive probability that only one HFT becomes informed, who can subsequently
extract monopoly rents. We ﬁnd that faster trading can be useful in high-frequency batch auction
markets, as it reduces the probability that a single informed HFT participates in any given auction.
Consequently, trading speed can improve liquidity as it stimulates competition between arbitrageurs.
The economics of trading speed therefore crucially depends on the market design: In continuous-time
markets, Menkveld and Zoican (2017) show that trading speed can actually harm liquidity as it
triggers more zero-sum trading “duels” between high-frequency market-makers and arbitrageurs.
Our model builds on the general structure in Menkveld and Zoican (2017), where we allow
for the market to clear at discrete time-intervals. We model the discrete-time market to be fully
transparent before market clearing. This means that traders are able to observe orders submissions
and cancellations at all times. In addition, traders can submit and cancel orders at any time, but
the market clears at equally-spaced discrete time intervals. Unlike in continuous-time markets,
where a marketable order submission corresponds to the end of the trading round, the timing of
market clearing is exogenous in periodic call auction markets, and thus unaﬀected by order arrival.
High-frequency traders compete to provide liquidity at the beginning of the trading game. One
of the HFTs, at random, is the ﬁrst to post orders in the book and becomes a high-frequency
market-maker (HFM). The other HFTs assume the role of high-frequency speculators, or snipers
(HFS), who try to proﬁt from short-term stale quotes. Following an innovation in the asset value,
all HFTs rush to the market: the HFM to cancel or update the now stale quotes, the HFS to proﬁt
from a temporary arbitrage opportunity.
The main economic friction in the model is imperfect learning, which generates short-term
asymmetric information. High-frequency traders still require time, albeit a short one, to process
and react to trading signals (Brolley and Cimon, Forthcoming). If the inter-auction interval is very
short, on par with high-frequency traders’ speed, the number of HFTs in each auction becomes
random.3 This leads to three economically relevant auction types: (i) maker-auctions, in which the
3In this sense, an “auction” stands for the time interval between two successive market clearings.
2

market-maker removes stale quotes before any sniper can trade on them, (ii) sniper-auctions, where
a single sniper can take advantage of the HFM’s stale quotes, and (iii) competitive auctions, where
multiple snipers compete in the same auction until information rents are eliminated. We refer to
these auction types as “economically relevant” because they are the only three types for which our
model results in updates to the auction order book. We ﬁnd that both a longer auction interval
or a higher trading speed reduce the probability of sniper-auctions, adverse selection costs, and
consequently improve liquidity.
In our model, continuous-time markets emerge naturally as a limiting case of periodic batch
auction markets, as the duration of the auction interval becomes arbitrarily small. In the setup of
Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), HFT snipers engage in Bertrand competition in every auction,
regardless of its duration. The outcome of this assumption is that zero-duration auction markets have
better liquidity than continuous-time markets, although the market designs are otherwise equivalent.
Introducing HFT speed as a parameter in the model allows us to eliminate the discontinuity: as the
auction length decreases, the probability of two or more HFT arrivals in the same auction is lower.
In the limit, at most one HFT can arrive in each auction and time-priority is de facto restored as in
continuous-time markets.
A periodic batch auction market always improves liquidity and reduces high-frequency trader
proﬁts relative to the continuous-time limit order markets. We model HFT speed as an exogenous
policy variable, rather than an endogenous investment in technology. In this sense, we interpret
speed as being driven by common latency components, such as exchange architecture choices or
co-location rules implemented by trading venues.4
There is an active ongoing debate about the relative merits of continuous- and discrete-time
trading mechanisms. The Securities and Exchanges Commission (SEC) chair indicated in June
2014 her interest in batch auction markets as a “more ﬂexible, competitive” exchange design. In
October 2015, Chicago Stock Exchange received approval from the SEC to launch a batch-auction
platform, CHX SNAP. In March 2016, London Stock Exchange launched a midday auction for the
4An alternative interpretation, where HFT speed refers to information processing latency would yield identical
results, as long as speed is common to all high-frequency traders, rather than an individual investment choice.
3

most liquid securities.5 This paper oﬀers an important policy-relevant insight: the HFT “arms’ race”
in a batch auction market intensiﬁes competition between arbitrageurs and decreases the spread.
Stimulating HFT speed competition is eﬀective in scenarios where longer auction intervals conﬂict
with short-term trading needs. Discrete-time trading can thus align private and social incentives,
since the arms’ race is arguably privately optimal for HFTs.
Our paper contributes to a growing literature on HFT and market design. A closely related
paper is Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), who study a model of batch auction markets. The
authors assume HFTs to react to new information without a delay. As a consequence, arbitrageurs
always compete `a la Bertrand. We introduce a learning friction which generates adverse selection
risk: In particular, we allow for auctions where a single HFT sniper participates, who consequently
acts as a monopolist on information. The richer model we propose features a positive bid-ask spread
and unveils new economic channels, in particular the role of speed in discrete-time markets. Our
model nests the Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) setup for relatively infrequent auctions, as well
as the continuous market outcome if the inter-auction delay is short enough.
In a policy paper, Farmer and Skouras (2012) estimate the worldwide beneﬁts of the transition
from limit order to periodic auction markets to be around USD 500 billion per year. Their paper is
similar to ours as it models the batch auction time as a Poisson process. However, the authors do not
consider the eﬀects of batch auctions on arbitrageur competition, nor the endogenous order choice
for HFTs. Wah and Wellman (2013) and Wah, Hurd, and Wellman (2015) develop agent-based
models to showcase the beneﬁts of batch auction markets. Batch auctions improve welfare as they
better aggregate supply and demand. If traders can choose between a limit order and a batch
auction market, HFTs will always follow the choice of slow traders to increase arbitrage proﬁts.
Fricke and Gerig (2015) calibrate a batch auction trading model with risk-averse traders to U.S.
data and ﬁnd the optimal batch length to be between 0.2 and 0.9 seconds. However, the authors
focus on liquidity risk rather than on an adverse selection channel. Aldrich and L´opez Vargas (2019)
build an experimental laboratory market to compare continuous- to discrete-time markets and ﬁnd
that the latter are less conducive to predatory trading, while having better liquidity and lower price
5Sources for this paragraph: SEC Chair Speech on June 5, 2014; the CHX SNAP Auction Market webpage; and
the London Stock Exchange webpage.
4

volatility.
Madhavan (1992) and Economides and Schwartz (1995) argue that batch auction markets
improve price eﬃciency as they aggregate disparate information from traders for a longer interval
of time. In a model of double-auction markets where “fast” traders act as intermediaries rather
than arbitrageurs, Du and Zhu (2017) ﬁnd that, if news are not scheduled, the socially optimal
trading frequency exceeds information arrival frequency. However, trading speed does not oﬀer an
informational advantage. In our model, stochastic learning leads to a novel channel: infrequent
trading improves the public-to-private news ratio, enhances learning, and reduces the adverse
selection cost.
Other solutions to the HFT arms’ race externality include exogenous order delays, or speed
bumps (Baldauf and Mollner, Forthcoming; Aoyagi, 2019; Brolley and Cimon, Forthcoming). Kyle
and Lee (2017) propose, at the opposite end of the spectrum, a fully-continuous exchange where
traders submit buy or sell trade rates over time, rather than quantities. Brolley and Zoican (2019)
argue for a FinTech-oriented solution where decentralized exchanges would incentivize HFTs to
purchase low-latency infrastructure on an as-needed basis, reducing the overall cost of the arms’
race.
This paper is also related to the literature on auctions in ﬁnancial markets.
Janssen and
Rasmusen (2002) and Jovanovic and Menkveld (2017) study auction mechanisms where the number
of competing bids (in our case, the number of informed HFTs) is not common knowledge. The
bidding equilibrium is always symmetric and in mixed strategies. Our paper proposes asymmetric
information as a rationale for the uncertain number of auction participants. Kremer and Nyborg
(2004) study various allocation rules in uniform price auctions and ﬁnd that a discrete tick size or
uniform rationing at infra-marginal prices eliminates arbitrarily large underpricing. Kandel, Rindi,
and Bosetti (2012), Pagano and Schwartz (2003), and Pagano, Peng, and Schwartz (2013) document
that the introduction of opening and closing call auctions on Paris Bourse in 1996 and Nasdaq in
2004, respectively, reduced spreads and volatility and improved price discovery.
Finally, this paper relates to a growing literature on high-frequency trading.
Asymmetric
information or asymmetric speed across traders may lead to “stale” quotes and adverse selection
5

costs for market-makers (as ﬁrst modeled in Copeland and Galai, 1983; Glosten and Milgrom, 1985).
As in Foucault, Roell, and Sandas (2003) and Foucault, Kadan, and Kandel (2013), traders in our
model engage in a speed race to react ﬁrst to new arbitrage opportunities. Several theoretical papers
argue that the beneﬁts from the speed “arms’ race” between HFTs are limited. High-frequency
market markers have an option to cancel their quotes before being “sniped” by arbitrageurs, a
mechanism explored in Baruch and Glosten (2013).
Biais, Foucault, and Moinas (2015) ﬁnd
socially excessive investment in fast trading technology. According to Kumar and Seppi (1994) and
Menkveld (2014), the HFT “arms’ race” can hurt market liquidity. In the same spirit, Menkveld and
Zoican (2017) argue that ever faster exchanges promote a higher frequency of inter-HFT trades,
increasing the adverse selection cost and consequently the spread. Empirical evidence suggests
high-frequency traders use strategies to snipe stale quotes. Hendershott and Moulton (2011) and
Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014) ﬁnd HFT market orders to have a larger price impact.
For more complete and in-depth analysis of the literature that studies the eﬀects of high-frequency
trading on market liquidity, we refer the interested reader to Menkveld (2016).
2
Model
Trading environment.
One risky asset is traded in a call auction market as in Budish, Cramton,
and Shim (2015). Traders can submit and cancel orders at any time, but the market clears at
equally-spaced discrete time intervals of length τ, that is at t ∈{τ, 2τ, . . . , kτ . . . }. There is full
pre-auction transparency, that is, traders observe new orders and cancellations at all times. Further,
there is no time priority within the auction interval: all buy and sell orders entered in the kth
auction between t ∈[(k −1) τ, kτ) are processed together and, if matched, executed at a unique
clearing price. Traders can submit both limit orders and market orders. Limit orders are instructions
to buy or sell a certain quantity of the asset at a given price or better. In contrast, market orders do
not specify a limit price: Rather, they are instructions to execute at the best price that allows the
order to be ﬁlled in full. Orders can be posted and cancelled at no cost before each market clearing.
Orders left outstanding after the market clears at the end of the kth auction are carried over
to the k + 1th auction, and have time-priority over new orders at the same price. In each auction,
6

if demand and supply intersect horizontally such that the price is uniquely determined and the
quantity is not, then orders are executed with a non-unit probability such that the market clears.
Conversely, if demand and supply intersect vertically, quantity is uniquely determined: all trades
execute in full.6 However, the market clears at a range of prices, e.g., between [pL, pH]. We follow
Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) and assume the market clearing price in this case is pL + pH
2
.
Asset.
The common value of the risky asset at the start of the trading game is v. Innovations
about the value of the asset (news) arrive as a Poisson process with intensity η (as in Baruch and
Glosten, 2013). The absolute size of value innovations is σ > 0: Conditional on news, the asset
value either jumps to v + σ for “good” news or v −σ for “bad” news. The common value of the asset
is a martingale; hence, good and bad news are equally likely.
Agents.
The risky asset is traded by two types of agents: a single liquidity trader and N > 2
HFTs. There is no time discounting and all agents are risk neutral. The liquidity trader receives
private value shocks according to a Poisson process with intensity µ. Conditional on the shock, they
are equally likely to buy or sell exactly one unit of the asset.
High-frequency traders, by contrast to the LT, possess a monitoring technology that allows them
to process changes to the security’s fundamental value. Learning, however, takes time. The HFT
market arrival times follow a Poisson process with rate ψ > 0, where ψ stands in for the traders’
reaction speed. We interpret ψ as a technology-driven parameter: for example, the speed of incoming
data feeds from trading platforms, the round-trip order latency between exchanges where the asset
is cross-listed, or the performance of algorithms parsing news and social media feeds. Note that the
traders’ reaction speed ψ governs both the expected time from news to order execution (equal to
ψ−1), as well as the per-auction probability of HFT arrival. In continuous-time markets, only the
former interpretation is relevant. In call auction markets, the latter interpretation becomes the most
salient. Let tHFT denote the time at which an HFT observes the value innovation. The probability
6In our model, trades always occur between limit orders on one side and market orders on the other side. In this
case, the supply and demand always intersect horizontally, and the unique price is the one for which all market orders
are executed in full.
7

that an HFT observes a value innovation in auction k for the ﬁrst time, conditional on news, is
α ≡Prob (tHFT < kτ | tHFT ≥(k −1) τ) = exp (−ψ (k −1) τ) −exp (−ψkτ)
exp (−ψ (k −1) τ)
= 1 −exp (−ψτ) ,
(1)
which is constant for each individual auction k.
Timing.
The timing of our model mirrors Menkveld and Zoican (2017). At t = 0, the N highfrequency traders compete to provide price quotes. Let v −s and v + s denote the lowest buy and
highest sell price quoted at t = 0, respectively. Two high-frequency trading roles emerge as a result.
The HFT that succeeds in posting their quotes becomes the high-frequency market-maker (HFM).
The other N −1 HFTs act as quote snipers, poised to trade on stale quotes: we refer to such HFTs
as high-frequency speculators (HFS).
We denote the“trigger event”to be the ﬁrst arrival of either news or a liquidity trader. Since both
events are Poisson processes, the expected time until the trigger event is
1
η + µ. With probability
µ
η + µ, the trigger event is liquidity-driven: an LT arrives at the market and consumes either the
bid or the ask quote. In this case, since there is no change in the asset’s value, the HFSs have no
incentive to trade after the trigger event. Conversely, with the complementary probability
η
η + µ,
news arrives instead. The N −1 HFS and the HFM rush to submit orders as soon as they observe
the value innovation: the speculators send orders to trade against the stale quote, whereas the HFM
rushes to cancel the order from t = 0. The game ends upon the ﬁrst market clearing with non-zero
trading volume or a cancelled order.
Figure 1:
Example of event sequence in the model
t=0
News or LT arrival
HFTs post quotes
τ
Trigger event
2τ
3τ
4τ
HFT1
HFT2
HFT3
HFT4
Auction times
8

Figure 1 illustrates an example of events sequence in the model. The labels HFT1, HFT2, . . . ,
indicate HFT arrivals in chronological order. If the trigger event is an LT arrival, the liquidity
trade is executed in the ﬁrst auction at τ. Conversely, if the trigger event is a news arrival, the ﬁrst
auction elapses with no trades, since no HFTs arrive before τ. In the example in Figure 1, trade
only happens at t = 2τ (that is, when the second auction clears), upon the arrival of HFT1.7
All model parameters are summarized in Appendix A.
3
Equilibrium
We search for symmetric Nash equilibria of the trading game. In particular, at any point in time
t ≥0 an equilibrium consists of (i) HFT strategies to submit limit or market orders to buy or to
sell a given quantity of the asset (for limit orders, at a speciﬁed price), or a decision to cancel such
orders, and (ii) market clearing prices at the batch auction times t ∈{τ, 2τ, . . . , kτ, . . . }.
3.1
Optimal sniping behavior
Let A denote the index of the ﬁrst auction following news, where at least one HFT is present
at the market (either an HFS or the HFM). Auction A therefore starts at (A −1) τ and ends at
tA = Aτ. Since HFTs do not participate in every auction, particularly for a very short τ, it could be
that tA > tnews + τ such that several auction intervals elapse between the news event and the ﬁrst
HFT order arrival. However, any auction interval that elapses at t ∈[tnews, tA) is not economically
relevant since it does trigger any trades and does not reﬂect any order book updates.
We distinguish between three possible economically relevant scenarios. First, the HFM might
return at the market during A. In this case, we refer to A as a maker-auction or M-auction. The
probability of a maker auction, conditional on at least one arrival during A, is
πM ≡P (HFM order in A | at least one HFT arrival in A) =
α
1 −(1 −α)N .
(2)
Second, if the HFM is not active in the market during A (either through cancelling or submitting
7We also note that if, for example, HFT2 would arrive before 2τ, both HFT1 and HFT2 orders are considered for
market clearing in the second auction.
9

orders), but the quotes submitted at t = 0 are still live, it must be that at least one sniper submits
an order. We distinguish two possibilities: either (i) exactly one or (ii) at least two HFS submit
orders in auction A. We denote A as a sniper auction or S-auction if exactly one HFS is submitting
orders to the market (and the HFM is not). The probability of a sniper auction is
πS ≡P (Exactly one HFS order in A | at least one HFT arrival in A)
= (N −1)α (1 −α)N−1
1 −(1 −α)N
.
(3)
Finally, auction A is a competitive-auction or C-auction if at least two HFS submit orders during A,
while the HFM does not act in A. The probability of a competitive-auction is
πC ≡P (Two or more HFS orders in A | at least one HFT arrival in A)
=
PN−1
k=2
 N−1
k

αk (1 −α)N−k
1 −(1 −α)N
.
(4)
It is easy to verify that πM + πS + πC = 1. Table 1 summarizes the three auction types and
their respective probabilities.
Table 1:
Auction types
Auction type
HFM active?
HFS active?
Probability
Maker (M) auction
Yes
Irrelevant
πM =
α
1−(1−α)N
Sniper (S) auction
No
One
πS = (N−1)α(1−α)N−1
1−(1−α)N
Competitive (C) auction
No
Two or more
πC =
PN−1
k=2 (N−1
k )αk(1−α)N−k
1−(1−α)N
.
Lemma 1 describes the HFT optimal order submission strategies for each of the three auction
types in Table 1.
Lemma 1. (Order submission upon a news trigger.) Following a news trigger event, highfrequency traders optimally submit the following orders as a function of the auction type:
10

(i) In a maker-auction, the HFM cancels any quotes posted at t = 0. High-frequency snipers do
not submit any new orders.
(ii) In sniper-auctions and competitive-auctions, each speculator present at the exchange sends
a buy (sell) market order for one unit of the asset, if the trigger event was good (respectively,
bad) news.
First, we note that since the liquidity trader demand at most one unit of the security, the
HFM infers that any directional order ﬂow |q| ≥2 indicates the presence of snipers. Consequently,
competitive HFMs stand ready to buy (respectively, sell) any quantity of two units and above at a
price of v + σ (respectively, at v −σ).
The high-frequency snipers’ rationale for trading is to proﬁt from the existence of stale quotes
as posted by the HFM at t = 0. If the HFM is actively present in the market at A, she optimally
cancels the previously submitted quote on the news-relevant side of the market to avoid being
adversely selected.8 Since there are no stale quotes in the book, high-frequency snipers have no
incentives to trade and optimally refrain from submitting orders to the matching engine. As a
consequence, maker-auctions have no trading volume and all HFTs earn a proﬁt of zero.
The single HFS present at the market in a sniper-auction is essentially a monopolist on information.
Consider the case of good news (the case of bad news is symmetrical): the asset value becomes
v + σ, and the market-maker is willing to sell the security for v + s as per the quote submitted in
t = 0. A market buy order for one unit executes at v + s (the lowest price that clears the market)
and the unique sniper earns a monopoly proﬁt equal to σ −s. Since the informed trade is a zero-sum
game, the market-maker loses s −σ < 0. A sniper-auction essentially mimics the outcome obtained
in a continuous-time market (as in, for example, Glosten and Milgrom, 1985), where the ﬁrst sniper
at the market has a monopoly on information due to time-priority rules.9
In competitive auctions snipers submit two or more buy market orders. Consider again the
case of good news: Since the auction is uniform price, the market clears at v + σ and both the
8The quote on the no-news side is never executed in this case before the end of the game, and therefore the HFM
is indiﬀerent between cancelling it or not.
9Note that the HFS cannot proﬁtably deviate by posting a limit order with price diﬀerent from v + s: a buy order
for v + s −ϵ would not be executed, and a buy order for v + s + ϵ would yield a lower proﬁt, for any ϵ > 0.
11

market-maker and speculators earn a proﬁt of zero. Again, no HFS can proﬁtably deviate from
submitting a market order: a limit buy order with a price higher than v + σ would yield a loss,
whereas a limit buy order with a price lower than v + σ would still get executed at v + σ.
Adverse selection on stale quotes, as in Menkveld and Zoican (2017), only emerges therefore in
sniper-auctions. In contrast, maker-auctions correspond to zero trading volume, whereas competitiveauctions trades execute at the eﬃcient price and generate no adverse selection.
Lemma 2. (Sniping probability.) The probability of a sniping trade conditional on news, that is
πS as given in equation (3), decreases in the HFT speed ψ.
The result in Lemma 2 is driven by two channels. First, since a higher ψ increases the per-auction
probability of HFT arrival α, the HFM is more likely to arrive in auction A and cancel her quotes.
Second, even if the HFM does not cancel her stale quotes in the auction, a higher ψ increases the
likelihood of a C-auction, where two or more snipers compete and drive the clearing price to the true
asset value. Figure 2 illustrates how the probabilities of each auction type change with HFT speed.
As HFTs become faster, sniper-auctions where a single HFS can trade on stale quotes become less
likely. At the same time, a faster market-maker is more likely to update her quotes. The probability
of an auction where snipers compete for stale quotes ﬁrst increases, then decreases in HFT speed,
as market-makers are more likely to reach the market themselves and render sniper orders moot.
12

Figure 2:
Probabilities of each auction type
This ﬁgure illustrates the probabilities of each auction type (market-, sniper-, and competitive-auction) as a function
of the HFT speed parameter ψ. Parameter values: µ = η = σ = 1, τ = 0.5, and N = 4.
0
1
2
3
4
5
HFT speed (ψ)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability of each auction type
Maker-auction
Sniper-auction
Competitive-auction
Equivalence with price competition.
While the strategies above do not involve explicit competition on prices as in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), we note that a model where snipers can
condition the order price on the presence or absence of competitors would yield identical results.
In a sniper auction, conditional on good news, the unique HFS can submit a buy order for any
price pHFS ∈[v + s, v + σ]. The market clears and one unit is traded at pHFS + (v + s)
2
. As a result,
the HFS earns a positive proﬁt of v + σ −pHFS + (v + s)
2
. The speculator optimally selects the
lowest buy price that clears the market, pHFS = v + s.
Conversely, in a competitive-auction high-frequency speculators engage in Bertrand competition
on prices. Consider again the case of good news, for illustration purposes. Any market-clearing
price pC < v + σ cannot be an equilibrium. If there are m ≥2 HFS at the market posting an order
to buy at pC, then each of them is randomly matched with probability 1
m < 1. It is optimal for
any HFS to bid a slightly higher amount, pC + ϵ and guarantee execution of his order, while still
13

earning a positive proﬁt. In equilibrium, the market clears at v + σ, and one of the HFS, randomly
selected, is matched with the market-maker.
A potential concern with the price competition is that snipers could wait to submit orders until
an instant before market clearing, to avoid revealing themselves. The concern could be alleviated, for
example, by allowing for a “soft close” auction (as implemented by Amazon, see Roth and Ockenfels,
2002), where market clearing is automatically delayed for a very brief interval upon the arrival of
new orders.10
3.2
Liquidity in batch auction markets
In this section, we study the optimal HFT initial quotes (i.e., the ones submitted in t = 0). We
focus on symmetric equilibria such that each HFT submits at t = 0 an order to buy the ﬁrst unit of
the asset for v −s and an order to sell the ﬁrst unit of the asset at v + s, where s ≥0 denotes the
outstanding half-spread on the limit orders around the common value v.
At t = 0, all HFTs submit quotes to the markets without being assigned a market-market or
speculator role. The expected utility of a market-maker is
UHFM(s) =
µ
µ + ηs +
η
µ + ηπS(s −σ).
(5)
With probability
µ
µ + η, the trigger event is a liquidity trade. The liquidity trader submits order at
a price that clears the market and minimizes their trading cost: either buy one unit at v + s, the
lowest price that the HFM accepts as a seller, or sell one unit at v −s, the highest price that the
HFM requests as a buyer. In this case, the market-maker earns s and the game ends.
With probability
η
µ + η, the trigger event is a news arrival. From Lemma 1 and the discussion
in Section 3.1, the HFM earns zero proﬁt in maker- and competitive-auctions, and makes a loss of
s −σ in sniper-auctions which occur with probability πS.
A high-frequency speculator has positive utility if both (i) the trigger event is a news arrival,
with probability
η
µ + η, and (ii) she is the only trader to arrive in auction A. Since there are N −1
10Cinnober, a Swedish ﬁnancial infrastructure provider, patented adaptive micro-auctions, where market clearing
is automatically delayed if new order arrivals change the clearing price. See patent US 8719146 B2, available at:
https://bit.ly/2SKI6mb.
14

potential snipers, each HFS is a monopolist with probability
πS
N −1. The expected utility of a
high-frequency speculator becomes
UHFS(s) =
η
µ + η
1
N −1πS(σ −s).
(6)
In equilibrium, HFTs must be indiﬀerent between the two roles. The equilibrium spread s⋆is
pinned down by equating the expected utilities in (5) and (6). Intuitively, if an HFTi posts instead
a larger half-spread s+ > s⋆, then she does not become the HFM. In this case, HFTi would earn
the sniper utility in (6) and is therefore indiﬀerent between deviating or not.11 Conversely, if HFTi
deviates and posts a tighter spread s−< s⋆, she is sure to assume the HFM role. However, the
deviation is not proﬁtable since (i) the HFM and HFS utilities are equal in equilibrium and (ii) the
HFM utility increases in the posted spread, that is
UHFM (s−) < 1
N UHFM (s⋆) + N −1
N
UHFS (s⋆) = UHFM (s⋆) .
(7)
Lemma 3 describes the half-spread pinned down by this indiﬀerence condition.
Lemma 3 (Half-spread). The unique half-spread s⋆that ensures that UHFM(s⋆) = UHFS(s⋆) > 0
is given by
s⋆=
ηNπS
ηNπS + µ(N −1)σ
=
ηNα(1 −α)N
µ(1 −α) + (1 −α)N (ηNα −µ(1 −α))σ.
(8)
Since from Lemma 3 the equilibrium spread s⋆< σ, from equation (6) it follows that HFTs earn
positive utility in equilibrium. Therefore, all HFTs submit quotes at t = 0: with probability 1
N ,
each of them is equally likely to arrive ﬁrst and become HFM. The other N −1 high-frequency
traders assume the role of HFS.
11The intuition in this paragraph is identical to the proof of Proposition 1 from Menkveld and Zoican (2017), p. 1217.
15

Proposition 1 characterizes the equilibrium of the trading game by merging the optimal HFT
strategy at t = 0 described in Lemma 3 and the optimal HFT strategy for t > 0 in Lemma 1.
Proposition 1 (Equilibrium). The following strategies form a Nash equilibrium in the trading
game.
(i) At t = 0, each HFT submits a buy limit order for the ﬁrst unit at price v −s⋆and a sell limit
order for the ﬁrst unit at price v + s⋆, where s⋆is given by (8). Further, HFTs submit buy
and sell orders for the any further incremental units at prices v −σ and v + σ, respectively.
The ﬁrst HFT to arrive and post his quotes becomes the HFM.
(ii) In the event of LT arrival, no cancellations or new limit orders are submitted.
(iii) In the event of news arrival, the HFTs send orders as described in Lemma 1.
4
HFT speed, auction duration, and liquidity
The equilibrium decribed in Proposition 1, as well as the results in Lemmas 1 and 3 allow us to
study the impact of auction duration and HFT speed on liquidity, as measured by quoted spreads.
Corollary 1. The equilibrium half-spread s⋆increases in the size of value innovations, σ, news
intensity, η, and decreases in the liquidity trader’s arrival intensity, µ.
Corollary 1 serves as a “reality check” and is consistent with existing results in the literature
(for a detailed survey see, e.g., Biais, Glosten, and Spatt, 2005). The positive spread emerges as a
compensation for the adverse selection cost of being sniped by an HFS and is thus proportional to
sniping proﬁts. Sniping proﬁts increase in the news intensity η and news size σ, and so does the
equilibrium spread. A larger µ increases the HFM payoﬀfrom providing liquidity and therefore the
spread decreases.
Proposition 2 states the main result of the paper. In periodic batch auction markets, a higher
HFT speed improves liquidity. Proposition 2 describes the behavior of the equilibrium spread s⋆
with respect to the batch auction duration τ, the number of HFTs N, and the HFT speed ψ.
16

Proposition 2. The equilibrium half-spread in the batch auction market, s⋆, decreases in (i) the
HFT speed ψ, (ii) the duration of an auction τ, and (iii) the number of HFTs N.
Faster high-frequency traders are more likely to participate in any given auction. Keeping
auction duration ﬁxed, the probability that a single HFS arrives in a given auction interval decreases
in HFT speed. If high-frequency traders are faster, they are more likely to arrive in clusters and
drive the clearing price to the fundamental value. At the same time, a faster HFM is also more
likely to arrive and cancel quotes before being sniped.
Auction duration has an equivalent impact on equilibrium liquidity. Longer batch auctions, for
a ﬁxed HFT speed, increase the probability of either (i) the HFM to cancel quotes before being
sniped or (ii) two or more HFS to compete over the stale quote. Consequently, sniper-auctions
become relatively less likely, leading to lower adverse selection costs for the HFM and a lower spread.
The number of competing HFTs and the HFT speed have a similar eﬀect. Therefore, longer batch
auctions and faster trading are substitutes for market liquidity.
Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) argue that to encourage competition between HFTs, the
auction length should be “long” enough. However, slowing down the market clearing frequency may
create a negative externality for impatient traders, such as option traders who hedge in real time,
or institutions with large positions to execute. Our paper suggests that promoting low trading
latencies, or at least not explicitly discouraging them, is a solution that can sustain both frequent
market clearing and high liquidity. Figure 3 illustrates the main result in Proposition 2: if HFTs
are slow relative to the auction frequency, the equilibrium spread converges to the outcome on a
continuous-time market. Conversely, the equilibrium spread decreases to zero if HFTs can react
very fast relative to the duration of auction intervals (essentially the result in Budish, Cramton, and
Shim, 2015).
17

Figure 3:
Equilibrium half-spread
This ﬁgure illustrates the equilibrium half-spread (s⋆) on the periodic batch auction market as a function of the HFT
speed parameter ψ. Parameter values: µ = η = σ = 1, τ = 0.5, and N = 4.
0
1
2
3
4
5
HFT speed (ψ)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Equilibrium half-spread (s⋆)
periodic auction market
continuous-time market
Finally, the equilibrium spread decreases in the number of HFTs N. That is, stronger arbitrageur
competition improves liquidity.
As N becomes larger, two eﬀects come into play.
First, the
probability of a sniping auction (πS) is larger, leading to higher adverse selection costs for the
market-maker. However, it is the second eﬀect which dominates in equilibrium. As more HFTs join
the industry, the opportunity cost of the market-maker is lower, which reduces the spread. A larger
N reduces each sniper’s individual probability to trade on a stale quote, leading to a lower sniper
proﬁt. Since in equilibrium HFTs are indiﬀerent between the two roles, a lower HFS proﬁt implies
a lower HFM proﬁt. Consequently, market-makers require a lower spread to be compensated for
assuming a liquidity provision role. The result is in line with Brogaard and Garriott (2019) who
document that HFT arbitrageur competition improves liquidity.
In the limit, as τ decreases towards zero (very frequent auctions), the batch auction market
converges to a continuous-time market.
In this case, πS converges to N −1
N
and we recover
18

the equilibrium in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) stating that the equilibrium spread on a
continuous-time market does not depend on the number of HFTs.
In Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), competition between snipers emerges even as the duration
of an auction becomes arbitrarily small. Therefore, in their model, the discrete auction market does
not converge to a continuous-time market as the auction interval goes to zero. Lemma 4 shows that
if we allow for a ﬁnite HFT learning speed, we obtain an equilibrium that bridges the continuousand discrete-time markets.
Lemma 4. For any N > 2, the equilibrium half-spread s⋆on the batch auction market converges
to zero as auctions are inﬁnitely long or HFTs become inﬁnitely fast, that is,
lim
τ→∞s⋆= lim
ψ→∞s⋆= 0.
(9)
As the auction length goes to zero, the equilibrium half-spread s⋆converges to the continuous-time
market spread
lim
τ→0 s⋆= σ
η
µ + η.
(10)
Lemma 4 implies that, while the periodic batch auction spread is positive, it is always lower
than the spread on a continuous-time market, and converges to it as auctions become arbitrarily
frequent. It follows that periodic batch auctions always improve liquidity.
The ﬁrst limiting result in Lemma 4 is an exact counterpart to the batch auction market
equilibrium in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015). The authors assume “fast” HFTs act immediately
on the information, i.e., inﬁnite monitoring intensity generates a zero spread. Therefore, policies
that intensify HFT monitoring (e.g., allowing for colocation) can reduce the equilibrium spread on a
frequent call auction market. Figure 4 illustrates that faster HFTs earn lower proﬁts in equilibrium,
as sniping opportunities become less frequent.
19

Figure 4:
Equilibrium HFT proﬁt
This ﬁgure illustrates the equilibrium HFT proﬁt on the periodic batch auction market as a function of the HFT speed
parameter ψ. Parameter values: µ = η = σ = 1, τ = 0.5, and N = 4.
0
1
2
3
4
5
HFT speed (ψ)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Equilibrium HFT utility
frequent auction market
continuous-time market
5
Discussion
In this section we discuss the robustness of the model analysis. First, we consider the incentives of
traders to invest in the speed technology, when trading on a periodic call auction market. Second,
we examine the eﬀect of the tick size on the equilibrium spread. Finally, we discuss the possible
implications of multiple “trigger” events in one auction.
5.1
Implications for the HFT arms race
In our model, the HFT speed parameter ψ is exogenous. In this subsection we discuss the implications
of allowing HFTs to invest in speed technology on a periodic auction market. Figure 4 illustrates
that the equilibrium HFT proﬁt decreases in trading speed (ψ). A natural consequence of our model,
in line with the intuition in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), would be that a frequent auction
20

market reduces traders’ incentives to invest in speed and alleviates the HFT arms race.
To better understand the economic mechanism, suppose that at the start of the game, each
HFT i can choose individual speed level ψi at a cost C (ψi), where C′ (·) > 0 and C′′ (·) > 0. Let
Π (ψi(τ), τ; ψ−i) denote the ex-ante expected proﬁt of the high frequency trader i, where ψ−i is the
vector of competitors’ speed choices. When making the decision to invest in the reaction speed ψi
the trader’s objective is to maximize the net expected proﬁt, for a given ψ−i,
max
ψi Π (ψi(τ), τ; ψ−i) −C (ψi(τ)) .
(11)
The optimal speed investment ψ⋆
i is determined by the ﬁrst order condition of this problem
∂Π (ψ⋆
i (τ), τ; ψ−i)
∂ψi
−∂C (ψ⋆
i (τ))
∂ψi
= 0,
(12)
where the competitors’ speed levels, ψ−i, are held constant from the perspective of HFT i. In any
symmetric equilibrium, it needs to be that ψ⋆
i = ψ⋆
−i; that is, a ﬁxed point of the HFTs’ investment
reaction function.
From the implicit function theorem, by taking the derivative of the optimality condition with
respect to τ, we obtain
∂ψ⋆
i
∂τ =
∂2Π(ψ⋆
i (τ),τ;ψ⋆
−i)
∂ψi∂τ
∂2C(ψ⋆
i (τ))
∂ψ2
i
−
∂2Π(ψ⋆
i (τ),τ;ψ⋆
−i)
∂ψ2
i
.
(13)
First, ∂C(ψi(τ ⋆))
∂ψi
> 0 and ∂2C(ψi(τ ⋆))
∂ψ2
i
> 0 since faster trading requires additional investment and
we assume that the cost increases more and more per incremental increase in reaction speed (the cost
function is convex). Second, the term
∂2Π(ψ⋆
i (τ),τ;ψ⋆
−i)
∂ψ2
i
is negative, due to decreasing returns to scale
of the speed technology. Holding the competitors’ speed constant at ψ⋆
−i, the probability of HFT i
to be present in each given auction converges to a maximum of one. Finally,
∂2Π(ψ⋆
i (τ),τ;ψ⋆
−i)
∂ψi∂τ
< 0:
intuitively, as the auction duration increases (higher τ), the marginal return from speed is lower
as sniper auctions become less likely. It follows that ∂ψ⋆
i
∂τ < 0: a higher auction duration reduces
investment in speed technology, therefore de-escalating the HFT arms’ race.
21

5.2
Discrete price grid
An implicit assumption of the model is that HFTs can submit orders on a continuous price grid:
That is, the equilibrium spread s⋆deﬁned in equation (8) is precisely pinned down by the HFT
indiﬀerence condition between the two roles of market-maker and speculator. From equations (5)
and (6), the HFS (respectively, HFM) utility is linearly decreasing (respectively, increasing) in the
half-spread s.
In reality, however, prices are likely to be constrained to a discrete grid. We normalize v = 0
and denote the tick size as ∆> 0, such that the feasible prices for buy and sell orders are
{0, ∆, 2∆, . . . , κ∆, . . . }. We focus on the ask quote, that is the quote at which HFM stands ready
to sell the asset (the case of the bid quote is symmetric). If v = 0, then from Proposition 1 the
equilibrium ask price is equal to the half-spread s⋆. Assume s⋆falls in between two consecutive
feasible prices κ∆and (κ + 1)∆, as illustrated in Figure 5.
Figure 5:
Equilibrium spread on a price grid
Half-spread s
Expected utility HFT
HFS utility
HFM utility
s⋆
κ∆
(κ + 1) ∆
We proceed to analyze the two equilibrium candidate ask quotes, s′ = κ∆and s′′ = (κ + 1)∆,
following the same process as in Section 3.2. First, we note that s′ cannot be an equilibrium: if
N −1 HFTs quote s′ = κ∆, the Nth HFT can proﬁtably deviate by choosing not to submit a quote
as she earns a higher expected utility as speculator. However, no HFT can proﬁtably deviate from
22

posting an ask quote with half-spread s′′. If an HFT submits a larger half-spread, for example,
s+ = s′′ + ∆, then she does not become the HFM and will earn the strictly lower HFS expected
utility. Conversely, if an HFT submits a smaller half-spread (e.g., s′) then she is sure to assume the
HFM role, but will earn lower utility.
The equilibrium ask quote therefore is the lowest price on the grid that exceeds s⋆: that is, there
is a minimum spread equal to the tick size – even if the unconstrained spread s⋆becomes arbitrarily
low due to high trading speed or longer auctions.
5.3
Multiple events in one auction
In our model, a single news event or a single liquidity trader may arrive (i.e., the trigger event). A
richer setting could allow for a second event in between the “trigger” and market clearing. Menkveld
and Zoican (2017, Lemma 1 on p. 1203) provide useful insights into the impact of a second news or
LT event on adverse selection costs and the equilibrium spread.
First, since HFTs are risk-neutral and the asset value is a martingale, a second news event does
not impact the equilibrium spread. For example, conditional on a “bad” news trigger, it is equally
likely that the second news is also “bad” (doubling the potential HFM loss) or “good” (that is, a
value reversal that eliminates adverse selection risk altogether).
Further, allowing for a subsequent LT arrival would lead to even lower spreads in markets with
lower auction intervals. The rationale is that, since LT arrivals are uncorrelated with news, an LT
trade on the no-news side compensates the market maker for a potential sniping loss.
6
Conclusion
We ﬁnd that in periodic batch auctions in contrast to a continuous-time limit order market, faster
trading improves liquidity by stimulating competition across high-frequency snipers. A lower HFT
speed, or shorter auction interval, increases the probability that each individual HFT has a monopoly
on information in any given auction. This allows a single sniper to take advantage of the stale HFM
quotes and consequently to earn rents. Conversely, faster HFTs are more likely to become informed
in the same auction and compete to trade on arbitrage opportunities. Such competition reduces
23

arbitrage rents and adverse selection costs: as a consequence, the equilibrium spread decreases.
Longer batch auctions, for a ﬁxed HFT speed, have the same eﬀect.
Importantly, the equilibrium in our model bridges two alternative market designs: continuous
and discrete markets. As the auctions become more frequent and the auction length decreases to
zero, the equilibrium spread converges to the continuous-time market counterpart. Conversely, as
the auction length increases or HFTs become inﬁnitely fast, the spread on the batch auction market
converges to zero as in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015).
The paper’s ﬁndings contribute to the public debate on high-frequency trading and alternative
market designs. It generates an important implication: Policies that aim at intensifying HFT
monitoring (e.g., allowing for colocation) can reduce the equilibrium spread and make batch call
auction markets more attractive for investors. This in turn implies that the “arms race” implication
strikingly diﬀers on batch auction markets when compared to limit order markets. Whereas for limit
order markets speed does not impact liquidity, it turns out to be beneﬁcial in the case of periodic
batch auction markets.
References
Aldrich, Eric M., and Kristian L´opez Vargas, 2019, Experiments in high-frequency trading: comparing
two market institutions, Experimental Economics.
Aoyagi, Jun, 2019, Speed Choice by High-Frequency Traders with Speed Bumps, Manuscript.
Baldauf, Markus, and Joshua Mollner, Forthcoming, High-frequency trading and market performance,
The Journal of Finance.
Baruch, Shmuel, and Lawrence R. Glosten, 2013, Fleeting orders, Columbia Business School Research
Paper 13-43.
Biais, Bruno, Thierry Foucault, and Sophie Moinas, 2015, Equilibrium fast trading, Journal of
Financial Economics 116, 292–313.
24

Biais, Bruno, Larry Glosten, and Chester Spatt, 2005, Market microstructure: A survey of microfoundations, empirical results, and policy implications, Journal of Financial Markets 8, 217–264.
Brogaard, Jonathan, and Corey Garriott, 2019, High-Frequency Trading Competition, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 54, 1469–1497.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Terrence Hendershott, and Ryan Riordan, 2014, High frequency trading and
price discovery, Review of Financial Studies 27, 2267–2306.
Brolley, Michael, and David Cimon, Forthcoming, Order Flow Segmentation, Liquidity and Price
Discovery: The Role of Latency Delays, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
Brolley, Michael, and Marius Zoican, 2019, Liquid speed:On-demand fast trading at distributed
exchanges, Rotman School of Management Working Paper No. 3377346.
Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim, 2015, The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent
batch auctions as a market design response, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1547–1600.
Copeland, Thomas E., and Dan Galai, 1983, Information eﬀects on the bid-ask spread, The Journal
of Finance 38, 1457–1469.
Du, Songzi, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2017, What is the Optimal Trading Frequency in Financial Markets?,
The Review of Economic Studies 84, 1606–1651.
Economides, Nicholas, and Robert A. Schwartz, 1995, Electronic call market trading, The Journal
of Portfolio Management 21, 10–18.
Farmer, J. Doyne, and Spyros Skouras, 2012, Review of the beneﬁts of a continuous market vs.
randomised stop auctions and of alternative priority rules, Review of the Markets in Financial
Instruments Directive.
Foucault, Thierry, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel, 2013, Liquidity cycles and make/take fees in
electronic markets, Journal of Finance 68, 299–341.
Foucault, Thierry, Ailsa Roell, and Patrik Sandas, 2003, Market making with costly monitoring: An
analysis of the soes controversy, Review of Financial Studies 16, 345–384.
25

Fricke, Daniel, and Austin Gerig, 2015, Too fast or too slow? Determining the optimal speed of
ﬁnancial markets, Working paper.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100.
Hendershott, Terrence, and Pamela C. Moulton, 2011, Automation, speed, and stock market quality:
The nyse’s hybrid, Journal of Financial Markets 14, 568–604.
Janssen, Maarten, and Eric Rasmusen, 2002, Bertrand competition under uncertainty, The Journal
of Industrial Economics 50, 11–21.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Albert J. Menkveld, 2017, Dispersion and skewness of bid prices, Working
paper.
Kandel, Eugene, Barbara Rindi, and Luisella Bosetti, 2012, The eﬀect of a closing call auction on
market quality and trading strategies, Journal of Financial Intermediation 21, 23–49.
Kremer, Ilan, and Kjell G. Nyborg, 2004, Underpricing and market power in uniform price auctions,
The Review of Financial Studies 17, 849–877.
Kumar, Praveen, and Duane J. Seppi, 1994, Information and index arbitrage, The Journal of
Business 67, 481–509.
Kyle, Albert (Pete) S, and Jeongmin Lee, 2017, Toward a Fully Continuous Exchange, Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 33, 650–675.
Madhavan, Ananth, 1992, Trading mechanisms in securities markets, The Journal of Finance 47,
607–641.
Menkveld, A.J., and M.A. Zoican, 2017, Need for speed? Exchange latency and liquidity, Review of
Financial Studies 30, 1188–1228.
Menkveld, Albert J., 2014, High frequency traders and market structure, The Financial Review
(Special Issue: Computerized and High-Frequency Trading) 49, 333–344.
26

, 2016, The economics of high-frequency trading: Taking stock, Annual Review of Financial
Economics 8, 1–24.
Pagano, Michael S., Lin Peng, and Robert A. Schwartz, 2013, A call auction’s impact on price
formation and order routing: Evidence from the nasdaq stock market, Journal of Financial
Markets 16, 331–361.
Pagano, Michael S., and Robert A. Schwartz, 2003, A closing call’s impact on market quality at
euronext paris, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 439–484.
Roth, Alvin E., and Axel Ockenfels, 2002, Last-minute bidding and the rules for ending second-price
auctions: Evidence from ebay and amazon auctions on the internet, American Economic Review
92, 1093–1103.
Shkilko, Andriy, and Konstantin Sokolov, Forthcoming, Every Cloud Has a Silver Lining: Fast
Trading, Microwave Connectivity and Trading Costs, Journal of Finance.
Wah, Elaine, Dylan Hurd, and Mic Wellman, 2015, Strategic market choice: Frequent call markets
vs. continuous double auctions for fast and slow traders, Proceedings of the 3rd EAI Conference.
Wah, Elaine, and Michael Wellman, 2013, Latency arbitrage, market fragmentation, and eﬃciency:
A two-market model, Proceedings of the 14th ACM Conference.
Ye, Mao, Chen Yao, and Jiading Gai, 2013, The externalities of high frequency trading, WBS
Finance Group Research Paper No. 180.
27

A
Notation summary
Parameter
Deﬁnition
v
Common value of the risky asset.
τ
Length of auction interval (auction duration).
η
Poisson intensity of news arrival.
µ
Poisson intensity of LT arrival.
ψ
Poisson intensity of HFT news monitoring (HFT speed).
σ
Size of news, i.e., common value innovations.
N
Number of high-frequency traders.
B
Proofs
Lemma 1
Proof. The proof is presented in the main body of the paper.
Lemma 2
Proof. To sign the derivative of πS = (N−1)α(1−α)N−1
1−(1−α)N
with respect to ψ, we ﬁrst compute the ﬁrst
order derivative of πS with respect to α:
∂πS
∂α = −(N −1)(1 −α)N−2  (1 −α)N + Nα −1

((1 −α)N −1)2
.
(B.1)
It is enough to show that f(α) ≡(1 −α)N + Nα −1 ≥0. This is true since f(0) = 0 and
∂f
∂α = N

1 −(1 −α)N−1
> 0. Therefore, πS decreases in α. Since ∂α
∂ψ > 0, we conclude that πS
decreases in ψ.
Lemma 3
Proof. The equilibrium spread obtains immediately from setting equal the market-maker utility in
(5) and the sniper utility in (6).
28

Proposition 1
Proof. The trading game equilibrium follows from Lemmas 1 and 3.
Corollary 1
Proof. We compute the ﬁrst order derivatives of s⋆with respect to σ, η, and µ.
∂s⋆
∂σ =
ηNπS
ηNπS + µ(N −1) > 0
(B.2)
∂s⋆
∂η =
µ(N −1)NπSσ
(ηNπS + µ(N −1))2 > 0
(B.3)
∂s⋆
∂µ = −
η(N −1)NπSσ
(ηNπS + µ(N −1))2 < 0.
(B.4)
It follows that s⋆increases in σ and η and decreases in µ, which concludes the proof.
Proposition 2
Proof. We ﬁrst show that the equilibrium spread increases in the sniping probability πS. Indeed,
∂s⋆
∂πS
=
ηµ(N −1)Nσ
(ηNπS + µ(N −1))2 > 0.
(B.5)
From Lemma 2, the sniping probability πS decreases in the per-auction arrival probability of an
HFT, α. Further, from equation (1), α increases in ψ and τ. Therefore,
∂s⋆
∂ψ = ∂s⋆
∂πS
|{z}
>0
∂πS
∂α
|{z}
<0
∂α
∂ψ
|{z}
>0
< 0 and
(B.6)
∂s⋆
∂τ = ∂s⋆
∂πS
|{z}
>0
∂πS
∂α
|{z}
<0
∂α
∂τ
|{z}
>0
< 0
(B.7)
Therefore, the equilibrium spread s⋆decreases in the HFT speed ψ and the duration of an auction τ.
Next, we compute the partial derivative of s⋆with respect to N:
∂s⋆
∂N = ηµασ(1 −α)N+1  1 −(1 −α)N + N log(1 −α)

(µ + (1 −α)N(ηNα + µ(α −1)) −µα)2
.
(B.8)
29

The sign of the derivative in (B.8) is given by the sign of
g ≡1 −(1 −α)N + N log(1 −α).
We note that g (α = 0) = 0 and that g decreases in α since
∂g
∂α = −N
 1 −(1 −α)N
1 −α
< 0.
(B.9)
It follows that g < 0 and consequently ∂s⋆
∂N < 0 which implies that the equilibrium spread decreases
in the number of HFTs.
30
