 
Does Insider Trading Regulation Deter Private 
Information Trading? International Evidence. 
 
Art A. Durnev*                               Amrita S. Nain** 
                          (McGill University)                                   (McGill University) 
 
Abstract 
Using a sample of 2,189 firms from 21 countries we find that, on average, stricter insider trading 
regulations reduce private information trading. However, for firms with high agency costs, insider 
trading restrictions are less effective in deterring private information trading. We suggest that 
controlling shareholders who are banned from trading may resort to covert expropriation of firm 
resources thereby reducing transparency and increasing the returns to private information trading. 
Consistent with this, we find that firms with higher agency costs located in countries with stricter insider 
trading laws have more opaque earnings and are valued lower.  
 
 
 
JEL Classification: G15, G14, G38 
Keywords: Insider trading regulation, ownership wedge, private information trading, earnings opacity  
 
 
* Assistant Professor, Desautels Faculty of Management, McGill University, 1001 Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1G5, 
Canada. Tel: (514) 398-5394. Fax (514) 398-3876. 
 
** Assistant Professor, Desautels Faculty of Management, McGill University, 1001 Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Tel: (514) 
398-8440. Fax: (514) 398-5394. Email: amrita.nain@mcgill.ca.  
 
We are grateful for helpful comments by Laura Beny, Amy Dittmar, Stanislav Dolgopolov, Douglas Emery, Mara Faccio, E. Han Kim, Lubomir 
Litov, Randall Morck, Adair Morse, Sophie Shive, Jordan Siegel, and Bernard Yeung. We also thank the participants at the 2006 CEMAF/ISCTE 
Conference on Corporate Governance and Capital Markets, 2004 American Law and Economics Association Meetings, 2004 Washington Area 
Finance Association Meetings; and at the seminars at University of Alberta, Brigham Young University, University of Kentucky, University of 
Maryland, where earlier versions of the paper under various titles were presented. We also thank Larry Lang and Mara Faccio for providing access to 
ownership data. Art Durnev thanks Borislava Aneva for excellent research assistance. This research was partially supported by the Institut de 
Finance Mathématique de Montréal (IFM2). 

 
1
1. Introduction 
There is a long standing debate in the finance, economics and law literatures about the need for 
insider trading regulation. Its critics argue that insider trading may serve as an efficient form of 
compensation for insiders.  Moreover, insider trading allows private information to be quickly 
incorporated into stock prices, thereby leading to more informationally efficient stock prices (Carlton 
and Fischel, 1983; Dye, 1984). Proponents of insider trading regulation contend that insider trading 
subjects uninformed outsiders to an adverse selection problem, discourages investment, and damages 
corporate value (Manove, 1989; Ausubel 1990; Fischer, 1992). Moreover, allowing insiders to trade at 
the expense of uninformed outsiders diminishes investor confidence and hurts the integrity of capital 
markets (Brudney, 1979; Easterbrook, 1985; Glosten, 1989; Maug, 1995, 2002).  
In keeping with the latter viewpoint, many countries have adopted insider trading laws. A survey by 
Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002) finds that out of 103 countries that have stock markets, 87 have 
introduced insider trading rules. A principal goal of introducing insider trading restrictions appears to be 
to prevent informationally advantaged insiders from trading at the expense of the uninformed public. 
The objective of this paper is to examine whether insider trading regulation achieves its goal. 
Specifically, we examine whether insider trading regulation, on average, deters private information 
trading. Using a sample of 2,189 firms from 21 countries we find that it does. A cross-sectional 
regression analysis shows that firms in countries with stricter insider trading restrictions are less subject 
to private information trading. Since the cross-sectional analysis is likely to suffer from endogeneity 
problems, we also conduct an event study which compares private information trading before and after 
the enforcement of insider trading restrictions. Consistent with the cross-sectional results, the event 
study reveals that the amount of private information trading decreases significantly after the first 
enforcement of insider trading laws.  
This paper also examines whether the effect of insider trading restrictions on private information 
trading depends on the degree of agency problems inherent in the firm. We measure agency costs as the 
ownership wedge - the difference between control rights and cash flow rights of the largest shareholder. 
Greater separation of ownership and control is indicative of entrenched shareholders who often use firm 

 
2
resources to generate private benefits of control that are not shared by minority shareholders. In the 
presence of insider trading restrictions, entrenched controlling shareholders are more likely to have an 
incentive to continue trading as well as the means to mask the trades using various methods like off- 
shore accounts, nominee accounts etc. Therefore, we expect insider trading restrictions to be less 
effective in reducing private information trading in stocks of firms with a higher ownership wedge. Our 
data show that although insider trading restrictions lower private information trading on average, they 
are significantly less successful in doing so when the ownership wedge is high. This result supports the 
notion that controlling shareholders of firms with greater ownership wedge are less likely to be deterred 
from insider trading by the introduction of insider trading restrictions. 
Another theme of our paper is to argue that the observed positive association between insider 
trading restrictions and private information trading in stocks with high ownership wedge may exist 
because insider trading restrictions foster greater information asymmetry in firms afflicted with high 
agency costs. We argue that restricting insider trading without closing other channels of expropriation 
may encourage controlling shareholders with high ownership wedge to seek other methods of diverting 
resources away from minority shareholders.1 When controlling shareholders engage in activities that are 
not in the best interests of the firm, they attempt to mask the resulting poor performance of the firm 
(Leuz, Nanda and Wysocki, 2003). This opacity about the firm’s operations increases the return to 
private information acquisition and trading. This is another explanation for our finding that insider 
trading restrictions are less effective in reducing private information trading in firms with high 
separation of ownership and control.2 
We test this potential explanation in several ways. First, we examine the effect of insider trading 
restrictions on earnings opacity conditional on the ownership wedge. We find that when ownership 
                                                 
1 Other methods of expropriating resources from a firm may include elaborate transfer pricing schemes, special dividends, perquisites and 
outright stealing (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997; Johnson et al., 2000). 
2 Microstructure literature suggests that while insider trading regulation reduces trading by insiders, it may increase private information 
acquisition by outsiders. Insider trading regulation reduces the competition outsiders face from better informed insiders and thereby increases 
their return to information acquisition. Outsiders, who can acquire private information at a cost, are not subject to insider trading restrictions but 
may also trade at the expense of the uninformed investors (Fishman and Hagerty, 1992; Shin, 1996). In this paper, we do not investigate how 
insider trading restrictions affect the incentives of different types of investors, insiders versus outsiders; instead, we concentrate on the 
aggregate effect of insider trading regulation on private information trading.  
 

 
3
wedge is high, insider trading restrictions are associated with greater earnings opacity. Second, we 
investigate whether insider trading restrictions distort the incentives of controlling shareholders in a 
manner detrimental to firm value. As in Beny (2006) we find that insider trading restrictions are on 
average associated with higher firm value. However, a higher ownership wedge significantly diminishes 
the positive association between insider trading restrictions and firm value. We argue that the value 
destruction arises not just because controlling shareholders refrain from monitoring the firm sufficiently 
when restricted from trading, but also because controlling shareholders may be actively involved in 
expropriating resources from minority shareholders.  
To further support this interpretation, we recognize that the positive association between private 
information trading and the interaction of ownership wedge with insider trading restrictions is more 
likely in countries where insiders find it relatively easy to resort to expropriation - that is in countries 
with poor investor protection standards. Therefore, we repeat our analyses for sub-samples of low- and 
high-investor protection countries. We find that in the high-investor protection sub-sample, insider 
trading restrictions are unambiguously associated with lower private information trading, earnings 
opacity, and higher firm value. However, in countries with poor investor protection, the combination of 
strict insider trading restrictions and a high ownership wedge could lead to higher private information 
trading, higher earnings opacity and lower firm value. 
This paper is related to recent research by Ackerman and Maug (2006) and Fernandes and Ferreira 
(2006) who investigate the effectiveness of insider trading legislation at the country level. Ackerman 
and Maug examine stock return run-ups prior to acquisitions and conclude that insider trading laws 
reduce run-ups but only in countries with good laws enforcement. Fernandes and Ferreira (2006) 
perform a test similar to our event study methodology by comparing stock price informativeness before 
and after the first enforcement of insider trading laws. Their conclusion is in line with ours – insider 
trading laws are less effective in developing countries where agency costs are higher. Both papers can be 
viewed as complimentary to our research. 

 
4
The paper is arranged as follows. Section II presents our hypotheses. Section III describes the 
sample, variables and empirical methodology. The empirical results and robustness checks appear in 
Section IV. Section V concludes. 
2. Hypotheses  
Insider trading restrictions have been introduced in most markets in the last decade, and in many, 
the restrictions have also been enforced with the prosecution of those violating the rules. Insider trading 
restrictions are expected to reduce adverse selection facing the uninformed investors and encourage 
them to participate in the market. Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002) find that the cost of equity declines 
after the first prosecution of insider trading. This is consistent with the notion that outside investors are 
aware of the existence of private information trading by insiders and take account the resulting adverse 
selection when calculating expected returns.  
This paper first examines whether insider trading restrictions are, on aggregate, associated with 
lower informed trading. The findings of Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002) suggest that on average insider 
trading restrictions reduce private information trading and are consequently associated with a lower cost 
of capital. We argue that under some conditions, insider trading restrictions are less successful in 
reducing informed trading and therefore, it is not obvious that insider trading restrictions will reduce the 
return demanded by uninformed investors. Specifically, insider trading restrictions are less effective in 
companies where the separation of ownership and control is higher, and consequently, agency problems 
more severe.  
Existing literature demonstrates that shareholders who have high levels of control but lack sufficient 
cash flow rights seek private benefits which are not shared with minority shareholders. Insider trading is 
one avenue for expropriating profits from outside investors. When ownership wedge is high, controlling 
shareholders are more likely to engage in insider trading to make up for their scarce cash flow rights. 
They are also less likely to relinquish trading profits if insider trading restrictions are imposed because 
concentrated control provides more opportunities to mask insider trades through the use of offshore 
accounts, nominee accounts, independent manager-owned companies etc. Thus, we hypothesize that 
insider trading restrictions will be less successful in curbing insider trading in companies where the 

 
5
ownership wedge is high. We examine the effect of insider trading restrictions on private information 
trading conditional on the separation of ownership and control. We expect to find that insider trading 
restrictions are associated with higher private information trading in firms with a higher ownership 
wedge.   
 This paper also provides an alternative explanation for why insider trading restrictions may be 
associated with higher informed trading in firms with high ownership wedge – namely, greater 
information asymmetry. Existing literature suggests that insider trading is an important source of 
benefits for controlling shareholders which, if removed, can discourage controlling shareholders from 
actively monitoring the firm (Bhide, 1993; Demsetz, 1986).3 Insider trading is one of many different 
ways in which controlling shareholders, devoid of sufficient cash flow rights, can expropriate minority 
shareholders. Ceteris paribus, restricting insider trading may simply drive controlling shareholders to 
expropriate through other means such as transfer pricing, tunneling, special dividends or outright 
diversion. If controlling shareholders are engaged in activities that are not in the best interests of the 
firm, they are likely to mask the resulting poor performance of the firm (Leuz, Nanda and Wysocki, 
2003) through, for example, earnings management. The resulting opaque environment can increase the 
returns to private information acquisition and trading. Therefore, we examine the effect of insider 
trading restrictions on private information trading and earnings opacity conditional on the ownership 
wedge. We expect that in the presence of a higher ownership wedge, insider trading restrictions are 
associated with greater private information trading and higher earnings opacity. 4  
The notion that insider trading restrictions drive controlling shareholders to covert expropriation of 
firm resources can be tested indirectly. We split our sample into firms that belong to countries with high 
                                                 
3 We use the terms “controlling shareholder” and “insider” interchangeably. Although our arguments hold for any insider who wields sufficient 
control in the firm, our empirical tests focus on a subset of insiders – controlling shareholders. 
4 We recognize the possibility that there may be a positive relation between the amounts of insider trading and expropriation. When insiders 
engage in expropriation of firm resources they expect firm value to suffer in the future. This advance knowledge could encourage insiders to 
sell some of their holdings before firm value drops. That is, expropriation could create opportunities for insider trading. However, if insiders 
take this opportunity and sell, they may attract the market’s attention and increase the probability that unlawful activities within the firm are 
detected. Insiders who expect firm value to decline because of their expropriation have to balance the benefit of selling stock before prices fall 
against the probability that the selling draws unwanted attention to their illegal actions. The stricter the laws against insider trading and 
expropriation, the less likely it is that insiders take advantage of the trading opportunities created by their own stealing. 
 

 
6
and low-investor protection sub-samples. In countries where investor rights are well protected, it is 
costlier for controlling shareholders who have been deprived of insider trading profits to resort to other 
means of expropriation. Therefore, we are unlikely to observe the aforementioned increase in earnings 
opacity and private information trading when insider trading restrictions and a high ownership wedge 
coexist. Rather, this relation is expected to be observed only in countries where minority shareholder 
rights are poorly protected and controlling shareholders find it easier to replace insider trading profits 
with other covert forms of expropriation. 
Finally, to examine whether insider trading restrictions distort the incentives of controlling 
shareholders we also examine the association between insider trading restrictions and firm value 
conditional on ownership wedge. This conditional relation between firm value and insider trading 
restrictions is also tested for the high and low- investor protection sub-samples described above.   
3. Sample and variables 
This section describes the empirical methodology, sample construction, and main variables.  
3.1 Empirical setup 
Our primary regressions are of the form,  
c
i
K
k
c
i
k
k
c
c
i
c
c
i
c
i
c
i
Z
INS
WEDGE
INS
WEDGE
CASH
PRIVATE
ε
δ
γ
β
β
β
α
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
∑
=1
,
3
2
1
*
 
,            (1) 
where i indexes firms, c indexes countries, PRIVATE is the measure of private information trading, 
WEDGE is ownership wedge, INS is a measure of the strictness of insider trading laws, WEDGE × INS 
is the interaction of control concentration with a measure of the strictness of insider trading laws, and 
Z’s are control variables.  
We estimate these regressions using country-random effects to take into account the possibility that 
observations on individual firms in a given country can be correlated. We check the validity of countryrandom effects specification with the Breusch and Pagan (1980) test. In almost all specifications, the test 
rejects the hypothesis that the variation of random effects is zero. Alternatively, as suggested in Petersen 
(2006), we calculate coefficients standard errors and their significance values using clustered (by 

 
7
country) robust standard errors. Both methods give us similar results in terms of coefficients’ 
significance.  
We predict that stricter insider trading laws are associated with less private information trading (β2 
< 0), and that insider trading laws are less effective in reducing private information trading for firms 
with high ownership wedge (γ > 0).  
The regression coefficients can be biased because of endogeneity. Endogeneity could arise due to 
unobserved variables that are correlated with both ownership structure and the amount of private 
information trading. It may also arise due to a reverse causality between ownership wedge and private 
information trading. For example, in countries where higher profits can be obtained through private 
information trading, shareholders may choose to acquire greater control in order to have privileged 
access to nonpublic information.  We address endogeneity in two ways. First, we perform an event 
study by comparing the changes in the private information trading variable for all firms around years of 
the first enforcement of insider trading restrictions. We also examine the changes in PRIVATE 
conditional on firm-level ownership wedge. This approach controls for unobserved time-invariant firm- 
and country-specific factors that can cause endogeneity. Second, we address endogeneity issues by 
estimating (1) with instrumental variables, using legal origin dummies as instruments for the ownership 
variables.  
We also estimate equation (1) for strong- and weak- investor protection sub-samples. If insider 
trading restrictions become less effective in the presence of high ownership wedge because controlling 
shareholders resort to other forms of expropriation, we expect the coefficient γ to be significant only in 
countries where the cost of expropriation is low, i.e., in the poor investor protection sub-sample. Finally, 
we repeat all regressions with earnings opacity and firm valuation as dependent variables. 
3.2 Sample and variables 
 To quantify the amount of private information trading, we use a measure developed by Llorente et 
al. (2002), which is based on stock return autocorrelation conditional on trading volume. The amount of 
private information trading, PRIVATE, is defined as the coefficient C2 in the time-series regression,  

 
8
c
t
i
c
c
t
i
c
i
c
t
i
c
i
c
i
c
t
i
t
iV
R
C
R
C
A
R
,
,
2
,
,
1,
1
,
,
ε
+
+
+
=
+
 ,                                                                                 (2) 
run for each firm i in country c using at least 30 days of trading data from January 2nd, 1995 through 
December 29th, 1997. In (2), 
c
t
iR , are daily returns 
c
t
iV , is trading volume. Llorente et al. argue that 
estimated coefficient C2 in (2) increases as more information becomes available to insiders but is not 
shared with the general public.5 The measurement period for PRIVATE, 1995-1997, is chosen to avoid 
the period after the 1998 financial crisis after which many Asian firms changed their ownership 
structure. We obtain daily closing prices, numbers of shares traded, and the number of shares 
outstanding from Datastream, and dividends per share from Worldscope.  
We match ownership data (Claessens et al., 2002 for East Asian companies, and Faccio and Lang, 
2002, for Western European companies) with PRIVATE by company name. We exclude financial firms 
because accounting data for these firms are not comparable with the rest of the sample.  
Ownership wedge, WEDGE, is defined as the difference between control rights CONT and cash 
flow rights CASH of the largest shareholder.  
The measure of earnings opacity is based on Leuz, Nanda and Wysocki (2002) and Bhattacharya, 
Daouk, and Welker (2003). For every firm, we calculate earnings opacity, OPACITY, as -1 times the 
Spearman correlation between the changes in accruals and the changes in cash flow from operations, 
both scaled by lagged total assets. Accruals are defined as 
ACCRUALSc
i,t = (∆CA c
i,t – ∆CASHc
i,t) – (∆CLc
i,t – ∆STDc
i,t – ∆TPc
i,t) - DEPc
i,t ,                                       (3) 
where ∆ stands for changes, CA is total current assets, CASH is cash and cash equivalents, CL is current 
liabilities, STD is short-term debt included in current liabilities, TP is income tax payable, and DEP is 
depreciation and amortization expense. Operating cash flows are determined by first calculating the 
accruals component of earnings and then subtracting it from earnings. The data period is from 1992 
                                                 
5 Llorente et. al. verify that C2 is larger for companies that are more likely to suffer from information asymmetry – that is, firms with high bidask spread, small size, lower analyst following – indicating the dominance of private information (hedging) trades. In a supportive study, 
Grishchenko, Litov, and Mei, 2003 show that C2 is, on average, larger for firms that are located in countries where information asymmetry 
problems are more severe, such as countries with poor disclosure requirements or countries that score low on corporate governance 
characteristics. 
 

 
9
through 1997; thus each correlation coefficient is based on five data points. Large positive values for 
OPACITY indicate more earnings opacity.  
Firm valuation is measured by Tobin’s Q, average from 1996 through 1998. As in Doidge, Karolyi, 
and Stulz (2003), we define Tobin’s Q as the sum of total assets and the market value of equity less 
book value of equity, over total assets. The market value of equity is the number of common shares 
outstanding, times the year-end price.  
Beny (2005, 2006) constructs an index of insider trading regulation by aggregating individual 
components of countries’ insider trading laws. The original data come from Stamp and Welsh (1996) 
who provide a comprehensive overview of the key rules relating to insider dealing in 25 countries 
collected from various written laws. The index is formed by adding one if (1) violation of the insider 
trading law is a criminal offense; (2) tippees are prohibited from trading on material nonpublic 
information; (3) insiders are prohibited from tipping outsiders about material nonpublic information 
and/or encouraging them to trade on such information for personal gain; (4) monetary penalties are 
proportional to insiders’ trading profits; (5) investors have a private right of action. We use this index as 
a measure of insider trading regulation, INS_REG.  
To construct a proxy for the enforcement of insider trading laws, we rely on country statistics 
collected by Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002), who document the year in which each country first 
enforced its insider trading laws by prosecuting a violator. Since our explanatory variables are measured 
in 1996, we define enforcement of insider trading laws, INS_ENF, as a dummy variable, which equals 
one if a country enforced insider trading laws at least once before or during 1996, and zero otherwise. In 
our regressions, we use INS_REG and INS_ENF separately as well as their product, which we call INS. 
 The relation between ownership structure and private information trading can be driven by various 
country, industry and firm factors. In our regressions, we control for variables that can affect both 
ownership structure and the incidence of private information trading. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and 
Shleifer (1998) show that both cash flow rights and control rights are more concentrated in countries 
with poor legal environment. According to Grishchenko, Litov, and Mei (2003), there is more trading 

 
10
based on private information in countries with weak investor protection. In our regressions we control 
for this by including the efficiency of the judicial system, JUDIC, defined in La Porta et al. (1998).  
The negative relation between insider trading restrictions and our informed trading measure may be 
observed not because insiders are deterred from trading in the presence of restrictions, but because 
countries that introduce and enforce insider trading restrictions happen to have better developed and 
more efficient stock markets where stricter disclosure laws reduce the opportunity for private 
information trading. Thus we control for the aggregate level of stock market capitalization, MCAP, 
defined as the logarithm of the value of all listed shares over GDP, annual average from 1990 through 
1996.  
We control for cash flow ownership, CASH, obtained from Claessens et al. (2002) and Faccio and 
Lang (2002) to account for the fact that a greater cash flow ownership stake reduces the insider’s 
incentives to trade on private information (Beny, 2006).  
Coefficient C2 in (2) can be influenced by liquidity. Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) show that the less 
liquid a stock is, the larger is the price impact of trades and the more negative C2 is. On the other hand, 
using firm size as a measure of liquidity, Llorente et al. indicate that C2 is negatively related to firm size. 
Moreover, according to Maug (2000), insider trading restrictions are most valuable when stock markets 
are sufficiently liquid because insider trading is more likely to occur in liquid markets. Finally, stocks of 
firms with lower ownership concentrations tend to be more liquid. For these reasons we include the log 
of market capitalization in 1996, LMV, to control for liquidity.  
Coefficient C2 can be estimated with greater precision for firms with more time-series observations. 
To control for this heterogeneity, we include the log of the number of trading periods, LNN, as a control 
parameter. 
Industry dummies, D, are included in regressions to account for differences in asset structure, 
accounting practices, government regulation, and competitiveness, all of which may affect ownership 

 
11
structure and the incentive to pursue private information trading. We classify two-digit SIC industries 
into 12 groups as in Campbell (1996).  
Controlling shareholders of firms with greater growth opportunities and a higher fraction of 
intangible assets may have more opportunities to trade on private information. Therefore, we control for 
firms’ investment opportunities, INV_OPP, defined as growth in sales, and R&D expenditures over 
sales, R&D. These variables are calculated for 1996. Finally, we control for time dummies, T, because 
our ownership data come from different years 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999.  
To capture investor protection laws and their enforcement, we define the variable PROTECT as the 
product of anti-director index, taken from La Porta, et al. (1998), and the rule of law.   
The description of main variables and data sources appears in Table 1. 
4. Results 
In this section we present univariate analysis, the results of multivariate regressions, the event study, 
and robustness checks. 
4.1. Univariate results 
Table 2 reports summary statistics, by country, for the primary variables. There is great variation in 
the average amount of private information trading. It is the highest in Philippines (PRIVATE = 0.089), 
Norway (0.078), and Italy (0.069) and the lowest in South Korea (-0.025), Hong Kong (0.000), and the 
U.K (0.001). Countries also differ substantially in the degree of insider trading regulation. Norway (INS 
= 1), Indonesia (2), and Philippines (0) have relatively lax insider trading laws, while South Korea (5), 
Taiwan (4), and France (4) have strict laws with at least one case of prosecution before or during 1996. 
Table 3 reports correlation coefficients. The coefficients indicate that the amount of private 
information trading is larger for firms with greater ownership wedge and it is lower for firms with more 
liquid stocks and for firms located in countries with stricter insider trading laws. Moreover, companies 
with greater private information trading have more opaque earnings. Given that our measure of private 
information trading reflects the degree of information asymmetry between informed and uninformed 
traders, the observed relation between private information trading and earnings opacity is consistent 

 
12
with Bhattacharya, Daouk, and Welker’s (2003) result that earnings management is associated with 
greater information asymmetry and higher cost of capital.  
In Figure 1, we plot the average amount of private information trading, PRIVATE, against INS, the 
strictness of insider trading laws. The plot indicates a monotonically decreasing relation between private 
information trading and strictness of insider trading regulation. The decreasing relation is consistent 
with Grishchenko, Litov, Mei (2003), who document that private information trading is prevalent in 
countries with lax enforcement of insider trading restrictions.  
In Fig. 2, we plot the average amount of information based trading, PRIVATE, against WEDGE, the 
ownership wedge. The graph indicates that, except for cases where the wedge is equal to zero percent, 
higher wedge is associated with greater trading on private information. This supports the notion that 
there is more trading on private information of companies with greater agency problems. The nonmonotonic relation points to the need to control for other factors before drawing inference about the 
relation between private-information trading and ownership wedge. For this we turn to multivariate 
tests.  
4.2. Multivariate tests for private information trading 
Specification 4.1 in Table 4 presents the results of a simple OLS regression of private information 
trading on ownership wedge and strictness of insider trading laws, controlling for cash flow rights. 
Higher ownership wedge is associated with more private information trading and stricter insider trading 
laws are associated with less private information trading. This finding is robust to the inclusion of 
country random-effects, a liquidity measure, log of the number of trading periods, industry dummies and 
time dummies (Specification 4.2).  
In specification 4.3, we also find that higher ownership wedge is associated with higher private 
information trading. This finding seems consistent with the notion that controlling shareholders of firms 
with high agency costs are more likely to use sensitive private information to obtain trading profits for 
themselves. Specification 4.3 also shows that stricter insider trading regulation is associated with less 
private information trading. However, the positive and significant coefficient on the interaction of 

 
13
ownership wedge with insider trading regulation indicates that insider trading regulation is less effective 
in reducing private information trading when the wedge between ownership and control is higher.   
As discussed earlier, we have two potential explanations for this finding. First, controlling 
shareholders who do not have adequate cash flow rights are less likely to relinquish insider trading 
profits possibly because they have the incentive and the means to hide illegal insider trading. Second, 
insider trading restrictions may drive controlling shareholders to seek private benefits through covert 
expropriation of firms’ resources, fostering information asymmetry, which in turn increases the returns 
to private information trading. The positive and significant coefficient on the interaction of INS and 
WEDGE provides evidence in support of our argument. These results continue to hold when we control 
for efficiency of the judicial system, firm investment opportunities and R&D expenditures (Specification 
4.4).  
Based on specification 4.3 in Table 4, the magnitudes of the coefficients indicate that when insider 
trading laws improve by one point (out of five), the amount of private information trading decreases by 
13% relative to the average value of PRIVATE, for the mean value of ownership wedge of 5%. 
However, for firms with the lowest ownership wedge in our sample, zero percent (1st percentile), the 
amount of private information trading decreases by 18%, while it actually increases by 2.0% for firms 
with 60% (99th percentile) ownership wedge. This confirms our hypothesis that although stricter insider 
trading regulation reduces private information trading, the laws become less effective for high-wedge 
companies.  
4.3 Event study approach 
The key conclusion we draw from our cross-section tests on private information trading is that 
insider trading restrictions reduce the incidence of private information trading but are less effective in 
doing so when firm agency costs are high. A major concern with this interpretation is that the observed 
negative relation between insider trading restrictions and PRIVATE may be driven by country and firm 
characteristics we fail to control for. We present an alternative methodology that effectively addresses 
both these concerns by performing an event study. 

 
14
First, we estimate the change in PRIVATE for each firm using the returns and volume data two years 
before and after the first enforcement of insider trading laws. Since Datastream pricing data coverage is 
scant in the early 90s we consider firms from countries that first enforced insider trading laws after 
1993. The sample consists of 3,882 firms from sixteen countries: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, 
Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, 
and Turkey.  We find that, on average, PRIVATE is significantly positive before enforcement and 
significantly negative after enforcement (Table 5). The decline in PRIVATE after enforcement is 
significant at the 1 % level.  
Second, we examine the relation between firm-level changes in private information trading 
(∆PRIVATE) and firm-level ownership wedge (Table 6) after controlling for changes in firm variables.6  
The sample drops to 958 firms from eight countries: Belgium, Germany, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Italy, 
Malaysia, Spain, and Switzerland. In all specifications, we find that ∆PRIVATE is significantly higher in 
firms with greater ownership wedge This suggests that although private information trading declines 
after the enforcement of insider trading regulation, it declines by less  in firms with high ownership 
wedge. Thus, our key results are robust to an event study approach that controls for unobserved countryspecific factors. 
4.4 Earnings opacity and valuation 
We claim that controlling shareholders banned from trading are likely to make up for lost profits by 
expropriating the firm’s resources, particularly when the wedge between ownership and control is high. 
Individuals who divert firms’ resources will attempt to mask the resulting poor performance of the firm, 
foster information asymmetry and thus, increase the returns to private information trading. Therefore, 
we expect that firms with high ownership wedge have greater earnings opacity, OPACITY, when strict 
insider trading restrictions are imposed. To investigate this we use the earnings opacity measure, 
OPACITY, as the dependent variable in specification 4.5 of Table IV. We find that in countries with 
                                                 
6 This test relies on the assumption that ownership structure does not change significantly after insider trading laws enforcement. To validate 
the assumption, we hand-collected information on ownership structure before and after the laws enforcement for a random sub-sample of our 
firms (20%). We did not discover significant changes.   

 
15
stringent insider trading regulation, firms have less opaque earnings. Firms with high ownership wedge 
have more opaque earnings.7 Moreover, ownership wedge is associated with even greater opacity in 
countries with stricter insider trading laws. This result is consistent with the notion that the quality of 
information provided to the public becomes lower when strict insider trading restrictions are imposed on 
firms with higher ownership wedge. 
If expropriation by insiders destroys corporate value, we expect a reduction in firm value for highwedge firms when insider trading regulation is stringent. According to specification 4.6 of Table 4, 
firms are valued lower in lax insider trading regimes. As expected, firm value is lower when agency 
costs, as measured by the ownership wedge, are higher. These companies are valued even lower in strict 
insider trading regulation countries.  
4.5 Investor protection 
If our interpretation is correct, the interaction of ownership wedge with insider trading restrictions 
should be associated with higher private information trading only in countries where insiders find it 
relatively easy to resort to expropriation. That is, in countries with poor investor protection standards. 
Thus, as an additional test we split the sample into low- and high-investor protection countries and 
running our regressions for each sub-sample.8  
The results for PRIVATE, OPACITY, and Q as dependent variables are presented in Table 7. Panel 
A (low-investor protection sub-sample) shows, as predicted, that the coefficient on insider trading 
restrictions is significantly negative for PRIVATE and OPACITY and positive for Q. More importantly, 
the coefficient on the interaction of insider trading with ownership wedge is significantly positive for 
PRIVATE and OPACITY and negative for Q.  
In the high-investor protection sub-sample (Panel B), while the coefficient on insider trading 
restrictions is still negative (positive) and significant for PRIVATE (Q) and insignificant for OPACITY, 
the interaction term is now insignificant in all specifications. This implies that in countries where 
                                                 
7 This finding is in line with Haw et al. (2004) who show that there is greater earnings management in companies where divergence between 
control and cash flows rights is higher.  
8 The low- (high-) investor protection sub-sample consists of firms with investor protection score, PROTECT, lower (higher) than the sample 
median of 33.3. 

 
16
shareholder rights are well protected, insider trading regulation unambiguously reduces private 
information trading and increases firm value. However, in countries where minority shareholder rights 
are not protected adequately, private information trading, earnings opacity, and valuation may remain 
unchanged in the presence of insider trading restrictions. Taken together, these results validate our 
suggestion that in the presence of insider trading restrictions, controlling shareholders substitute towards 
covert expropriation, provided agency costs are sufficiently high and investor protection low. 
It can be argued that our results are driven by the possibility that countries with high-investor 
protection standards are also the ones that enforce insider trading laws. That is, insider trading laws are 
more effective in countries with high-investor protection standards simply because these countries 
happen to be the ones that also enforce the existing insider trading rules. However, this alternative 
argument cannot explain away our findings because the coefficient on INS is negative and significant in 
both the high- and low-investor protection sub-samples. This suggests that even in low-investor 
protection countries, the enforcement of insider trading regulation is sufficient to put a downward 
pressure on private information trading. 
4.6. Robustness checks 
Our results are robust to endogeneity problem, alternative regression specifications and definitions 
of main variables, and outliers. That is, the regression coefficients generate very similar patterns of signs 
and statistical significance to those reported in Tables 4-7. 
The insider trading laws enforcement variable can be a noisy measure because the lack of 
prosecution prior to 1996 could indicate that trading restrictions were strict enough to deter people from 
violating them. Thus, as a robustness check, we use the rule of law index (a measure of the law and 
order tradition of the country) as a proxy for INS_ENF. The rule of law index is from the International 
Country Risk Guide and is calculated as a monthly average in 1996. Using this variable as a proxy for 
enforcement does not change our results. 
In addition to the event study approach described in Section 4.3, we address endogeneity by using 
legal origin dummies, ORIGIN, defined in La Porta et al. (1998), as instruments for the ownership 
variables. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1998) show that legal origin shapes firms' 

 
17
ownership structure. However, there is no a priori reason to believe that legal origin affects the amount 
of private information trading, other than through ownership structure and the variables we already 
control for such as the quality of legal environment.  
Table 8 repeats the regressions of Table 4 using legal origin dummies as instruments for WEDGE, 
CASH, and WEDGE×INS, which are assumed to be endogenous. It is evident from the instrumental 
variable regressions that the results described earlier still hold for PRIVATE and Q, and are weaker for 
OPACITY.9 Greater ownership wedge is associated with more private information trading and lower 
valuation. Insider trading regulation reduces information trading and increases valuation, but is less 
successful in doing so when ownership wedge is high.  
As an alternative measure of information trading we use the degree of stock prices asynchronicity 
developed in Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000), and Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004). They show that 
when market return has low explanatory power with respect to individual firm return (high degree of 
asynchronicity) stock prices are more informative.  
To calculate stock returns asynchronicity we follow Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000) and decompose 
the variation in local individual stock returns into two components: unexplained (residual) sum of 
squares and explained (by local market index and U.S. index) sum of squares. To perform the 
decomposition we first run the regression, 
c
t
i
US
t
m
c
i
c
t
m
c
i
c
i
c
t
i
r
r
r
,
,
,2
,
,1
,
ε
β
β
α
+
+
+
=
,                                                                                          (4) 
where 
c
t
ir ,  is firm i’s weekly return, 
c
t
mr , is local market return, and 
US
t
mr , is U.S. market return. All 
returns are expressed in local currencies. Local market and U.S. indexes are value-weighted and they 
exclude the firm in question to avoid spurious correlation between individual returns and indexes for 
markets with few firms. We define stock returns asynchronicity measure, ASYNi, as the logarithmic 
transformation 
of 
one 
minus 
the 
coefficient 
of 
determination 
of 
the 
above 
                                                 
9 At the bottom of Table VIII we report the results of Durbin-Hausman-Wu test of endogeneity. The test indicates that ownership variables are 
endogenous.  

 
18
regression,





−
=
c
i
c
i
c
i
R
R
ASYN
,2
,2
1
ln
, which is, by construction, equal to the difference between the log 
of unexplained and explained sums of squares. High values of ASYN mean that individual stock returns 
move mostly independently of market indexes which, according to Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000), 
Durnev, et al. (2003), and Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004), can reflect more informative stock 
prices.10 
We repeat regressions of Table 4 with ASYN as the dependent variable and report the results in 
Table 9. The coefficients on ownership wedge and insider trading regulation are of expected sign and 
significant across all specifications – lower agency costs and stricter insider trading regulation are 
associated with more asynchronous stock prices. The result on the interaction term is weaker. It is 
significant at 5% level in one out of two specifications. 
The strictness of insider trading laws, INS, is measured by the product of the insider trading index, 
INS_REG, and the insider trading law enforcement dummy variable, INS_ENF. Since previous studies 
(Beny, 2005; Bhattacharya and Daouk, 2002) use either the insider trading index or the insider trading 
enforcement variable, we check the robustness of our findings by including INS_REG and INS_ENF and 
their interaction terms with WEDGE separately. Although we do not report the results, the coefficients 
on INS_REG and INS_ENF are significantly negative suggesting that both regulation and its 
enforcement are associated with lower private information trading. The coefficients on the interaction 
terms of INS_REG and INS_ENF  with ownership wedge are both positive and significant. When we use 
the rule of law as a proxy for INS_ENF, the coefficient on INS_ENF is negative and significant and its 
interaction with WEDGE is positive and significant. These findings continue to suggest that when the 
ownership wedge of large shareholders is higher, both insider trading regulation and its enforcement are 
less effective at reducing private information trading.  
                                                 
10 Interestingly, PRIVATE and ASYN are only weakly correlated. The low correlation can reflect the fact that the two variables are measuring 
different types of informational efficiencies of stock prices. While PRIVATE is an aggregate proxy for information asymmetry between 
informed and uninformed traders, ASYN incorporates the speed of information incorporation into stock prices. Thus, the two measures are not 
directly comparable. 

 
19
As a robustness check, we define investor protection index, PROTECT, with the legality index, as in 
Durnev and Kim (2003). The legality index is constructed by combining investor and creditor 
protections, the efficiency of the judicial system, rule of law, absence of corruption, risk of 
expropriation, and risk of contract repudiation (see La Porta et al., 1998, for definitions of these 
variables and Berkowitz, Pistor, and Richard. 2003, for methodology). The main results remain 
unchanged. 
Our results also survive the inclusion of a long list of additional control variables that proxy for 
country governance and disclosure standards, economic development, level of corruption, and trading 
costs, all of which can influence the intensity of private information trading. Specifically, we control for 
the level of economic development measured by GDP per capita, the nation’s quality of accounting 
standards defined in La Porta et al (1998), corruption index from the Transparency International, 
country aggregate stock market turnover, Price Waterhouse Coopers’ opacity index, and Elkins/ 
McSherry index of trading costs (Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan, 2001).  Our results do not change 
when we include these additional controls together or separately. In the interest of brevity, we do not 
report the results with these additional control variables. 
Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2003) document that firms that issue ADRs receive higher valuation. 
Lang, Lins, and Miller (2003) suggest that cross listing enhances firm value through its effect on the 
firm’s information environment. Jain (2005) shows that electronic trading, compared to floor trading, 
enhances liquidity and informativeness of stock markets. We do not control for ADRs or electronic 
trading because our sample includes only non-ADR stocks from exchanges that have both floor trading 
and electronic trading systems in 1996.  
Our results also hold if we repeat the analyses after dropping Japanese firms on the grounds that 
they comprise 29% of the sample or if we include a dummy variable for firms from East Asian 
countries. Finally, our findings do not change if we winsorize all variables at the 1% and 99% levels to 
reduce the impact of outliers.  
 

 
20
5. Conclusion 
In the past decade, most stock markets around the world have introduced rules against insider 
trading. In many countries, these rules have been enforced with the prosecution of those violating the 
laws. The objective of insider trading restrictions is purportedly to improve the integrity and liquidity of 
stock markets by encouraging ordinary investors to participate. Insider trading restrictions are intended 
to reduce the adverse selection problem facing uninformed investors by limiting the incidence of private 
information trading.   
This paper examines the effectiveness of insider trading restrictions in reducing private information 
trading. The results indicate that insider trading restrictions become less effective if firm agency costs 
measured by ownership wedge are high and investor protection standards are weak. We hypothesize that 
controlling shareholders banned from insider trading may be able to make up for the loss in trading 
profits by expropriating firm resources if the protection given to minority shareholders is low. The 
opaque informational environment that often accompanies covert activities of controlling shareholders 
can, in turn, increase the returns to private information trading. 
Using cross sectional regressions and an event study we find that on average insider trading 
restrictions reduce the amount of private information trading. However, a wedge between ownership and 
control makes insider trading restrictions less effective in reducing private information trading. We also 
find that in the presence of insider trading restrictions, firms with high ownership wedge have more 
opaque earnings, and receive lower valuation. In fact, for high levels of ownership wedge, insider 
trading restrictions may actually increase trading on private information. These results support our 
conjecture that imposing insider trading restrictions on firms with a high ownership wedge increases 
private information trading because controlling shareholders expropriate and hide more in the presence 
of stricter insider trading laws.  Our results appear to be robust to alternative definitions of main 
variables, endogeneity and a battery of additional control variables. 
If the primary objective of insider trading restrictions is to encourage the uninformed public to 
participate in the market, then regulators need to be wary of the effect insider trading restrictions have 

 
21
on the aggregate level of private information trading. When agency costs are high, the restrictions may 
not make uninformed investors better-off, unless the regulator ensures a concomitant improvement in 
investor protection standards. Countries that do not protect minority shareholders adequately but have 
strict laws against insider trading should ensure stronger investor protection standards that would make 
expropriation and manipulation of financial statements harder. Otherwise, the costs of introducing and 
enforcing insider trading restrictions may not be worthwhile. 
 
 

 
22
REFERENCES 
 
Ackerman, A. and E. Maug, 2006, Insider trading legislation and acquisition announcements: Do law 
matter?, Working paper, University of Mannheim. 
 
Ausubel, L., 1990, Insider trading in a rational expectations economy, American Economic Review 80, 
1022-1041. 
 
Beny, L., 2005, Do insider trading laws matter? Some preliminary comparative evidence,  American 
Law and Economics Review 7, 144-83. 
 
Beny, L., 2006, Do shareholders value insider trading laws? International evidence, Working paper, 
University of Michigan.  
 
Berkowitz, D., K. Pistor and J.F. Richard, 2003, Economic development, legality, and the transplant 
effect, European Economic Review 47, 165-195. 
 
Bhattacharya, U. and H. Daouk, 2002, The world price of insider trading, Journal of Finance 57, 75-108. 
 
Bhattacharya, U., H. Daouk and M. Welker, 2003, The world price of earnings opacity, Accounting 
Review 78, 641-678. 
 
Bhide, A., 1993, The hidden costs of stock market liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 34, 31-51. 
 
Breusch, T. and A. Pagan, 1980, The Lagrange multiplier test and its applications to model specification 
in econometrics, Review of Economic Studies 47, 239-253. 
 
Brudney, V., 1979, Insiders, outsiders, and the informational advantages under the Federal Securities 
laws, Harvard Law Review 93, 322-376. 
 
Campbell, J., 1996, Understanding risk and return, Journal of Political Economy 104, 298–345. 
 
Carlton, D. and D. Fischel, 1983, The regulation of insider trading, Stanford Law Review 35, 322-376. 
 
Claessens S., S. Djankov, J. Fan and L. Lang, 2002, Disentangling the incentive and entrenchment 
effects of large shareholdings, Journal of Finance 57, 2741-2771. 
 
Demsetz, H., 1986, Corporate control, insider trading, and rates of return, American Economic Review 
76, 313-316. 
 
Doidge, C., A. Karolyi and R. Stulz, 2003, Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth more? Journal 
of Financial Economics 71, 205-238. 
 
Domowitz, I., J. Glen and A. Madhavan, 2001, Global equity trading costs, Working paper, 
Pennsylvania State University. 
 
Durnev, A. and E.H. Kim, 2005, To steal or not to steal: Firm attributes, legal environment, and 
valuation, Journal of Finance 60, 1461-1493. 
 
Durnev, A., R. Morck and B. Yeung, 2004, Value enhancing capital budgeting and firm-specific stock 
return variation, Journal of Finance 59, 65-105. 
 

 
23
Durnev, A., R. Morck, B. Yeung and P. Zarowin, 2003, Does greater firm-specific return variation mean 
more or less informed stock pricing?, Journal of Accounting Research 41, 797-836. 
 
Dye, R., 1984, Insider trading and incentives, Journal of Business 57, 295-313. 
 
Easterbrook, F., 1985, Insider trading as an agency problem, in J.W. Pratt and R.J. Zeckhauser, eds., 
Principals and agents: The structure of business (Harvard Business School Press, Boston). 
 
Faccio, M. and L. Lang, 2002, The ultimate ownership of Western European corporations, Journal of 
Financial Economics 65, 365-395. 
 
Fernandes, N. and M. Ferreira, 2006, Insider trading laws and stock price informativeness, Working 
paper, CEMAF/ISCTE. 
 
Fischer, P., 1992, Optimal contracting and insider trading restrictions, Journal of Finance 47, 673-694. 
 
Fishman, M. and K. Hagerty, 1992, Insider trading and the efficiency of stock prices, RAND Journal of 
Economics 23, 106-122. 
 
Glosten, L., 1989, Insider trading, liquidity and the role of the monopolist specialist, Journal of Business 
62, 211-35. 
 
Grishchenko O., L. Litov and J. Mei, 2003, Private information trading and corporate governance in 
emerging markets, Working paper, New York University. 
 
Haw, I.M., B. Hu, L.S. Hwang and W. Wu, 2004, Ultimate ownership, income management, and legal 
and extra-legal institutions, Journal of Accounting Research 42, 423-462.  
 
Jain, Pankaj, 2005, Financial market design and equity premium: Electronic versus floor trading, Journal 
of Finance 60, 2955-2985. 
 
Johnson, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A. Shleifer, 2000, Tunneling, American Economic 
Review 90, 22-27. 
 
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of 
Political Economy 106, 1113-1155. 
 
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A. Shleifer, 1998, Corporate ownership around the world, Journal 
of Finance 54, 471-517. 
 
Lang, M., K. Lins and D. Miller, 2003, ADRs, analysts, and accuracy: Does cross listing in the U.S. 
improve a firm’s information environment and increase value? Journal of Accounting Research 41, 
317-345. 
 
Leuz, C., D. Nanda and P. Wysocki, 2003 Earnings management and investor protection: An 
international comparison, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 505-527. 
 
Llorente G., R. Michaely, G. Saar and J. Wang, 2002, Dynamic volume-return relation of individual 
stocks, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1005-1047. 
 
Manove, M., 1989, The harm from insider trading and informed speculation, Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 104, 823-845. 
 

 
24
Maug, E., 1995, Institutional investors as monitors: On the impact of insider trading legislation on large 
shareholder activism, Working paper, Duke University. 
 
Maug, E., 2002, Insider trading legislation and corporate governance, European Economic Review 46, 
1569-1597. 
 
Morck, R., B. Yeung and W. Yu, 2000, The information content of stock markets: Why do emerging 
markets have synchronous stock price movements?, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 215238. 
Pástor, L. and R. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal of Political 
Economy 111, 642-685. 
 
Petersen, M., 2005, Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches, 
Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
 
Shin, J., 1996, The optimal regulation of insider trading, Journal of Financial Intermediation 5, 49-73. 
 
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance 52, 737-783. 
 
Stamp, M. and C. Welsh, 1996, International insider dealing (Biddles Limited, Guildford). 
 
 
 
 

 
25
Table 1. 
Variables, definitions, and sources 
 
Main Variables 
Notations 
Definitions 
Sources 
Amount of private information 
trading 
PRIVATE 
The amount of private information trading, PRIVATE, is measured by coefficient C2  in the timeseries regression 
c
t
i
c
c
t
i
c
i
c
t
i
c
i
c
i
c
t
i
t
iV
R
C
R
C
A
R
,
,
2
,
,
1,
1
,
,
ε
+
+
+
=
+
, where i indexes firms, t time, and c country; A 
is intercept, C1, C2 are the regression coefficients, and ε is the error term. Return is defined 
as
)
/)
log((
1
,
,
,
,
−
+
=
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
P
D
P
R
, where P is closing price, and D are dividends per share. Volume, V, 
is defined as 
∑=
−
−
−
=
20
1
1
,
,
,
,
,
)
/
log(
20
/
1
)
/
log(
j
t
i
j
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
N
VOL
N
VOL
V
, where VOL is the number of 
shares traded and N  the number of shares outstanding. This regression is run using daily data from 
January 2, 1995 through December 31, 1997. We drop firms that contain fewer than 30 trading days. 
Higher values of PRIVATE correspond to greater amount of private information trading. 
 
Datastream for closing price, number of shares 
outstanding, number of shares traded, and 
Worldscope for dividends. 
Cash flow rights 
CASH 
The share of cash flow rights held by the largest shareholder. The data distinguish between control 
and cash flow rights using information on firms’ pyramid structures, cross-holdings, and dual-class 
shares. The data are for the end of 1996 for Eastern Asian countries, France, Germany, Switzerland, 
U.K.; 1997 for Portugal, Spain; 1998 for Norway, Sweden, and 1999 for Austria, Belgium, and 
Finland. 
 
Claessens et al. (2002)  for Eastern Asian firms 
and Faccio and Lang (2002) for West European 
firms. 
Control rights 
CONT 
The share of control rights held by the largest shareholder. The data distinguish between control and 
cash flow rights using information on firms’ pyramid structures, cross-holdings, and dual-class 
shares. To determine effective control a 10% cutoff point is used, above which it is assumed that the 
largest shareholder has effective control over the intermediate and final corporation. The data are for 
the end of 1996 for Eastern Asian countries, France, Germany, Switzerland, U.K.; 1997 for Portugal, 
Spain; 1998 for Norway, Sweden; 1999 for Austria, Belgium, and Finland. 
 
Claessens et al. (2002)  for Eastern Asian firms 
and Faccio and Lang (2002) for West European 
firms. 
Ownership wedge 
WEDGE 
The difference between control rights (CONT) and cash flow rights (CASH).  
 
 
Insider trading regulation 
INS_REG 
An index formed by aggregating individual components of countries’ insider trading laws. The index 
is constructed by adding 1 if: (1) violation of the insider trading law is a criminal offense; (2) tippees 
are prohibited from trading on material nonpublic information; (3) insiders are prohibited from 
tipping outsiders about material nonpublic information and/or encouraging them to trade on such 
information for personal gain; (4) monetary penalties are  proportional to insiders’ trading profits; (5) 
investors have a private right of action. Scale: 0 - 5. Lower scores indicate less strict insider trading 
regulation. Original data come from Stamp and Welsh (1996).  
 
Beny (2005 and 2006). Original data: Stamp and 
Welsh (1996). 
 
Insider trading laws enforcement 
INS_ENF 
A dummy variable that is equal to 1 if a country’s insider trading law has been enforced for the first 
time (i.e., at least once) by the end of 1996. 
 
Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000).  
 
Strictness of insider trading laws 
INS 
Product of INS_REG and INS_ENF. Scale: 0 - 5. Lower scores indicate less strict laws against insider 
trading. 
 
 
Earnings opacity 
OPACITY 
Earnings opacity is a measure of earnings smoothing due to managerial motives. For each firm, 
OPACITY is defined as -1 times the time-series Spearman correlation coefficient between the 
changes in accruals and the changes in cash flow, both scaled by lagged total assets. It is based on 
annual data from 1992 through 1997. Accruals and cash flow are defined in (3) in the text. Higher 
values of OPACITY indicate greater earnings opacity. 
Worldscope. 
Valuation 
Q 
It is 1995 through 1997 average of annual Tobin’s Q. Tobin’s Q is calculated as the sum of total 
assets and market value of common stock less book value of equity over total assets. The market 
value of equity is the number of common shares outstanding times year-end price. 
Worldscope. 
Investor Protection Variables 
 
 
 

 
26
Investor protection 
PROT 
The product of investor protection index and the rule of law. The investor protection index 
aggregates the shareholders’ rights. It is formed by adding 1 when: (1) the country allows 
shareholders to mail their proxy vote to the firm; (2) shareholders are not required to deposit their 
shares prior to the General Shareholders’ Meeting; (3) cumulative voting or proportional 
representation of minorities in the board of directors is allowed; (4) an oppressed minorities 
mechanism is in place; (5) the minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to call 
for an Extraordinary Shareholders’ Meeting is less than or equal to 10%; (6) shareholders have 
preemptive rights that can only be waived by a shareholders’ vote. Scale: 0-6. The rule of law is the 
assessment of the law and order tradition of the country. It is calculated as the average of monthly 
values in 1996. The original data are transformed from 0-6 scale to 0-10 scale as in La Porta et al. 
(1998). Higher values of PROT indicate better investor protection. 
 
La Porta et al. (1998) for investor protection 
index and International Country Risk Guide for 
the rule of law.  
Efficiency of judicial system 
JUDIC 
Assessment of the efficiency and integrity of the legal environment as it affects business in 1996. 
Scale: 0 - 10. Lower scores indicate lower efficiency levels. 
Economist Intelligence Unit. 
Market Capitalization 
MCAP 
Logarithm of the value of all listed shares over GDP, annual average from 1993 through 1996. 
World Bank’s 2000 World Development 
Indicators. 
 
Legal origin 
ORIGIN 
Legal origin of the company law or commercial code of each country (English common law, French 
civil law, German civil law, and Scandinavian civil law).  
La Porta et al. (1998). 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
Liquidity 
LMV 
Logarithm of firm market value. Market value is the number of shares outstanding times closing 
price in the end of December 1996. 
 
Worldscope. 
Number of trading periods 
LNN 
Logarithm of the number of periods used to run the regression in (2) in the text to calculate 
PRIVATE. 
 
Datastream. 
Firm size 
SIZE 
Logarithm of sales in 1996. 
 
Worldscope. 
Investment opportunities 
INV_OPP 
One-year 1995-to-1996 growth rate in net sales. This variable is winsorized at the 1% and 99% 
levels.   
 
Worldscope. 
Research and development 
expenditures 
R&D 
Research and development expenditures over sales in 1996. 
Worldscope. 
Industry dummies 
D 
Industries are grouped across two-digit SICs. They are: petroleum (SIC 13, 29), consumer durables 
(SIC 30, 36, 37, 50, 55, 57), basic industry (SIC 8, 10, 12, 14, 24, 26, 28, 33), food and tobacco (SIC 
20, 21, 54), construction (SIC 15, 16, 17, 32), capital goods (SIC 34, 35, 38, 39), transportation (SIC 
40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 47), textiles and trade (SIC 22, 23, 51, 53, 56, 59), services (SIC 7, 73, 75, 80, 82, 
83, 87, 96), leisure (SIC 27, 58, 70, 79), unregulated utilities (SIC 48), and regulated utilities (SIC 
49). 
 
Campbell (1996). 
Year dummies 
T 
Dummy variables for years 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999. 
 
 

 
27
Table 2 
Summary statistics by country 
 
Country 
ORIGIN 
PRIVATE, 
mean 
N 
Firms, 
PRIVATE 
OPACITY, 
Mean 
Firms, 
OPACITY 
CONT 
CASH 
WEDGE 
INS_REG 
INS_ENF,  
Year 
INS 
Austria 
German 
0.0379 
42 
553 
-0.781 
36 
54.454 
  47.457 
6.997 
2 
No cases 
0 
Belgium 
French 
0.0416 
21 
618 
-0.757 
23 
37.621 
32.335 
5.286 
3 
1994 
3 
Finland 
Scandinavian 
0.0426   
62 
445 
-0.700 
13 
32.643 
28.820 
3.824 
3 
1993 
3 
France 
French 
0.0253 
220 
832 
-0.769 
138 
46.290 
45.309 
0.981 
4 
1975 
4 
Germany 
German 
0.0268 
189 
711 
-0.788 
252 
46.976 
41.202 
5.774 
3 
1995 
3 
Hong Kong 
English 
-0.000181   
113 
432 
-0.731   
93 
33.150 
28.920 
4.230   
3 
1994 
3 
Indonesia 
French 
0.0610 
44 
392 
-0.791 
34 
34.773 
25.045 
9.727 
2 
1996 
2 
Italy 
French 
0.0699 
56 
719 
-0.844 
54 
51.991 
44.177   
7.814 
3 
1996 
3 
Japan 
German 
0.0254 
744 
775 
-0.795   
498 
11.085   
7.250 
3.835 
2 
1990 
2 
Malaysia 
English 
0.00629 
65 
591 
-0.772 
87 
33.646 
28.738 
4.908   
3 
1996 
3 
Norway 
Scandinavian 
0.0781 
16 
614 
-0.541 
37 
25.434 
23.226 
2.208   
1 
1990 
1 
Philippines 
French 
0.0891 
21 
311 
-0.533 
9 
28.000   
24.857 
3.143 
2 
No cases 
0 
Portugal 
French 
0.0696   
15 
672 
- 
- 
43.633 
40.405 
3.228 
4 
No cases 
0 
Singapore 
English 
0.0411 
68 
612 
-0.758 
78 
29.515 
22.412   
7.103 
4 
1978 
4 
South Korea 
German 
-0.0246   
112 
717 
-0.665 
79 
22.893   
19.848 
3.045 
5 
1988 
5 
Spain 
French 
0.0554 
38 
811 
-0.864 
25 
28.591 
26.654 
1.937 
4 
1998 
0 
Sweden 
Scandinavian 
0.0603 
57 
712 
-0.663 
43 
26.047 
19.006 
7.041 
3 
1990 
3 
Switzerland 
German 
0.0348 
69 
654 
-0.743 
67 
40.028 
27.639 
12.389 
3 
1995 
3 
Taiwan 
German 
0.00429   
61   
717 
-0.751 
68 
22.705 
18.672 
4.033 
4 
1989 
4 
Thailand 
English 
0.0658 
26   
434 
-0.561 
49 
37.931 
33.985 
3.946   
3 
1993 
3 
UK 
English 
0.00119 
150 
623 
-0.617   
54 
16.893 
15.654 
1.239 
3 
1981 
3 
Average  
 
0.0387 
104.238 
616.429 
-0.721 
86.850 
33.538 
28.648 
4.890 
3.048 
 
2.476 
 
This table reports the summary statistics (averages) of main variables by country. Countries are sorted alphabetically.  Variable ORIGIN is a country’s legal regime; ‘PRIVATE, mean’  is a country average amount 
of private information trading; N is the average number of trading days used to calculate PRIVATE; “Firms, PRIVATE” records the number of firms in a country for which PRIVATE can be calculated; OPACITY is 
earnings opacity measure; “Firms, OPACITY” records the number of firms in a country for which OPACITY can be calculated; CONT is control concentration (in % terms); CASH are cash flow rights (in % terms); 
WEDGE is the difference between CONT and CASH;  INS_REG is the index of insider trading regulation; “INS_ENF, Year” is the year of the first documented case against insider trading; and INS is the index of 
the strictness of insider trading laws. Firms that belong to financial industries (SIC 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67) are excluded from the sample. Refer to Table 1 for definitions of variables.  

 
28
Table 3 
Correlation coefficients 
 
CASH 
WEDGE 
INS_REG 
INS_ENF 
INS 
LMV 
OPACITY 
LNN 
INV_OPP 
R&D 
R&D 
Research and development expenditures 
0.067 
0.042 
-0.160 
-0.158 
-0.231 
-0.232 
0.053 
-0.056 
-0.015 
-0.020 
(0.00) 
(0.05) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.02) 
(0.01) 
(0.49) 
(0.36) 
PRIVATE 
Amount of private information trading 
 
-0.170 
0.351 
-0.140 
0.216 
-0.338 
-0.004 
-0.190 
0.070 
-0.0305 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.84) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.16) 
CASH 
Cash flow rights 
 
 
-0.060 
0.003 
-0.036 
-0.037 
0.039 
-0.044 
-0.063 
-0.015 
 
 
(0.01) 
(0.89) 
(0.09) 
(0.10) 
(0.10) 
(0.04) 
(0.00) 
(0.50) 
WEDGE 
Ownership wedge 
 
 
 
-0.008 
0.768 
-0.211 
-0.027 
0.080 
-0.042 
0.001 
 
 
 
(0.70) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.26) 
(0.00) 
(0.06) 
(0.70) 
INS_REG 
Insider trading regulation 
 
 
 
 
0.600 
0.098 
-0.015 
0.128 
0.0237 
0.010 
 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.55) 
(0.00) 
(0.28) 
(0.64) 
INS_ENF 
Insider trading laws enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.126 
-0.038 
-0.102 
-0.031 
0.007 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.11) 
(0.00) 
(0.16) 
(0.76) 
INS 
Strictness of insider trading laws 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.046 
0.433 
0.057 
0.028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.06) 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.20) 
LMV 
Liquidity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.133 
-0.007 
-0.004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.78) 
(0.87) 
OPACITY 
Earnings opacity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.045 
0.026 
Log of number of trading periods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.04) 
(0.24) 
LNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.00) 
INV_OPP 
Investment opportunities 
 
This  table  reports  correlation  coefficients  between  main  variables. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the hypothesis of zero correlation can be rejected. Coefficients significant at least at 
the 10% level (based on two-tailed test) are in bold face. Firms that belong to financial industries (SIC 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, and 67) are excluded from the sample. The sample size ranges from 1,559 to 2,189 firms 
depending on the pair of variables under consideration.  Refer to Table 1 for definitions of variables. All financial and accounting variables are measured in U.S. dollars. 

 
29
Fig.1. Average amount of private information trading, PRIVATE, grouped by the strictness of insider trading laws, INS.  
 
The height of each bar is the group average of the amount of private information trading. The groups are: INS 0-1 (Austria, Philippines,  Portugal,  Norway, Spain), INS = 2 (Indonesia, Japan); INS = 3 
(Belgium, Finland, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Malaysia, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, U.K.); INS = 4 or 5 (France, Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea). Higher values for PRIVATE indicate higher 
amount of private information trading. The graph is based on the  sample of 2,189 firms from 21 countries. The percentage of observations in a group is listed at the top of each bar.  
0.000
0.010
0.020
0.030
0.040
0.050
0.060
0.070
0-1
2
3
4-5
Strictness of Insider Trading Regulation, 
INS
Amount of Private Information Trading, 
PRIVATE
6.0%
36.0%
37.0%
21.0%
Austria, Philippines, Portugal, Norway, Spain
Indonesia, Japan
Belgium, Finland, Germany, Hong Kong, 
Italy, Malaysia, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Thailand, U.K.
France, Singapore, 
Taiwan, South Korea
 

 
30
Fig.2. Average amount of private information trading, PRIVATE, grouped by ownership wedge, WEDGE. 
  
The height of each bar is the group average of the amount of private information trading. Higher values for PRIVATE indicate higher amount of private information trading. The graph 
is based on the sample of 2,189 firms from 21 countries.. The percentage of observations in a group is listed at the top of each bar.  
0.02
0.022
0.024
0.026
0.028
0.03
0.032
0.034
0.036
0%
0%-10%
10-20%
>20%
Ownership Wedge, 
WEDGE
Amount of Private Information Trading, 
PRIVATE
58.2%
26.8%
9.4%
5.5%

 
31
Table 4 
Regressions of amount of private information trading, earnings opacity, and valuation 
Dependent Variable
Amount of Private Information Trading, 
PRIVATE 
Earnings 
Opacity, 
OPACITY 
Valuation, 
Q 
Specification
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
-0.0287 
-0.0226 
-0.0227 
-0.0182 
-0.0445 
0.0305 
Cash flow rights
CASH
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.05) 
(0.08)   
0.0343 
0.0259 
0.0252 
0.0206 
0.209 
-0.526 
Ownership wedge
WEDGE
(0.01) 
(0.06) 
(0.07) 
(0.10)   
(0.03) 
(0.07) 
-0.0112 
-0.00991 
-0.00991 
-0.0117 
-0.0115   
0.0469 
Strictness of insider trading laws
INS
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
  (0.03) 
(0.05) 
- 
- 
0.0178 
0.0142 
0.0138   
-0.0343 
Interaction term of ownership 
wedge with strictness of insider 
trading laws
WEDGE×INS
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.04) 
(0.02) 
- 
-0.000640 
-0.000662   
-0.000441 
-0.00796 
0.0712 
Liquidity
LMV
 
(0.38) 
(0.36) 
(0.54)   
(0.10) 
(0.00) 
- 
-0.00691 
-0.00682 
-0.00487 
- 
0.0320   
Log of number of trading periods
LNN
 
(0.02) 
(0.02) 
(0.11) 
 
(0.65) 
Industry dummies
D
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Time dummies 
T
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
- 
- 
- 
-0.00375 
-0.0150 
0.0496 
Market capitalization
MCAP
 
 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.06) 
- 
- 
- 
0.00282 
0.0439 
0.0732097 
Investment opportunities
INV_OPP
 
 
 
(0.51) 
(0.25) 
(0.42) 
- 
- 
- 
-0.00413 
-0.0331 
0.00961 
Efficiency of judicial system
JUDIC
 
 
 
(0.06) 
(0.10) 
(0.05) 
- 
- 
- 
-0.00170 
0.000880 
0.000125 
Research and development 
expenditures
R&D
 
 
 
(0.52)   
(0.50) 
(0.28) 
54.920 
206.810 
206.900 
241.170 
48.130 
45.790 
Wald test statistics of overall significance
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Regression R2
0.071 
0.092   
0.095 
0.106 
0.078   
0.029  
Number of firms
2,189 
2,062 
2,062 
2,059 
1,706 
1,819 
- 
203.430 
203.620 
178.630 
120.30 
788.910 
Breusch-Pagan Test
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
This table reports the results of country-random effects regressions (specifications 4.2-4.6): 
c
i
K
k
c
i
k
k
c
c
i
c
c
i
c
i
c
i
c
i
c
i
Z
INS
WEDGE
INS
WEDGE
CASH
Q
OPACITY
PRIVATE
ε
δ
γ
β
β
β
α
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
∑
=1
,
3
2
1
*
or 
 
or 
 
, 
where c indexes countries and i indexes firms. Variable α is a constant (coefficient is not reported), E[εi
c] = 0, E[εi
c εj
c] ≠ 0 ∀ i and j, and E is the expectation operator.  Specification 4.1 is based on OLS regression. 
The dependent variables are PRIVATE, the amount of private information trading (specifications 4.1-4.4), OPACITY, earnings opacity (specification 4.5), and Tobin’s Q (specification 4.6). Variable CASH is cash 
flow rights; WEDGE is ownership wedge; INS is the strictness of insider trading laws; and WEDGE×INS is the interaction term of control concentration with the strictness of insider trading laws. Control variables, 
Z’s,  are: liquidity, LMV (specifications 4.2-4.6); log of the number of trading periods, LNN (specifications 4.2-4.4 and 4.6); industry dummies, D (specifications 4.2-4.6, coefficients are not reported); time dummies, 
T (specifications 4.2-4.6, coefficients are not reported); market capitalization,  MCAP (specifications 4.4-4.6), investment opportunities, INV_OPP (specifications 4.4-4.6; it is winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels); 
and research and development expenditures, R&D (specifications 4.4-4.6). All financial and accounting variables are measured in U.S. dollars. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the null 
hypothesis of zero coefficient can be rejected. Coefficients significant at least at the 10% level (based on two-tailed test) are in boldface. Firms that belong to financial industries (SIC 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67) are 
excluded from the sample. We drop firms from the sample if their measure of private information trading is based on fewer than 30 trading days. If all variables, except R&D expenditures, are available we set R&D 
expenditures to zero. At the bottom of the table we report the results of the  Breusch-Pagan test that the variance of the random effects is zero. In specification 4.1 we report the F-statistics of overall significance 
instead of  Wald test statistics. Refer to Table 1 for definitions of variables.  

 
32
Table 5 
Mean comparison test of private information trading before and after the first enforcement of insider trading laws 
 
 
N = 3,882 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
t-stat (p-val) 
PRIVATE before enforcement 
0.00674 
0.00192 
35.030 (0.00) 
PRIVATE after enforcement 
-0.0315 
0.00205 
-51.080 (0.00) 
Difference (after – before) 
-0.0383 
0.000749 
12.080 (0.00) 
 
 
This table reports the results of the mean comparison test of private information trading before and after the first enforcement of insider trading laws. PRIVATE is the 
measure of the amount of private information trading. ‘PRIVATE before (after)’ enforcement is calculated using the available return and volume data two years before 
(after) the first year of insider trading laws enforcement. The sample consists of 3,882 firms from 16 countries that enforced insider trading laws after 1993 (Argentina, 
Australia, Belgium, Chile, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey). The number in 
parentheses is the probability levels at which the null hypothesis of equal means can be rejected. We drop firms from the sample if their measure of private information 
trading is based on fewer than 30 trading days.  

 
33
Table 6 
Regressions of the change in the amount of private information trading 
 
 Dependent Variable
Change in the Amount of Private Information 
Trading, 
∆PRIVATE 
Specification
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
-0.0349 
-0.0176 
-0.0268 
Cash flow rights
CASH
(0.66)   
(0.84) 
(0.76) 
0.0136 
0.0218 
0.0193 
Ownership wedge
WEDGE
  (0.02) 
(0.03) 
  (0.03) 
- 
0.0000363 
0.000154 
Change in liquidity
∆LMV
 
(0.04) 
(0.09) 
- 
-0.00411 
-0.00115 
Change in logs of number of 
trading periods
∆LNN
 
(0.19) 
(0.18) 
- 
- 
-0.0142 
Change in investment 
opportunities
∆INV_OPP
 
 
(0.03)   
- 
- 
-0.00185 
Change in research and 
development expenditures
∆R&D
 
 
(0.70) 
3.263 
4.820 
5.120 
F-test statistics of overall significance
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Regression R2
0.020 
0.025 
0.027 
Number of firms
965 
620 
513 
 
This table reports the results of OLS regressions: 
c
i
K
k
c
i
k
k
c
i
c
i
c
i
Z
WEDGE
CASH
PRIVATE
ε
δ
β
β
α
+
∆
+
+
+
=
∆
∑
=1
,
2
1
 
, 
where c indexes countries and i indexes firms. Variable α is a constant (coefficient is not reported). In all specifications, the 
dependent variable is ∆PRIVATE, the change in the amount of private information trading (the value before minus the value after 
the first enforcement of insider trading laws). PRIVATE before (after) enforcement is calculated using the available return and 
volume data two years before (after) the first year of insider trading laws enforcement. Variables CASH and WEDGE  are cash 
flow rights and ownership wedge, respectively. Control variables, Z’s, are: change in liquidity, ∆LMV (specifications 6.2 and 6.3); 
change in the log of the number of trading periods, ∆LNN (specifications 6.2 and 6.3); change in investment opportunities, 
INV_OPP (specification 6.3); and change in research and development expenditures, ∆R&D (specification 6.3). All financial and 
accounting variables are measured in U.S. dollars. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the null hypothesis of 
zero coefficient can be rejected. Coefficients significant at least at the 10% level (based on two-tailed test) are in boldface. Firms 
that belong to financial industries (SIC 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67) are excluded from the sample. We drop firms from the sample if 
their measure of private information trading is estimated with fewer than 30 trading days. If all variables, except R&D 
expenditures, are available we set R&D expenditures to zero. Refer to Table 1 for definitions of variables. The sample consists of 
965 firms from 8 countries that enforced insider trading laws after 1993 (Belgium, Germany, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Italy, 
Malaysia, Spain, Switzerland) for which the data on independent variables are available. 
 

 
34
 
Table 7 
Regressions of amount of private information trading, earnings opacity, and valuation run for high- and low-investor protection sub-samples 
Specification
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
Dependent Variable
PRIVATE 
OPACITY 
Q 
PRIVATE 
OPACITY 
Q 
Panel A: Low-investor protection sub-sample, 
PROT ≤ 33.3 (sample median) 
Panel B: High-investor protection sub-sample, 
PROT > 33.3 (sample median) 
-0.00209 
0.0414 
0.0571 
-0.00628 
-0.0273 
0.251 
Cash flow rights
CASH
(0.27)   
(0.44) 
(0.02) 
(0.22) 
(0.80) 
(0.03) 
0.0254 
0.197 
-0.135 
0.0184 
-0.0881 
-0.261 
Ownership wedge
WEDGE
(0.00) 
(0.10) 
(0.56) 
(0.10) 
(0.69) 
(0.00) 
-0.0123 
-0.0110 
0.0463 
-0.00911 
-0.0270 
0.0396 
Strictness of insider trading 
laws
INS
(0.00) 
(0.03) 
(0.01)  
(0.00) 
(0.24)  
(0.00) 
0.0108 
0.0146 
-0.0314   
0.0000549 
-0.166 
  0.00281 
Interaction term of ownership 
wedge with strictness of 
insider trading laws
WEDGE×INS
(0.04) 
(0.03) 
(0.10) 
(0.71) 
(0.43) 
(0.21) 
-0.0008287 
-0.00441 
0.139 
0.000378   
-0.00760 
0.0108 
Liquidity
LMV
(0.33) 
(0.55) 
(0.00) 
(0.72) 
(0.34) 
(0.67)   
-0.00518 
- 
-0.0852 
-0.00662 
- 
0.156 
Log of number of trading 
periods
LNN
(0.24)   
 
(0.16) 
(0.19) 
 
(0.17) 
Industry dummies
D
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Time dummies 
T
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
-0.00179 
-0.0160 
0.0236 
-0.00147 
-0.0167 
-0.0036 
Market capitalization
MCAP
(0.21) 
(0.03) 
(0.04) 
(0.60) 
(0.69) 
(0.12)   
0.00380 
-0.0380 
0.0101 
0.00118 
-0.0211 
0.00618 
Efficiency of judicial system
JUDIC
(0.05) 
(0.08) 
(0.03) 
(0.17) 
(0.22) 
(0.25) 
0.00219 
-0.0124 
0.261 
-0.0118 
-0.0674 
0.0845   
Investment opportunities
INV_OPP
(0.68) 
(0.82) 
(0.00) 
(0.07) 
(0.22) 
(0.58) 
-0.000445 
0.103 
 0.0000149 
-0.000818 
-0.000422 
0.000242    
Research and development 
expenditures
R&D
(0.00) 
(0.83) 
(0.06) 
(0.78) 
(0.98) 
(0.00) 
111.820 
33.180 
153.760 
36.610 
35.270 
149.320 
Wald test statistics of overall significance
(0.00) 
(0.05) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.04) 
(0.00) 
Regression R2
0.035 
0.039 
0.058 
0.031 
0.0402 
0.032 
Number of firms
  896 
840 
827 
1,163 
866 
992 
43.670 
50.000 
8.780 
9.070 
50.300 
59.320 
Breusch-Pagan Test
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
This table reports the results of country-random effects regressions : 
c
i
K
k
c
i
k
k
c
c
i
c
c
i
c
i
c
i
c
i
c
i
Z
INS
WEDGE
INS
WEDGE
CASH
Q
OPACITY
PRIVATE
ε
δ
γ
β
β
β
α
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
∑
=1
,
3
2
1
*
or 
 
or 
 
, 
where c indexes countries and i indexes firms. Variable α is a constant (coefficient is not reported), E[εi
c] = 0, E[εi
c εj
c] ≠ 0 ∀ i and j, and E is the expectation operator.  The dependent variables are PRIVATE, the amount 
of private information trading (specifications 7.1 and 7.4), earnings opacity, OPACITY (specifications 7.2 and 7.5) and Tobin’s Q (specifications 7.3 and 7.6). Variable CASH is cash flow rights; WEDGE is ownership 
wedge; INS is the strictness of insider trading laws; and WEDGE×INS is the interaction term of control concentration with the strictness of insider trading laws. Control variables, Z’s,  are: liquidity, LMV; log of the 
number of trading periods, LNN; industry dummies, D (coefficients are not reported); time dummies, T (coefficients are not reported); market capitalization, MCAP, investment opportunities, INV_OPP (it is winsorized 
at the 1% and 99% levels); and research and development expenditures, R&D. All financial and accounting variables are measured in U.S. dollars. In Panel A, the sample consists of firms from low-investor protection 
countries (PROT ≤  33.3, sample median). In Panel B, the sample consists of firms from high-investor protection countries (PROT > 33.3,  sample median). Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the 
null hypothesis of zero coefficient can be rejected. Coefficients significant at least at the 10% level (based on two-tailed test) are in boldface. Firms that belong to financial industries (SIC 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67) are 
excluded from the sample. We drop firms from the sample if their measure of private information trading is based on fewer than 30 trading days. If all variables, except R&D expenditures, are available we set R&D 
expenditures to zero. At the bottom of the table we report the results of  the  Breusch-Pagan test that the variance of the random effects is zero. Refer to Table 1 for definitions of variables.  

 
35
Table 8 
Two-stage least squares regressions of amount of private information trading, earnings opacity, and valuation 
 
 Dependent Variable
Amount of Private Information Trading, 
PRIVATE 
Earnings 
Opacity, 
OPACITY 
Valuation, 
Q 
Specification
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
-0.250 
-0.101 
 -0.792 
-0.319 
-0.509 
16.138 
Cash flow rights
CASH
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.31) 
(0.09) 
(0.30) 
(0.40)   
0.239 
0.428 
0.306   
0.546 
0.839 
-3.097 
Ownership wedge
WEDGE
(0.05) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.08) 
(0.09) 
(0.00) 
-0.0148   
-0.0164 
-0.0222 
-0.108 
-0.151 
5.883 
Strictness of insider trading 
laws
INS
(0.00) 
(0.00)  
(0.03) 
(0.08)    
(0.40) 
(0.41)   
- 
- 
0.411   
0.184 
-0.231 
-1.184 
Interaction term of ownership 
wedge with strictness of 
insider trading laws
WEDGE×INS
 
 
(0.01) 
(0.08) 
(0.17) 
(0.04) 
- 
  0.00121 
0.00712 
0.00150 
-0.177 
0.0389   
Liquidity
LMV
 
(0.33) 
(0.45) 
(0.65)  
(0.67) 
(0.07) 
- 
-0.00484   
0.101   
0.0408 
- 
-2.937 
Log of number of trading 
periods
LNN
 
(0.28)   
(0.40)   
(0.23) 
 
(0.38) 
Industry dummies
D
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Time dummies 
T
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
- 
- 
- 
-0.00625 
-0.0265 
0.234   
Market capitalization
MCAP
 
 
 
(0.08) 
(0.59)  
(0.50) 
 
 
 
-0.00308 
-0.108 
0.0162 
Efficiency of judicial system
JUDIC
 
 
 
(0.08) 
(0.10) 
(0.05) 
- 
- 
- 
-0.0322 
-0.519 
1.809 
Investment opportunities
INV_OPP
 
 
 
(0.10) 
(0.68) 
(0.40)  
- 
- 
- 
-0.000515   
0.109 
0.000240 
Assets intangibility
R&D
 
 
 
(0.05) 
(0.73) 
(0.42)    
5.580 
8.780 
7.340 
2.480 
2.660 
4.120 
F-test statistics of overall significance
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.05) 
(0.05) 
(0.00) 
Number of firms
  2,189 
2,062 
2,062 
2,059 
1,706 
1,819 
46.340 
17.190 
17.210 
15.440 
16.060 
19.200 
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test of endogeneity
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
This table reports the results of the following two-stage least squares regression: 
c
i
K
k
c
i
k
k
c
c
i
c
c
i
c
i
c
i
c
i
c
i
Z
INS
WEDGE
INS
WEDGE
CASH
Q
OPACITY
PRIVATE
ε
δ
γ
β
β
β
α
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
∑
=1
,
3
2
1
*
or 
 
or 
 
, 
where legal origin dummies, ORIGIN, are used as instruments for ownership variables. The ownership variables, which are assumed to be endogenous, are: cash flow rights, CASH, ownership wedge, WEDGE, 
and the interaction of ownership wedge with the strictness of insider trading regulation, WEDGE×INS. In those regressions c indexes countries, i indexes firms, and α is a constant (coefficient is not reported). 
The rest of the variables are: PRIVATE, the amount of private information trading; OPACITY, earnings opacity; Tobin’s Q, Q; INS is the strictness of insider trading regulation; liquidity, LMV; log of the number 
of trading periods, LNN; industry dummies, D, (coefficients are not reported); time dummies, T (coefficients are not reported); market capitalization, MCAP, investment opportunities, INV_OPP (winsorized at 
the 1% and 99% levels); and research and development expenditures, R&D. All financial and accounting variables are measured in U.S. dollars. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels at which the null 
hypothesis of zero coefficient can be rejected. Coefficients significant at least at the 10% level (based on two-tailed test) are in boldface. Firms that belong to financial industries (SIC 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67) are 
excluded from the sample. We drop firms from the sample if their measure of private information trading is based on fewer than 30 trading days.  If all variables, except R&D expenditures, are available we set 
R&D expenditures to zero. At the bottom of the table we report the results of the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test of endogeneity. To perform this test we first regress the endogenous variables (WEDGE and CASH in 
specifications 8.1-8.6, and also WEDGE×INS in specifications 8.3-8.5 and 8.6) on the set of exogenous variables, collect the fitted values of residuals, εCASH, εWEDGE, and εWEDGE×INS, and use them as additional 
variables in the base regression. High values of the F-test of their joint significance indicate the endogeneity of CASH, WEDGE and WEDGE×INS. Refer to Table 1 for definitions of variables. 

 
36
Table 9 
Regressions of alternative measure of private information trading (returns asynchronicity) 
 
 
Dependent Variable
Returns asynchronicity, 
ASYN 
Specification
9.1 
9.2 
9.3 
9.4 
0.277 
0.397 
0.397 
0.441 
Cash flow rights
CASH
(0.00) 
(0.02) 
(0.02) 
(0.00) 
-0.174 
-0.155 
-0.112 
-0.267 
Ownership wedge
WEDGE
(0.05) 
(0.05) 
(0.09) 
(0.01) 
0.115 
0.110 
0.173 
0.145 
Strictness of insider trading laws
INS
(0.00) 
(0.03)   
(0.08) 
(0.10) 
- 
- 
-0.0942   
-0.0840 
Interaction term of ownership 
wedge with strictness of insider 
trading laws
WEDGE×INS
 
 
(0.05) 
(0.15) 
- 
-0.293 
-0.293 
-0.285   
Liquidity
LMV
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.04)   
- 
0.239   
0.244 
0.360 
Log of number of trading periods
LNN
 
(0.02)  
(0.02) 
(0.00) 
Industry dummies
D
No 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Time dummies 
T
No 
yes 
yes 
yes 
- 
- 
- 
0.00338 
Market capitalization
MCAP
 
 
 
(0.00) 
- 
- 
- 
0.357 
Investment opportunities
INV_OPP
 
 
 
(0.00) 
- 
- 
- 
0.222   
Research and development 
expenditures
R&D
 
 
 
(0.25) 
13.230 
560.170 
561.130 
451.650 
Wald test statistics of overall significance
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
Regression R2
0.089 
0.153   
0.153   
0.189 
Number of firms
2,048 
1,964 
1,964 
1,922 
- 
2635.190 
203.620 
2451.770 
Breusch-Pagan Test
 
(0.00) 
2598.85 
(0.00) 
 
This table reports the results of country-random effects regressions (specifications 9.2-9.4): 
c
i
K
k
c
i
k
k
c
c
i
c
c
i
c
i
c
i
Z
INS
WEDGE
INS
WEDGE
CASH
ASYN
ε
δ
γ
β
β
β
α
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
∑
=1
,
3
2
1
*
, 
where c indexes countries and i indexes firms. Variable α is a constant (coefficient is not reported), E[εi
c] = 0, E[εi
c εj
c] ≠ 0 ∀ i and j, and E is the expectation operator.  
Specification 9.1 is based on OLS regression. The dependent variable is ASYN, stock returns asynchronicity, calculated as the logarithmic transformation of one minus 
the coefficient of determination from the regression of firm weekly return on value-weighted local market index, and value-weighted U.S. market index (all returns are 
measured in local currencies). Variable CASH is cash flow rights; WEDGE is ownership wedge; INS is the strictness of insider trading laws; and WEDGE×INS is the 
interaction term of ownership wedge with the strictness of insider trading laws. Control variables, Z’s,  are: liquidity, LMV (specifications 9.2-9.4); log of the number of 
trading periods, LNN (specifications 9.2-9.4); industry dummies, D (specifications 9.2-9.4, coefficients are not reported); time dummies, T (specifications 9.2-9.4, 
coefficients are not reported); market capitalization,  MCAP (specifications 9.4), investment opportunities, INV_OPP (specifications 9.4; it is winsorized at the 1% and 
99% levels); and research and development expenditures, R&D (specifications 9.4). All financial and accounting variables are measured in U.S. dollars. Numbers in 
parentheses are probability levels at which the null hypothesis of zero coefficient can be rejected. Coefficients significant at least at the 10% level (based on two-tailed 
test) are in boldface. Firms that belong to financial industries (SIC 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67) are excluded from the sample. We drop firms from the sample if their measure 
of returns asynchronicity is based on fewer than 30 trading days. If all variables, except R&D expenditures, are available we set R&D expenditures to zero. At the 
bottom of the table we report the results of the  Breusch-Pagan test that the variance of the random effects is zero. In specification 9.1 we report the F-statistics of overall 
significance instead of  Wald test statistics.  
 
