Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177
CENTRE FOR DYNAMIC MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
 
 
* I am indebted to an anonymous referee for invaluable comments. Discussions with Charles 
Nolan, Gary Shea and Andrew Vivian were also very helpful. I thank my thesis examiners John 
Driffill and David Ulph for valuable input. All remaining errors and ambiguities are my own. I 
received generous funding from the Centre for Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis at St. Andrews 
and from Shell Foundation. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and are not 
necessarily shared by Shell Foundation. 
† School of Economics and Finance, Castlecliffe, The Scores, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9AL, 
Scotland, UK. Tel: +44 (0) 1334 462445. E-mail: awt2@st-andrews.ac.uk. Web: www.standrews.ac.uk/cdma/a.trew.html. 
 
CASTLECLIFFE, SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS & FINANCE, UNIVERSITY OF ST ANDREWS, KY16 9AL 
TEL: +44 (0)1334 462445    FAX: +44 (0)1334 462444    EMAIL: cdma@st-and.ac.uk 
 
www.st-and.ac.uk/cdma 
 
 
CDMA07/12 
 
 
Efficiency, Depth and Growth: Quantitative 
Implications of Finance and Growth Theory* 
 
 
Alex Trew†
University of St Andrews 
 
 
JULY 2007 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
We develop a parsimonious finance and endogenous growth model with 
microeconomic frictions in entrepreneurship and a role for credit constraints. 
We demonstrate that though an efficiency-growth relation will always exist, the 
efficiency-depth-growth relation may not. This has implications for the 
connection between the theory and empirics of finance and growth. We go on 
to ask whether the model can account for some historical trends in growth, 
financial depth and financial efficiency for the UK over the period 1850--1913. 
The best model of finance and growth is one that departs from the standard 
depth-growth link. 
 
 
JEL Classification: O11, O16, O40, N13, N23. 
Keywords: Finance and growth, endogenous growth, economic history. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177
1
Introduction
The connection between ﬁnance and economic growth has been the subject of increasing
attention over recent years. The majority of this attention has been on its empirical
aspect, however. Though the implications of the empirical results cannot be taken
without qualiﬁcation, the core messages emanating from this research have been consistent and forceful. It has been shown that the extent of ﬁnancial development in an
economy is related to the level of sustained economic growth.
Work such as King and Levine (1993a) has gone so far as to suggest that we can
draw predictions about the rate of economic growth over ten to thirty years based
on the extent of ﬁnancial depth. Those sorts of implications, and those of succeeding
papers,1 are open to further validation: In short, are they realistic? Driﬃll (2003),
among others, suggests that they are not, partly because of the strength of outliers
(speciﬁcally, the Asian ‘tiger’ economies) in driving the results, and partly because of
the simple implausibility of the predictions. There has been some further dissent,2
but on the whole, as suggested by Beck and de la Torre (2006, p.1), the “causal link
running from ﬁnancial depth to growth has been rather convincingly established.”
At the same time as ﬁnding positive relationships between ﬁnancial development
and economic growth, work such as King and Levine (1993b) seeks to bolster empirical
ﬁndings with the development of theory relating ﬁnancial matters to the determinants of growth. The tacit implication is that the empirical ﬁndings are supported
by, and support, the theoretical results.
But while the empirics typically consider
cross-section regressions on aggregate ﬁnancial depth, the theories relate measures of
ﬁnancial eﬃciency to economic growth. In these theories, there is assumed to be some
wedge between savings and investments which acts to reduce the rate of technological
progress or human capital accumulation by dampening entrepreneurial or educational
activities. In order to consider results from each approach as a single body of research,
the connection between these frictions and the level of aggregate depth then needs to
1See, inter alia, Levine and Zervos (1998), Beck et al. (2000) and Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Levine (2001).
2Such as Manning (2003) and Trew (2006).
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

be made explicit.
In this paper we begin to address the absence in the theoretical literature of any
quantitative, and therefore testable, implications. By developing a model that does
have quantitative implications, we can look at the connection between theoretical and
empirical ﬁndings. We calibrate the model to historical data and draw conclusions on
the quantitative performance of the theory.
It will be argued that balanced growth actually implies that the economy needs
to obtain a constant level of ﬁnancial depth. We will see that greater ﬁnancial eﬃciency, as normally understood, must be associated with lower ﬁnancial depth. But
the theory tells us that growth is increasing in eﬃciency; the data tells us that growth
is increasing in depth. That apparent contradiction can only be resolved if we look
at the connection between eﬃciency and depth. Work such as Rousseau (1998) has
established, theoretically and empirically, a channel through which changes in ﬁnancial
eﬃciency can have a permanent eﬀect on depth. In the context of growth empirics,
Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) have also looked at eﬃciency and depth in isolation,
using a speciﬁc natural experiment. That paper argues that, empirically, growth improvements arose from increases in eﬃciency, not ﬁnancial deepening. More recently,
Rousseau and Wachtel (2006) consider changes in the relationship between depth and
growth, and show that it does not always exist over time. In general, then, the theory
linking eﬃciency to growth cannot without qualiﬁcation be held to support the numerical implications of empirical work based on depth. Growth, eﬃciency and depth
interact in ways not yet fully accounted for in extant ﬁnance and growth theory.
The empirical literature has moved toward increasingly rich analyses. Demirg¨u¸cKunt and Levine (2001) considers the ﬁnance-growth nexus using ﬁrm-level and economywide panel data, while work such as Beck et al. (2005) has looked at the diﬀering impact
of ﬁnancial development on ﬁrm size and growth. A number of papers have also begun to consider factors which determine the eﬃcacy of ﬁnance in inﬂuencing growth.
Beck and Levine (2005) and Bordo and Rousseau (2006) are examples in the context
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

of legal origin. Theoretical work3, on the other hand, has continued to focus on the
juxtaposition of cross-sectional econometrics and theory without explicitly assessing
the quantitative connection between them. There is, in this approach, no calibration
of theoretical results to empirical facts, and no attempted simulation of time paths or
cross sections found in the data.
This paper reduces some of the key mechanisms at work in a number of prominent
theories of ﬁnance and growth to a single model that can be calibrated to data. The
simplicity of the resulting model reﬂects the stripped-down nature of our approach.
The intention is to develop quantitative implications which are transparent enough to
allow an interpretation in terms of historical growth paths.
We ﬁrst provide in Section 2 a brief survey of a number of key theoretical contributions, and argue that they can be considered in the context of a small number of
core mechanisms. We develop in Section 3 a simple ﬁnance and endogenous growth
model in the manner of King and Levine (1993b). Section 4 then uses this representative model to conduct a number of quantitative tests using historical series for growth,
depth, eﬃciency and TFP. Section 5 concludes with our main ﬁndings.
2
The Prevailing Mechanics of Finance and Growth
Theory
Our intention is to reduce the most commonly cited ﬁnance and growth theories down
to their core, laying bare the central mechanisms through which ﬁnance is said to
inﬂuence the rate of economic growth. We do not derive an empirically motivated
theory; we intend only to reﬂect the prevailing state of thought in ﬁnance and growth
theory. In doing this, we will then be in a position to test our representative theory in
the light of its implications for time-series growth paths.
The emergence of the new growth literature has placed the accumulation of technology or human capital at the heart of the growth process. It has become straightforward
3With the clear exception of Townsend and Ueda (2006).
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

to introduce this or that friction into the intermediate, quality-enhancing sector and so
demonstrate that there can be real consequences for the long-run growth of an economy. For ﬁnancial matters to have an impact on growth, we need to introduce frictions
between those who save and those who wish to invest. Such frictions motivate the
existence of specialised ﬁnancial structures, the eﬃcacy of which enters into the rate of
human capital or technology accumulation and so has an indirect impact on the level
of sustained growth.
Capasso (2004) and Levine (2005) go through in some detail the nature of a good
deal of the theoretical literature. Microeconomic frictions arise out of the imposition of
at least incomplete but also, more typically, asymmetrical information. Wright (2002)
has also placed asymmetric information at the heart of the historical ﬁnance and growth
narrative.
King and Levine (1993b) is the original ﬁnance and growth model with adverse
selection, in which entrepreneurs are screened by a ﬁnancial intermediary to determine
their quality.
The screening is costly, and the chosen entrepreneurs develop better
quality intermediate goods with some known probability. In Bose and Cothren (1996),
banks can choose potential creditors with either a costly screening technology or by
designing a separating contract, or by a mix of the two. Models that motivate ﬁnancial
structures by the presence of moral hazard include Blackburn and Hung (1998) and
Morales (2003). In each there is a post-contract incentive for agents to either deceive
or shirk.
In addition to asymmetric information, the imposition of a simple credit constraint
has been shown to play an important role, though this aspect is only rarely emphasised.
Aghion et al. (2005) demonstrate that imperfect creditor protection can determine the
availability of capital to potential entrepreneurs. This can have a knock-on eﬀect on
growth and, in that model, convergence to the technological frontier. Acemoglu and
Zillibotti (1997) develop a model in which minimum investment requirements mean
that agents cannot always insure against the risk involved in investing in high-return
projects. A series of positive shocks can cause ﬁnancial development and economic
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

development to take-oﬀ. The importance of ‘access to ﬁnance’ has formed the backbone
of recent World Bank research in ﬁnance and development. This policy emphasis has
not yet been reﬂected in an analytical synthesis, though Beck and de la Torre (2007)
do suggest some potential directions for future research.
We can draw together some key aspects of the mechanisms underlying predominant ﬁnance and growth theories. Something akin to entrepreneurship drives the accumulation of either human capital or greater technologies. The eﬃciency with which
the motive to innovate or accumulate translates into actual growth is determined by
the ease with which entrepreneurs can obtain ﬁnance for their risky projects. With
asymmetric information in the ﬁnancial sector, this eﬃciency is dependent upon the
sophistication of the ﬁnancial technologies such as screening and monitoring. Further,
credit constraints can inhibit the ability of agents to access the ﬁnancial market. As the
economy becomes richer, so it can aﬀord those ﬁnancial structures that better facilitate
higher economic growth.
A recent analysis is that of Townsend and Ueda (2006), which builds on the theory
of Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990) to include transitional behaviour. They develop
a dynamic general equilibrium model of an economy with evolving levels of ﬁnancial
depth and economic inequality. Financial structures exist because of the imposition
of ﬁxed and marginal costs to exchange; i.e., the information problem is not explicit.
They compare the quantitative implications of the model to data from Thailand for
the period 1976-1997.
To reiterate, the purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the dangers of drawing
conclusions from arguments which omit the sort of direct connection between data and
theory propounded by Townsend and Ueda (op. cit.). A theory of economic growth
and ﬁnancial eﬃciency, however it is motivated, cannot be held to support, and nor
can it be supported by, empirical relationships between measures of aggregate ﬁnancial
depth and economic growth unless connections between depth and eﬃciency are spelled
out.
In Section 3 we develop a model in the spirit of King and Levine (1993b) which links
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

ﬁnancial matters to economic growth. The model includes: A role for entrepreneurship
in the accumulation of human capital, as facilitated by the existence of an intermediating sector; asymmetric information between intermediaries and entrepreneurs in the
form of adverse selection; and constraints on an able agent’s access to ﬁnance. We
invoke a model in which entrepreneurs wish to obtain ﬁnance for investment in their
own human capital, rather than for an addition to technology. It will be clear that
for our purposes the diﬀerence of each approach is minimal. Using this model, we
embark upon some quantitative tests. We draw out the numerical implications of our
representative model using historical series for ﬁnancial depth, TFP, economic growth
and a proxy for eﬃciency.
3
A Representative Model of Finance and Growth
The purpose of this section is to outline a simple version of an endogenous growth
model that can capture the principle mechanics of signiﬁcant theoretical models. We
calibrate the model to historical data for the UK and so trace out the implied ‘transition
path’ for ﬁnancial eﬃciency over the period of the industrial revolution.
The mechanism by which ﬁnance aﬀects long-run growth follows the trend suggested by the theories discussed in Section 2: Ever since King and Levine (1993b),
the majority of theories linking ﬁnance to growth revolve around entrepreneurship and
either human capital accumulation or technological progress. We adopt that perspective also. In addition, we assume that there can be arbitrary credit constraints. By
appropriately calibrating this model, we will be able, in Section 4, to consider the theoretical relationship between depth, eﬃciency and growth in the light of predominant
econometric results.
3.1
Financial Intermediation and Growth
In the model of King and Levine (1993b) intermediaries are eﬀectively venture capitalists that have the technology necessary to screen potential entrepreneurs who are
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

then employed and given funds to run a research project. The fruit of such labour
is an addition to the stock of knowledge (speciﬁcally, via a quality-ladders setup `a la
Grossman and Helpman, 1991). Post-screening, the intermediary knows with certainty
the ability of the applicant. There is no costly eﬀort (so no moral hazard), and the
intermediary market is perfectly competitive.4 Reductions in the cost of screening or
in the tax on intermediary proﬁts thus increase the eﬃciency of the ﬁnancial sector,
increase the rate of technological progress and so increase the rate of long-run growth.
On top of this cost, we allow for the existence of simple credit constraints: An agent
is not necessarily able to enter the ﬁnancial market.
3.1.1
Outline
In this model ﬁrms demand physical capital and human capital. We have a continuum
of agents in each household of total mass one, and a random distribution of type within
each. If we assume a large number of households then in the aggregate we can work
with the average distribution of type within a given household.
So, on average, a
proportion ϕ1 has no ability to acquire human capital whatsoever, a proportion ϕ2 has
low ability Λ′ and the remainder, proportion ϕ3 = 1−ϕ1 −ϕ2, has high ability Λ > Λ′.
It is important that able agents do not know their own level of ability, only that they
have some.5 Agents with no ability take household responsibility for selling physical
capital to ﬁrms. Only agents with high ability have the potential to develop human
capital; intermediaries wish to screen potential entrepreneurs before funding them. We
will assume that intermediaries always prefer screening to blind selection.
We suppose that only a proportion, λ, of the agents with some ability can access the
ﬁnancial market; this proportion is independent of agent type. All agents with nonzero
4A related model in Trew (2007) extends that presented here to include moral hazard considerations.
That work also shows that we can model related connections between depth, eﬃciency and growth within
a quality-ladders framework with imperfect competition in intermediate sectors. The usefulness of such a
model for quantitative testing is limited by the additional complexity, however (simply put, there are too
many free parameters). We therefore restrict our attention to the model in which quantitative mechanisms
are most transparent.
5If agents knew their level of ability, given that the screening technology of the intermediary identiﬁes
ability with precision, and given also that agents know this, there would be no reason for those with less
than high-ability to apply.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

ability who also have access to the credit market apply to a ﬁnancial intermediary to
be screened. Those that are rejected do not contribute to household income. Those
that are accepted are consequently funded by the intermediary to acquire education
or conduct research, becoming human capital with ﬁxed probability β. In the case of
education this might reﬂect the likelihood of not dropping-out; in the case of research
this might reﬂect the probability of useful innovation. Either way, we obtain the same
result.
Those that fail to develop human capital contribute nothing to household
income, those that do develop human capital are consequently employed by ﬁrms and
enter the production function as human capital. In the event that the agent succeeds
in acquiring human capital it is the researcher that owns the human capital, paying a
proportion t of income from human capital to intermediaries. The intermediary thus
sets t∗to maximise expected proﬁts.
3.1.2
Firms
Firms use human capital, H, and physical capital, K, as inputs to the production
process, Yt = AKα
t H1−α
t
.6 Each ﬁrm maximises proﬁts, πt = Yt −rKt −hHt, where
each takes the rates of return on physical capital, r, and human capital, h as given:
r = α(Yt/Kt) and h = (1 −α)(Yt/Ht). We can use the equation for h to obtain the
ﬁrm’s demand for human capital, Ht = [(1 −α)Yt]/h, which, upon substitution into
the production function, obtains a form of the familiar Ak endogenous growth setup,
Yt =
"
A
(1 −α)
h
1−α# 1
α
Kt.
(1)
Once we have found a relationship between the rates of return on human and physical
capital, we can treat this model as one in which externalities to production are just
enough to generate constant returns and ‘Ak’ growth. Following Barro and Sala-iMartin (2004), we can then think of K as something like a proxy for a composite
6In order to more faithfully reﬂect King and Levine (1993b), we might have thought of entrepreneurs
adding to the stock of knowledge via a compound coeﬃcient of technological progress of the form Yt =
A ˜A1−α
t
Kα
t . This diﬀerence would not matter for the purposes of our simple numerical simulation.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

capital variable. In doing so, we assume that the H : K ratio is constant. As in most
of the extant theory, transitional dynamics will not exist here.
3.1.3
Intermediaries
The intermediary incurs the cost f(H) > 0 to screen agents for ability and funds
successful applicants to acquire human capital at cost x(H) > 0.
Note that these
costs are not necessarily invariant to the level of human capital. We make the initial
assumption that f′ > 0 and x′ > 0, i.e., that the costs of intermediation are increasing
in the size of the demand for human capital. So both the outlay required to fund the
acquisition of human capital, x, and the cost of screening candidate acquirers of human
capital, f, is increasing in the level of human capital – a reasonable assumption if we
imagine that the higher the level of human capital aspired to, the more costly it is to
both fund and identify suitably able agents. We will consider departures from this in
Section 3.2.1.
It is assumed to be better for intermediaries to screen agents than to accept the
average. We also require that it is not feasible for households to fund the amount x(H)
from their own resources. For a given agent, expected intermediary proﬁts will be the
probability-weighted incomes and expenditures. The probability that an agent who
applies will be of low ability is ϕ2/(1 −ϕ1), in which case only the screening cost is
expended. The probability of successfully developing human capital from high-ability
agents and thus obtaining a rent from him is β(1 −ϕ1 −ϕ2)/(1 −ϕ2). If we assume
competition then the expected intermediary proﬁt is zero,
E(π) = λβ
1 −ϕ1 −ϕ2
1 −ϕ1

[thH −x(H) −f(H)] +
+ λ(1 −β)
1 −ϕ1 −ϕ2
1 −ϕ1

[−x(H) −f(H)] +
+ λ

ϕ2
1 −ϕ1

[−f(H)] = 0.
(2)
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

If we specify x(H) = ηxhH and f(H) = ηfhH,7 where ηx > 0 and ηf > 0 are the
cost parameters of intermediation, then we obtain the following expression for the fee
charged by the intermediary,
t∗= 1
β

ηx +

1 −ϕ1
1 −ϕ1 −ϕ2

ηf

.
(3)
Equation (3) is increasing in the costs of ﬁnancial intermediation, ηf and ηx, and in
the share of low ability agents, ϕ2, and decreasing in both the probability of human
capital creation, β and the share of high ability agents, ϕ3. So t∗reﬂects the size of
the wedge between those who wish to save and those who wish to borrow ﬁnance.
3.1.4
Households
The cost λt∗hH is borne by consuming households. The household receives income
from physical and human capital, however, at the rates r and h respectively. Using
equation (3), the household budget constraint will thus be the familiar ct + ˙kt =
rkt +λτ(1−t∗)hH. We mirror King and Levine here by incorporating a tax on income
from innovation, where 1 −τ is the tax rate applied to household income from human
capital. Households maximise the discounted present value of future consumption,
max
ct
U =
Z ∞
0
e−ρtu(ct)dt,
(4)
where u(ct) is the instantaneous utility function. If we assume CES preferences of the
form u(ct) = (c1−θ
t
−1)/(1 −θ), then we obtain the standard Euler equation governing
the growth rate of consumption, ˙ct/ct = θ−1(r −ρ).
7This means that, simply, we require (ϕ2 + ϕ3)ηf < ϕ2ηx for the case in which intermediaries always
choose to screen. We will consider potential generalisation of these functions in Section 3.2.1.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

3.1.5
Equilibrium Growth
In equilibrium we require that the net return on capital is equal to the net return on
human capital, i.e., that r = λτ(1 −t∗)h.8 From the production function, equation (1)
we have the following expression for r,
r =
"
A
(1 −α)
h
1−α# 1
α
.
(5)
By the equilibrium ﬁnancial intermediation condition, h = r/[λτ(1−t∗)], we may solve
for the interest rate,
r = A[λτ(1 −α)(1 −t∗)]1−α.
(6)
Hence, we have a simple closed-form solution for the equilibrium growth rate,
γ = 1
θ

A[λτ(1 −α)(1 −t∗)]1−α −ρ
	
.
(7)
An increase in the eﬃciency of ﬁnancial intermediation, by reducing ηf or ηx ceteris
paribus results in an increase in the equilibrium growth rate by reducing the cost of
intermediation, t∗. So there is simply a wedge in between what ﬁrms pay for human
capital and what agents receive, where the signiﬁcance of this wedge reﬂects the efﬁciency of ﬁnancial intermediation. This is the main theoretical result of King and
Levine (1993b).
3.2
Financial Depth and Eﬃciency
We can use this simple model to draw-out a preliminary analysis of ﬁnance and growth
relationships. As noted above, in empirical estimations, measures of ﬁnancial depth are
typically used. By depth is meant some ratio of ﬁnancial throughput to ﬁnal output.
We can think, for example, of receipts to the ﬁnancial intermediary as a proportion of
8This is akin to the argument in Tsiddon (1992): “I assume that each ﬁnancial intermediary can provide
a risk-free return to lenders that is equal to or greater than the risk-free rate of return individuals can earn
in the market for physical capital. Competition guarantees that each ﬁnancial intermediary has zero proﬁt.”
p. 305
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

output, and deﬁne depth, Dt, as,
Dt =
λφtthH
AKα
t H1−α
t
,
(8)
where φt = β

1−ϕ1−ϕ2
1−ϕ1

. Using the expression for the return on human capital, this
reduces to simply,
Dt = λ1−αφtA2

t∗
[τ(1 −t∗)]α

(1 −α)1−αψα,
(9)
where ψ = Ht
Kt . Since we know that Ht and Kt will always grow at the same rate, γ,
their ratio will be constant. Plainly, with this measure ﬁnancial depth is increasing in
both ηf and ηx since both serve to increase the perfectly competitive level of t∗, the
cost of ﬁnancial intermediation to agents. In other words, depth is here decreasing in
the level of ﬁnancial eﬃciency. Before going on to consider this further let us look at
another measure of depth: The outgoings of intermediation as a proportion of output,
Df,x,
Df,x = λ1−αφx,fA2

1
[τ(1 −t∗)]α

(1 −α)1−αψα,
(10)
where now φx,f =
h
1−ϕ1−ϕ2
1−ϕ1

ηx + ηf
i
. Of course, using the expression for t∗we have
that φx,f = β

1−ϕ1−ϕ2
1−ϕ1

t∗= φtt∗, so Dt = Df,x. Since the intermediary sector is perfectly competitive, the two measures of depth are identical: Outgoings as a proportion
of ﬁnal output is the same as incomings as a proportion of ﬁnal output. It is clear that
whichever measure we use (or even a sum of debits and credits to intermediaries as a
proportion of output), we will arrive at the same eﬃciency-depth connection.9
Let us consider the ﬁrst measure of depth, Dt. Equation (9) clariﬁes a tension between the empirical and theoretical ﬁndings of ﬁnance and growth. In the extant theory, increases in ﬁnancial eﬃciency, however deﬁned, imply greater economic growth.
9As mentioned above, we could extend this model to one that incorporates moral hazard and work with
measures of monitoring costs, etc., as proxies for ﬁnancial eﬃciency. We wish to obtain relatively clear
quantitative implications of this representative model, however, so we focus on only a minimum of variables
for ﬁnancial eﬃciency.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

But those increases in eﬃciency, taken alone, also imply a reduction in ﬁnancial depth
along a balanced growth path. Yet empirically, the level of ﬁnancial depth is typically
taken as a proxy for ﬁnancial development, and regressed against estimates of economic
growth. A positive contemporaneous (and sometime leading) coeﬃcient on ﬁnancial
depth is typically found. The theory and empirics of ﬁnance and growth are, from this
standpoint, apparently incongruous.
Although we typically assume that estimations using depth are meant as proxies
for estimations of ﬁnancial eﬃciency, these ﬁndings are not necessarily contradictory.
Increased depth might result from other factors that also cause growth. The problem
arises where we place theories of eﬃciency alongside the empirics of depth. Furthermore, there is a theoretical literature (which we will come onto below) linking increases
in eﬃciency to increases in the size of the ﬁnancial sector (though not in the conﬁnes
of balanced-growth theories). So we should suspect that there is something missing
from this representative model.
There is another possibility that has been closed oﬀin this model which might help
us to reconcile these issues: The severity of credit constraints might be a function of
ﬁnancial eﬃciency. Increases in eﬃciency, if they serve to suﬃciently increase access
to credit, might then yield a combination of higher growth and higher depth. We will
come on to this possibility in Section 3.2.2.
It might seem like we could also relate measures of ﬁnancial eﬃciency with technological progress, via the coeﬃcient A. As it stands, we have human capital-based
endogenous growth; the rate of accumulation reﬂects the costs of ﬁnancial intermediation. Alternatively, we could have more explicitly considered technological progress
within this set-up (see footnote 6); but this would not serve to modify the requirements
for balanced growth.
Within this framework, the parameter A captures exogenous
TFP; endogenous growth, reﬂecting the ﬁnancial eﬃciency conditions, is captured in
the accumulation of human capital.
Before coming to consider the link between eﬃciency and depth, we must consider
how robust this ﬁnding is to alternative functional forms for ﬁnancial costs.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

3.2.1
Robustness to Alternative Functional Forms
We have developed what is, in essence, a very stripped-down model of endogenous
growth. We could have been more general, however, in specifying the nature of the
ﬁnancial costs incurred by the intermediary. Suppose that we specify f(H) = h˜ηf(H)
and x(H) = h˜ηx(H); so now f and x can be any function of H. We might consider
that ﬁnancial costs rise or fall as a proportion of hH as the economy grows. Using
equation (2), competitive intermediaries set t∗to maximise expected proﬁts,
t∗=
1
βH

˜ηx(H) +

1 −ϕ1
1 −ϕ1 −ϕ2

˜ηf(H)

.
(11)
Quite clearly, by equation (7), balanced growth is not necessarily obtained in this
set-up. For balanced growth, we require t∗to be constant in H, i.e.,
˜η′
x(H) −(H)−1˜ηx(H) +

1 −ϕ1
1 −ϕ1 −ϕ2

[˜η′
f(H) −(H)−1˜ηf(H)] = 0,
(12)
which, of course, is satisﬁed when we let ˜ηf(H) = ηfH and ˜ηx(H) = ηxH. If this
is not the case, to recover balanced growth we could relate the size of the economy
to endogenously changing levels of access to ﬁnance, so λ = ˜λ(H). We would require
∂˜λ
∂H =
˜λ
(1−t∗)
∂t∗
∂H ; in other words, increases in ﬁnancial eﬃciency (reductions in t∗) over
time must, for balanced growth, be matched by reductions in access to ﬁnance. This
is the opposite to what we would expect, and moves us further away from reconciling
the eﬃciency-depth connection.
An alternative would be to specify ˜ηf(H) and ˜ηx(H) to oﬀset one another in
their impact on t∗, such that, for all H, (H)−1˜ηx(H) −˜η′
x(H) =

1−ϕ1
1−ϕ1−ϕ2

[˜η′
f(H) −
(H)−1˜ηf(H)]. The impact on depth is then also neutral, since t∗is simply invariant
to H in whichever measure of depth we use. There seems no good empirical justiﬁcation for doing this, so we concentrate on the simpler set-up with ˜ηf(H) = ηfH and
˜ηx(H) = ηxH.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

In short, balanced growth, ceteris paribus, requires a total ﬁnancial cost of proportionate form; balanced growth implies constant ﬁnancial depth.10
3.2.2
Eﬃciency, Depth and Access
Let us return to the case with ˜ηf(H) = ηfH and ˜ηx(H) = ηxH. Suppose that the
proportion of agents that can access credit is a function of a measure of ﬁnancial
eﬃciency, say λ = λf(ηf) with λ′
f < 0. Rousseau (1998) establishes a theoretical link
between the degree of adverse selection in ﬁnancial intermediation and ﬁnancial depth
by showing that it can determine the size of the pool of applicants. This channel is
similarly developed in Aghion et al. (2005), where the degree of creditor protection
(taken to be a proxy of ﬁnancial eﬃciency) is related to credit constraints, and so
also to the size of the ﬁnancial sector. In the context of growth theory, Greenwood
and Jovanovic (1990) and Aghion and Bolton (1997) demonstrate channels through
which greater ﬁnancial sophistication eventually yields greater use of ﬁnancial services.
Rousseau (1998) also supports this relationship empirically, using measures of interest
rate spreads to proxy ﬁnancial eﬃciency. Using unobservable components models, it
is found that a 1% reduction in the loan-deposit spread is associated with increases of
between 1.7 and 3.8% in long-run measures of ﬁnancial depth.
For the purposes of this paper, let us simply posit a relationship between ﬁnancial
eﬃciency and access to ﬁnance.
We can then consider, in quantitative terms, the
importance of this linkage in reconciling eﬃciency-depth considerations of ﬁnance and
growth. Using (9) with λ = λf(ηf) we have,
∂Dt
∂ηf
= Φ[(1 −t∗)λf]−α

t∗(1 −α)∂λf
∂ηf
+

1 + α(1 −t∗)−1
λf
∂t∗
∂ηf

,
(13)
where Φ = τ −αφA2(1 −α)(ψ)α. For depth to be increasing in eﬃciency, we wish to
satisfy ∂Dt
∂ηf < 0,
t∗(1 −α)∂λf
∂ηf
< −

1 + α(1 −t∗)−1
λf
∂t∗
∂ηf
.
(14)
10There is an analogous requirement for balanced growth in a quality-ladders setup (see Trew, 2007).
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

The eﬀect of ηf on λ has to be suﬃciently negative to outweigh the upward pressure of
ηf on t∗. By evaluating ∂t∗/∂ηf, and expressing the condition in terms of an elasticity,
we obtain,
ηf
λf
∂λf
∂ηf
< −
ηf
φtt∗(1 −α)

1 + α(1 −t∗)−1
.
(15)
Of course, this does not yield a direct comparison to the empirical relationship found
in papers such as Rousseau (1998). We can think of changing ηf as changes in the
interest rate spread, because t∗is essentially a wedge between what savers receive and
what borrowers pay. But λf is not depth; inequality (15) is the condition under which
increases in eﬃciency also increase depth via the credit channel. The elasticity of depth
with respect to eﬃciency is, however,
ηf
Dt
∂Dt
∂ηf
= ηf
λf
∂λf
∂ηf
(1 −α) + ηf
t∗
∂t∗
∂ηf

1 + α(1 −t∗)−1
.
(16)
This equation makes clear the conﬂicting tendencies of greater eﬃciency to both reduce
the costs of intermediation and increase the pool of credit applicants. The overall eﬀect
of changes in eﬃciency on growth are monotonic; the eﬀect on depth is ambiguous. If
increases in eﬃciency cause large increases in the applicant pool relative to decreases
in intermediary costs then eﬃciency and depth will both be positively associated with
growth. If the eﬀect on intermediary costs dominates, however, this relation will not
hold. Though an eﬃciency-growth relation will always exist, the standard eﬃciencydepth-growth relation may not.
We can now proceed to consider the quantitative implications of our representative
model in the light of empirical estimates of the eﬀect of ﬁnancial eﬃciency on depth.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

4
Quantitative Implications of the Representative Model
We wish to calibrate our representative model and use historical measures of economic
growth, ﬁnancial depth, total factor productivity and ﬁnancial eﬃciency (such as loandeposit spreads) to tests its explanatory power under various assumptions. Using such
data, we can consider whether our candidate ﬁnance and growth model holds up: How
closely can it capture actual changes in growth, eﬃciency and depth? We can also
consider the importance of the eﬃciency-depth mechanism suggested in Section 3.2.2.
Such data requirements necessitate that we restrict our focus to a relatively short
historical period. For the UK we look at the period 1850-1913. Detail of data sources
and construction is given in Appendix Section A. Data for growth and TFP can be
obtained with conﬁdence from Crafts and Harley (1992) and Crafts (1995). A series for
ﬁnancial depth across 1880–1929 is also available, as in Rousseau and Wachtel (1998).
We use this data to estimate the trend rate of change in the level of ﬁnancial depth
prior to 1880. Figures 1 and 2 depict the series we use.
Figure 1: (a) Trend Economic Growth and (b) TFP
Clearly there is a great deal of change in economic growth, even when we extract
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

Figure 2: Financial Depth
the trend component. Over the period, the general trend in growth is downwards,
however.
The trend in TFP, however, is plainly upwards.
Financial depth is also
trending upwards over the period. This runs against what we would expect to be the
case given the trend in growth. Since the Rousseau and Wachtel (1998) series for depth
begins in 1880, we cannot be certain about the level of depth prior to 1880. Instead
we note that the trend rate of change in depth appears to be stable; we depict three
potential trends for depth: First, using the high rate of change from 1880–1890; second,
using the lower rate of change across 1880–1913; third, an average of the ﬁrst two. This
approach is supported by data in Collins (1984), which covers English banking for the
period 1840–80. The trend in the ratio of Commercial Bank Deposits to Industrial
Output using this data is very close the estimate using the low rate of change in Figure
2 – details are in the appendix. Of course, these data are not fully compatible with
that in Rousseau and Wachtel (1998), so we take them only as indicative support for
our method.
There are only a few options for a ﬁnancial eﬃciency measure over this period in
the UK. We construct two proxies here: The ﬁrst is a loan-deposit spread at the Bank
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

of England derived from Mitchell (1988); the second is the proﬁtability of the London
Westminster Bank using data in Gregory (1936). Details of data sources and their
manipulation are in the appendix. Broadly speaking, we suppose that the interest rate
spread is negatively related to ﬁnancial eﬃciency and that the bank proﬁtability is
positively related to ﬁnancial eﬃciency. Both measures allow us to consider, in the
manner of Rousseau (1998), the trend in ﬁnancial eﬃciency. Figure 3 depicts the raw
series and the Hodrick-Prescott trend. We will be using the trend series as our measures
of eﬃciency.
Figure 3: (a) Bank Loan-Deposit Spread and (b) London Westminster Proﬁtability
Each of our candidate ﬁnancial eﬃciency measures in Figure 3 suggests a similar
trend: The Bank loan-deposit spread increased over the period; the net proﬁtability of
the London Westminster Bank fell. Further, the cyclical movements around this trend
match up in a few periods. In other words, both of our proxies suggest that ﬁnancial
eﬃciency fell over the period in question. Of course, we are making the assumption
that ﬁnancial eﬃciency, as we mean it in the theory, is positively related to bank
proﬁtability and inversely related to bank spreads.
The implied trend in eﬃciency
might seem surprising; but we shall see that this ﬁts in to our representative model of
ﬁnance and growth.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

We can now conduct a number of quantitative experiments. First, can we match
growth rates given observed changes in ﬁnancial depth and ﬁnancial eﬃciency? Second,
can we capture the trend in depth by calibrating the model to observed eﬃciency
estimates? In doing this, we can also consider the role of a positive eﬃciency-depth
relationship in the model extension of Section 3.2.2.
4.1
Can we match growth rates given observed depth and
eﬃciency changes?
Let us deﬁne the coeﬃcient of technological progress as A = a ˆA where a is some
constant and ˆA is our estimate of TFP. Similarly, let the cost of screening be ηf = f1ˆηf1
where f1 is some constant and ˆηf1 is our estimate of ﬁnancial eﬃciency from the
Bank loan-deposit spread. The second measure of eﬃciency, the London Westminster
proﬁtability, should be inversely related to the cost ηf; so let ηf = f2(¯ηf2 −ˆηf2) where
ˆηf2) is our second measure of eﬃciency and where f2 and ¯ηf2 are constants. In order
to match observed changes in depth, we change the credit parameter λ according to,
ˆλt =

ˆD−1
t φt
ta ˆA2
t

ˆt∗
t
[τ(1 −ˆt∗
t )]α

(1 −α)1−αψα

1
α−1
,
(17)
where ˆt∗evolves according to equation (3). We also require that ˆλt ∈(0, 1]. It should be
noted that this is the opposite to the standard depth-growth relation; here changes in
ﬁnancial eﬃciency are associated with opposite changes in depth according to equation
(16) with ∂λf
∂ηf = 0.
Our indirect estimates of the credit constraint come from estimated changes in ﬁnancial depth which, combined with our estimates for TFP and eﬃciency, will generate
an implied rate of growth, according to,
˜γ = 1
θ
n
a ˆAt[ˆλt(1 −α)(1 −ˆt∗
t )]1−α −ρ
o
.
(18)
We choose parameters a, f1, f2, β, ϕ1 and ϕ2 in order to obtain a best ﬁt and
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

set α, θ and ρ to standard values. The value for ¯ηf2 is simply ﬁxed at some number
greater than max{ˆηf2}. For these simulations we will let τ = 1. The calibration for
each simulation is given in Table 1.11
Table 1: Calibrations for the Model of Growth and Depth
I
II
III
IV
capital share
α
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
elasticity of substitution
θ
5
5
5
5
subjective discount rate
ρ
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
likelihood of success
β
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
proportion of zero ability
ϕ1
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
proportion of low ability
ϕ2
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
coeﬃcient on TFP
a
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
coeﬃcient on screening
f1
2.5
.
2.5
.
coeﬃcient on screening
f2
.
1.5
.
1.5
screening parameter
¯ηf2
.
0.02
.
0.02
parameter on ﬁnancial investment
ηx
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
credit constraint parameter
λ
.
.
0.01
0.01
Figure 4 shows the model implications for growth using, in panel (a), the Bank
measure for eﬃciency (Calibration I) and, in panel (b), the proﬁtability measure (Calibration II). We use the 1880–1913 trend for ﬁnancial depth back to 1850 since this is
closest to the trend suggested in Collins (1984).
The model performance in matching growth rates is generally good. The eﬃciency
measure derived from the Bank rate spread performs well over the period, capturing the
downward trend in growth and some of the cyclical movement. The measure derived
from the London Westminster Bank proﬁtability performs less well; implied cycles in
growth are opposite to those observed in the data. But the implied growth rate does
trend downwards. Overall, to some extent we succeed in capturing changes in trend
growth.
This is not despite but because of the presence of a negative relationship
between ﬁnancial eﬃciency and depth in our model. As noted above, the trend in
depth over the period was upwards, while that of growth was downwards.
So the
11The model implications are generally robust to changes in parameter values. Though we choose values
here to best ﬁt the levels of growth, simulated movements in growth and depth are very robust.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

Figure 4: Modelling Economic Growth with Financial Eﬃciency and Depth
positive relationship between ﬁnancial eﬃciency and growth holds up; that between
ﬁnancial depth and growth does not. Recent work by Rousseau and Wachtel (2006)
has also suggested that this may indeed be the case.
4.2
Do we match ﬁnancial depth given observed eﬃciency?
We can make the point about the relationship with ﬁnancial depth more clearly by
deriving the levels of ﬁnancial depth which are implied by observed eﬃciency and
TFP values. Using equation (9), we can solve for implied depth from estimates of
TFP and eﬃciency. Figure 5 shows results for the Bank loan-deposit spread (panel
(a), Calibration III in Table 1) and the London Westminster proﬁtability (panel (b),
Calibration IV ). Clearly, our estimates of eﬃciency and TFP enable us to match the
data on depth very closely.
Suppose instead that we impose a relationship between eﬃciency and the credit
constraint that would result in a positive depth-growth relationship.
Consider the
model in which the credit constraint is determined endogenously, as in Section 3.2.2.
We wish to consider the elasticity of depth with respect to ﬁnancial eﬃciency, equation
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

Figure 5: Modelling Financial Depth with Eﬃciency and TFP
(16). By imposing this relationship, we capture the channel through which increased
eﬃciency leads to increased depth via its eﬀect on the credit constraint.
But it turns out that we cannot simultaneously match a meaningful negative elasticity12 between depth and eﬃciency while also matching growth rates. This should
not be surprising. The ﬁt between the model and the data in Figure 5 is good. When
we impose a very diﬀerent relationship between eﬃciency and depth, we are able to
match estimates of neither depth nor growth. We are led to conclude that a model in
which we do not impose that eﬃciency and depth are positively correlated is the one
which best ﬁts the data.
5
Conclusion
We have found some support for the view that ﬁnancial eﬃciency plays a part in
the level of trend growth in an economy. We developed a representative ﬁnance and
growth model incorporating such an eﬃciency-growth channel and showed that its
numerical implications are broadly in line with the data.
The interaction between
12I.e., one even barely in accordance with estimations such as those of Rousseau (1998).
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

growth, eﬃciency and depth is less straightforward, however. The theoretical model
allowed us to identify the channel through which increases in eﬃciency can increase
depth at the same time as growth; but we have also seen that this relies upon crediteﬀects dominating. The quantitative ﬁndings of our model support the view that a
positive depth-growth link is absent.
How can we reconcile this with the consistent ﬁnding that depth is associated with
increased growth? It may be that the ﬁnance and growth relationship is not a static
one over time, but that it changes as the economy develops or for other, exogenous,
reasons. The strength of the credit-channel, through which increases in eﬃciency lead
to increases in depth, might simply be insuﬃcient over the current period of study.
But the fact that this is so clearly the case suggests that empirical estimations of the
depth-growth link, across time and across countries, might not be the best foundation
from which to draw policy implications.
We have not presented an econometric model of ﬁnance and growth. Were we to do
so, we may indeed ﬁnd some positive correlation between depth and growth. But within
the conﬁnes of a theory of endogenous growth, we can only draw conclusions from
relationships which are deﬁned within the model. The connection between eﬃciency
and depth must be explicit. The best model of ﬁnance and growth is one which departs
from the depth-causes-growth result common in most empirical literature. Reconciling
the diﬀerence between what econometric results consistently ﬁnd, and what is possible
in a model of ﬁnance and growth, is a subject for future research.
References
Acemoglu, D. and Zillibotti, F. (1997). ‘Was Prometheus Unbound By Chance? Risk,
Diversiﬁcation and Growth’. Journal of Political Economy, 105(5):709–51.
Aghion, P. and Bolton, P. (1997). ‘A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Development’. Review of Economic Studies, 64(1):151–72.
Aghion, P., Howitt, P., and Mayer-Foulkes, D. (2005). ‘The Eﬀect of Financial Develop24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

ment on Convergence: Theory and Evidence’. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120(1). 173-222.
Bairoch, P. (1982). ‘International industrialization levels from 1750 to 1980’. Journal
of European Economic History, 11(1):269–334.
Barro, R. J. and Sala-i-Martin, X. (2004). Economic Growth. MIT Press, 2nd edition.
Beck, T. and de la Torre, A. (2007).
‘The Basic Analytics of Access to Financial
Services’. Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments, 16(2):79–117.
Beck, T., Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt, A., Laeven, L., and Levine, R. (2005). ‘Finance, Firm Size,
and Growth’. Policy Research Working Paper Series. The World Bank. No. 3485.
Beck, T. and Levine, R. (2005). ‘Legal Institutions and Financial Development’, in
M´enard, C. and Shirley, M. M. (eds.). Handbook of New Institutional Economics.
Springer.
Beck, T., Levine, R., and Loayza, N. (2000). ‘Finance and the Sources of Growth’.
Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1–2):261–300.
Blackburn, K. and Hung, V. T. Y. (1998). ‘A Theory of Growth, Financial Development
and Trade’. Economica, 65(1):107–24.
Bordo, M. S. and Rousseau, P. L. (2006). ‘Legal-Political Factors and the Historical
Evolution of the Finance-Growth Link’. NBER Working Paper No. 12035.
Bose, N. and Cothren, R. (1996).
‘Equilibrium Loan Contracts and Endogenous
Growth in the Presence of Asymmetric Information’.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 38(3):363–76.
Capasso, S. (2004). ‘Financial Markets, Development and Growth: Tales of Information
Asymmetry’. Journal of Economic Surveys, 18(3):267–92.
Collins, M. (1984). ‘The Business of Banking: English Bank Balance Sheets, 1840–80’.
Business History, 26(1):43–58.
Crafts, N. F. R. (1995). ‘Exogenous or Endogenous Growth? The Industrial Revolution
Reconsidered’. The Journal of Economic History, 55(4):745–72.
Crafts, N. F. R. and Harley, C. K. (1992). ‘Output Growth and the British Industrial
Revolution: A Restatement of the Crafts-Harley View’.
The Economic History
Review, 45(4):703–30.
Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt, A. and Levine, R., editors (2001). Financial Structure and Economic
Growth: A Cross-Country Comparison of Banks, Markets and Development. MIT
Press.
Driﬃll, J. (2003). ‘Growth and Finance’. The Manchester School, 71(4):363–80.
Greenwood, J. and Jovanovic, B. (1990). ‘Financial Development, Growth and the
Distribution of Income’. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5):1076–1107.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

Gregory, T. E. (1936). The Westminster Bank: Through A Century, volume II. Curwen
Press.
Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. (1991). ‘Quality Ladders in the Theory of Economic
Growth’. Review of Economic Studies, 58(1):43–61.
Jayaratne, J. and Strahan, P. E. (1996). ‘The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from
Bank Branch Deregulation’. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3):639–70.
King, R. G. and Levine, R. (1993a).
‘Finance and Growth: Schumpeter might be
right’. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3):717–37.
King, R. G. and Levine, R. (1993b). ‘Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: theory
and evidence’. Journal of Monetary Economics, 32(3):513–42.
Levine, R. (2005).
‘Finance and Growth: Theory, Mechanisms and Evidence’, in
Aghion, P. and Durlauf, S.N. (eds.). Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier.
Levine, R. and Zervos, S. (1998).
‘Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth’.
American Economic Review, 88(3):537–88.
Manning, M. J. (2003). ‘Finance Causes Growth: Can We Be So Sure?’. Contributions
to Macroeconomics, 3(1):Art.12.
Mitchell, B. R. (1988). British Historical Statistics. Cambridge University Press.
Morales, M. F. (2003).
‘Financial Intermediation in a Model of Growth Through
Creative Destruction’. Macroeconomic Dynamics, 7(3):363–93.
Rousseau, P. L. (1998). ‘The Permanent Eﬀects of Innovation on Financial Depth:
Theory and US historical evidence from unobservable components models’. Journal
of Monetary Economics, 42(2):387–425.
Rousseau, P. L. and Wachtel, P. (1998).
‘Financial Intermediation and Economic
Performance: Historical Evidence from Five Industrialized Economies’. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 30(4):657–78.
Rousseau, P. L. and Wachtel, P. (2006). ‘What is Happening to the Impact of Financial
Deepening on Economic Growth?’. Stern School of Business, Working Paper 06-15.
Townsend, R. M. and Ueda, K. (2006). ‘Financial Deepening, Inequality, and Growth:
A Model-Based Quantitative Evaluation’. Review of Economic Studies, 73(1):251–
293.
Trew, A. W. (2006). ‘Finance and Growth: A Critical Survey’. Economic Record,
82(259):481–90.
Trew, A. W. (2007). ‘Towards the Microfoundations of Finance and Growth’. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of St Andrews.
Tsiddon, D. (1992). ‘A Moral Hazard Trap to Growth’. International Economic Review,
33(2):299–321.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

Wright, R. E. (2002). The Wealth of Nations Rediscovered: Integration and Expansion
in American Financial Markets. Cambridge University Press.
A
Data Appendix
Economic Growth. We use here the ‘revised best guess’ from Crafts and Harley (1992,
Table A3.I) for the industrial production series. This is a standard reference for such
data, and it shows a similar pattern to that in Bairoch (1982).
The advantage of
the Crafts and Harley dataset is that they provide annual values. We de-trend the
output series across the entire period of their data, using a Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter with
λ = 100, before deriving the trend growth rate for 1850–1913.
Total Factor Productivity. We take the growth rates of TFP from Crafts (Table 2)
and normalise to 1900=1.
Financial Depth. We use a standard measure of ﬁnancial depth, the ratio of total
ﬁnancial institutions assets to national output; see Rousseau and Wachtel (1998, Table
1). We linearly interpolate between data values and extend the series back to 1850
using the trend rate of change from both 1880–1890 and 1880–1913. We also give in
the paper an unweighted average between the two trend lines. All three lines are shown
in Figure 2. We also calculate an estimate for ﬁnancial depth prior to 1880 using data
in Collins (1984). We scale the ratio of Commercial Bank Deposits (Collins, Table 1)
to Industrial Output (Crafts and Harley, Table A3.I) so that it is comparable to the
Rousseau and Wachtel data. We thus identify that the actual trend in ﬁnancial depth
might not be too far from our estimate with the 1880–1913 trend.
Financial Eﬃciency.
The ﬁrst measure of eﬃciency takes daily changes in the
Bank Rate/Minimum Lending Rate from Mitchell (1988, Table ‘Financial Institutions
14’) and averages across each year for the period 1850–1925. We subtract from the
lending rate annual averages in the Rates for Three Months’ Bank Bills (op. cit., Table ‘Financial Institutions 15.B’). We extract the trend from the resulting series using
Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter with λ = 100. The second measure of eﬃciency is calculated
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

from data in Gregory (1936, pp. 304–7). For a consistent measure we use only data
from the London and Westminster Bank over the period 1850–1908. Our measure of
proﬁtability takes the ratio of Net Proﬁts to the sum of consistently available asset
series: Cash in Hand and at Bank; Money at Call and Short Notice; Loans and Discounts; and, the sum of Investments. We ﬁnd the trend component in the same way
as before.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

www.st-and.ac.uk/cdma 
ABOUT THE CDMA 
 
 
The Centre for Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis was established by a direct 
grant from the University of St Andrews in 2003. The Centre funds PhD students and 
facilitates a programme of research centred on macroeconomic theory and policy. The 
Centre has research interests in areas such as: characterising the key stylised facts of 
the business cycle; constructing theoretical models that can match these business 
cycles; using theoretical models to understand the normative and positive aspects of 
the macroeconomic policymakers' stabilisation problem, in both open and closed 
economies; understanding the conduct of monetary/macroeconomic policy in the UK 
and other countries; analyzing the impact of globalization and policy reform on the 
macroeconomy; and analyzing the impact of financial factors on the long-run growth 
of the UK economy, from both an historical and a theoretical perspective. The Centre 
also has interests in developing numerical techniques for analyzing dynamic stochastic 
general equilibrium models. Its affiliated members are Faculty members at St Andrews 
and elsewhere with interests in the broad area of dynamic macroeconomics. Its 
international Advisory Board comprises a group of leading macroeconomists and, ex 
officio, the University's Principal. 
 
 
Affiliated Members of the School 
Dr Arnab Bhattacharjee. 
Dr Tatiana Damjanovic. 
Dr Vladislav Damjanovic.  
Dr Laurence Lasselle.  
Dr Peter Macmillan. 
Prof Kaushik Mitra. 
Prof Charles Nolan (Director). 
Dr Geetha Selvaretnam. 
Dr Gary Shea.  
Prof Alan Sutherland. 
Dr Kannika Thampanishvong. 
Dr Christoph Thoenissen.  
Dr Alex Trew.  
 
Senior Research Fellow 
Prof Andrew Hughes Hallett, Professor of 
Economics, Vanderbilt University.  
 
Research Affiliates 
Prof Keith Blackburn, Manchester University.  
Prof David Cobham, Heriot-Watt University. 
Dr Luisa Corrado, Università degli Studi di Roma.  
Prof Huw Dixon, Cardiff University. 
Dr Anthony Garratt, Birkbeck College London. 
Dr Sugata Ghosh, Brunel University.  
Dr Aditya Goenka, Essex University.  
Prof Campbell Leith, Glasgow University.  
Dr Richard Mash, New College, Oxford.  
Prof Patrick Minford, Cardiff Business School.  
Dr Gulcin Ozkan, York University.  
Prof Joe Pearlman, London Metropolitan 
University.  
Prof Neil Rankin, Warwick University.  
Prof Lucio Sarno, Warwick University.  
Prof Eric Schaling, Rand Afrikaans University.  
Prof Peter N. Smith, York University. 
Dr Frank Smets, European Central Bank.  
Prof Robert Sollis, Newcastle University.  
Prof Peter Tinsley, Birkbeck College, London.  
Dr Mark Weder, University of Adelaide.  
 
Research Associates 
Mr Nikola Bokan.  
Mr Farid Boumediene. 
Mr Johannes Geissler. 
Mr Michal Horvath.  
Ms Elisa Newby.  
Mr Ansgar Rannenberg. 
Mr Qi Sun.  
 
Advisory Board 
Prof Sumru Altug, Koç University.  
Prof V V Chari, Minnesota University.  
Prof John Driffill, Birkbeck College London.  
Dr Sean Holly, Director of the Department of 
Applied Economics, Cambridge University.  
Prof Seppo Honkapohja, Cambridge University.  
Dr Brian Lang, Principal of St Andrews University.  
Prof Anton Muscatelli, Heriot-Watt University.  
Prof Charles Nolan, St Andrews University.  
Prof Peter Sinclair, Birmingham University and 
Bank of England.  
Prof Stephen J Turnovsky, Washington University.  
Dr Martin Weale, CBE, Director of the National 
Institute of Economic and Social Research.  
Prof Michael Wickens, York University.  
Prof Simon Wren-Lewis, Oxford  
University.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

www.st-and.ac.uk/cdma 
RECENT WORKING PAPERS FROM THE  
CENTRE FOR DYNAMIC MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
 
Number 
Title 
Author(s) 
CDMA06/02 Independence Day for the “Old 
Lady”: A Natural Experiment on the 
Implications of Central Bank 
Independence 
Jagjit S. Chadha (BNP Paribas and 
Brunel), Peter Macmillan (St 
Andrews) and Charles Nolan (St 
Andrews) 
CDMA06/03 On the Determinacy of Monetary 
Policy under Expectational Errors 
Jagjit S. Chadha (BNP Paribas and 
Brunel) and Luisa Corrado 
(Cambridge and Rome Tor 
Vergata) 
CDMA06/04 Labour and Product Market Reforms 
in an Economy with Distortionary 
Taxation 
 
Nikola Bokan (St Andrews and 
CEBR), Andrew Hughes Hallett 
(Vanderbilt and CEPR) 
CDMA06/05 Sir George Caswall vs. the Duke of 
Portland: Financial Contracts and 
Litigation in the wake of the South 
Sea Bubble 
Gary S. Shea (St Andrews) 
CDMA06/06 Optimal Time Consistent Monetary 
Policy 
Tatiana Damjanovic (St Andrews), 
Vladislav Damjanovic (St 
Andrews) and Charles Nolan (St 
Andrews) 
CDMA06/07 Monetary-Fiscal Interactions When  
Public Debt is Stationary 
Michal Horvath (St Andrews) 
CDMA06/08 Bank Lending with Imperfect 
Competition and Spillover Effects 
Sumru G. Altug (Koç and CEPR) 
and Murat Usman (Koç) 
CDMA06/09 Real Exchange Rate Volatility and 
Asset Market Structure 
Christoph Thoenissen (St 
Andrews) 
CDMA06/10 Disinflation in an Open-Economy 
Staggered-Wage DGE Model: 
Exchange-Rate Pegging, Booms and 
the Role of Preannouncement 
John Fender (Birmingham) and 
Neil Rankin (Warwick) 
CDMA06/11 Relative Price Distortions and 
Inflation Persistence 
Tatiana Damjanovic (St Andrews) 
and Charles Nolan (St Andrews) 
CDMA06/12 Taking Personalities out of Monetary 
Policy Decision Making? 
Interactions, Heterogeneity and 
Committee Decisions in the Bank of 
England’s MPC 
Arnab Bhattacharjee (St Andrews) 
and Sean Holly (Cambridge) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177

www.st-and.ac.uk/cdma 
CDMA07/01 Is There More than One Way to be 
E-Stable? 
Joseph Pearlman (London 
Metropolitan) 
CDMA07/02 Endogenous Financial Development 
and Industrial Takeoff 
Alex Trew (St Andrews) 
CDMA07/03 Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy 
in an Economy with Non-Ricardian 
Agents 
Michal Horvath (St Andrews) 
CDMA07/04 Investment Frictions and the Relative 
Price of Investment Goods in an 
Open Economy Model 
Parantap Basu (Durham) and 
Christoph Thoenissen (St 
Andrews) 
CDMA07/05 Growth and Welfare Effects of 
Stablizing Innovation Cycles 
Marta Aloi (Nottingham) and 
Laurence Lasselle (St Andrews) 
CDMA07/06 Stability and Cycles in a Cobweb 
Model with Heterogeneous 
Expectations 
Laurence Lasselle (St Andrews), 
Serge Svizzero (La Réunion) and 
Clem Tisdell (Queensland) 
CDMA07/07 The Suspension of Monetary 
Payments as a Monetary Regime 
Elisa Newby (St Andrews) 
CDMA07/08 Macroeconomic Implications of 
Gold Reserve Policy of the Bank of 
England during the Eighteenth 
Century 
Elisa Newby (St Andrews) 
CDMA07/09 S,s Pricing in General Equilibrium 
Models with Heterogeneous Sectors 
Vladislav Damjanovic (St 
Andrews) and Charles Nolan (St 
Andrews) 
CDMA07/10 Optimal Sovereign Debt Writedowns 
Sayantan Ghosal (Warwick) and 
Kannika Thampanishvong (St 
Andrews) 
CDMA07/11 Bargaining, Moral Hazard and 
Sovereign Debt Crisis 
Syantan Ghosal (Warwick) and 
Kannika Thampanishvong (St 
Andrews) 
CDMA07/12 Efficiency, Depth and Growth: 
Quantitative Implications of Finance 
and Growth Theory 
Alex Trew (St Andrews) 
 
For information or copies of working papers in this series, or to subscribe to email notification, contact: 
 
Alex Trew 
Castlecliffe, School of Economics and Finance 
University of St Andrews 
Fife, UK, KY16 9AL 
 
Email: awt2@st-and.ac.uk; Phone: +44 (0)1334 462445; Fax: +44 (0)1334 462444. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1001177
