Electronic Futures Market Microstructure
Dale W.R. Rosenthal
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Chicago
601 S. Morgan St. (MC 168), 2421 University Hall
Chicago, IL 60607
voice: +1 312 996 7170
email: daler@uic.edu
Abstract
Electronic market microstructure for equities has been well-explored
and enabled the rise of automated equity trading. Futures markets,
especially electronic futures markets, have remained relatively unstudied. In the US, open-outcry trading still predominates for some contracts. Even for contracts which trade electronically, getting ultra-high
frequency futures data can be diﬃcult. As futures markets become
increasingly electronic, they are undergoing changes similar to those
which swept through equity markets. The ongoing transition of contracts to electronic trading oﬀers opportunities to assess the eﬀects of
moving from open-outcry trading to more transparent market structures.
I aim to use ultra-high frequency futures data to determine
intraday diurnals of volume, spread, depth, volatility, kurtosis, risk
aversion, and timing/size of negotiated trades and to compare these
diurnals across dates and to one another. These analyses will (i) lead
to characterizations of market quality, (ii) show how electronic trading
aﬀects market quality, and (iii) help practitioners develop automated
trading engines for these markets. Finally, since commodity market
returns exhibit higher volatilities and kurtoses than equity returns, I
may study how intraday correlations and higher co-moments change
with a move to electronic trading. These would be useful for managing futures portfolios to control coherent measures of risk — perhaps
via approximation methods. All of these analyses would help investors
determine whether their futures orders were well-executed or not.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1223738

1
Objectives and Prior Art
Objectives
My goal is to perform the baseline analysis needed for academic researchers,
regulators, and practitioners to understand the microstructure of electronic
futures markets. In particular, my analysis should be suﬃcient to:
• assess later changes in market quality;
• determine optimal strategies for automated execution;
• quantify intraday relations between various contracts; and,
• understand and predict how markets change as they transition to electronic trading.
If time permits, I may also study the data to better measure commodity
portfolio risk.
Prior Art
The literature for non-futures market microstructure is too vast to list here
but is summarized well by Madhavan (2000) and Biais, Glosten, and Spatt
(2005).
Recent work on futures market microstructure does not reﬂect the rise
of electronic trading. Daigler (1997) uses intraday data to examine intraday
volatility but only considers three (non-commodity) contracts. Wang and
Yau (2000) use intraday data to examine the relationship between volumes,
spreads, and volatilities; but, they ignore intraday diurnals. Wang, Wu, and
Yang (2008) examine intraday correlations among energy futures; and, Chen
and Daigler (2008) examine relationships between volume and volatility for
index, livestock, and currency futures — but use only daily data. All of these
analyses were done for (non-electronic) open-outcry trades; none studied
electronic trades.
Since automated trading removes much of the human element of trading,
intraday patterns of loss aversion, as documented in Coval and Shumway
(2005), may change or disappear.
Similar comparisons can be found in studies of non-US markets which
moved to electronic trading: Tse and Zabotina (2001) studied the LIFFE’s
move and Aitken, Frino, Hill, and Jarnecic’s studied the LIFFE, Sydney
Futures Exchange, and Hong Kong Futures Exchange. However, none of
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1223738

these studies explore contract- or complex-level idiosyncracies. For US futures markes, Chou and Chung (2006) examined changes in market quality
due to a change to underlying/related markets: the move to decimal pricing
of stocks and ETFs.
Recent microstructure work by Johnson (2007) and Chacko, Jurek, and
Staﬀord (2008) have focused on liquidity and inventory risks. In light of
Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, and Heath’s (1997, 1999) development of coherency
for risk measures, the kurtosis of commodity returns suggests the work of
Johnson and Chacko, Jurek, and Staﬀord should be modiﬁed to use coherent risk measures (or approximations). A move to electronic trading may
increase how much these extreme risks are transmitted across diﬀerent contracts.
2
Methods, Results, and Worth
Data and Comparative Advantage
These analyses require intraday trade and quote data from futures exchanges. Due to an agreement between the CME Trust and UIC’s International Center for Futures and Derivatives, I have access to these data.
Further, I have already been contacted by the CME to help them educate
market participants and CME employees about market microstructure and
electronic trading.
Therefore, much of the data and relationships needed to analyze these
markets has already been secured. This alone indicates that funding dollars
may have greater reach than normal.
It is unclear whether I could get
similar data from other futures exchanges (such as the NYMEX, ICE, or
LME); however, many of the objectives of this proposal can be met without
those data. Also, the prepayed portion of a grant could be used to purchase
data from other exchanges if necessary.
Methods
The data would need to be explored with guidance from exchange oﬃcials
to discover the meanings of various ﬁelds for a given contract or exchange.
This would be needed to remove negotiated (e.g. block, VWAP) and nonstandard trades for each market.
The cleaned data would most likely be analyzed by time bins1 (each
1Kernel density estimators could also be used; however, these would be more diﬃcult
to correct for pseudoreplication.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1223738

constituting an ordinal variable). Market quality assessment could be done
as in Hasbrouck (1993). Alternatively, one could examine intraday diurnals
for interesting covariates, such as: volume, spread, inside depth, volatility,
skewness, kurtosis, loss aversion, and percent/size of negotiated trades. The
use of ordinal variables would allow for these diurnals to be characterized
by functional forms.
Sampled panel data could be used to estimate correlations and higher comoments. This analysis might proceed using estimators similar to the twoscale volatility estimators with Edgeworth-inﬂuenced corrections of Zhang,
Mykland, and A¨ıt-Sahalia (2005).
Less central to this project, but possible if time permits, would be to
compare Edgeworth expansions based on Gaussian, logistic, and Laplace
distributions to empirical distributions. If one of these expansions captures
enough of the behavior of the empirical distributions, we could then construct approximations of coherent risk measures for these futures contracts.
These approximations could also be used to examine the price of immediacy and if it incorporates skewness, kurtosis, and higher moments — in
contrast to Chacko, Jurek, and Staﬀord’s (2008) model which lacks these
higher-order terms.
The empirical analyses will be conducted using R with random eﬀects
and bootstrapped standard errors to correct for pseudoreplication.
Results
One byproduct of the data cleaning would be a reference for researchers
similar to Hasbrouck (1992) or Hasbrouck and Soﬁanos (1993).
The main product, however, would be a baseline measurement of the various intraday characteristics of US futures markets pre- and post-transition
to electronic trading. These analyses will:
• serve as a baseline for future microstructure studies;
• guide policy-making regarding electronic market structures;
• help practitioners build automated trading and market-making engines
for these markets; and,
• allow investors and hedgers to gauge whether or not their orders received “best execution”.
Such analyses may also assist in determining the costs or beneﬁts of
futures-market-only practices, such as trading along.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1223738

3
Timetable
• 1–3 months — procure other data;
• 2–4 months — determine unusual trade and quote conditions; document ﬁeld deﬁnitions;
• 1 month — estimate sub-second resolution; use preceding documentation to clean data;
• 1 month — gather/create data on percent of volume traded electronically;
• 3–7 months — examine data; determine diurnals and correlations/comoments; see how these vary across contract and market characteristics; and,
• 2–3 months — document ﬁndings.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1223738

Dale W.R. Rosenthal
2421 University Hall, 601 S. Morgan (MC 168)
Chicago, IL 60607
+1 312 996 7170
daler@uic.edu
Academic Experience
University of Illinois at Chicago. Chicago, IL
July 2008–present
Assistant Professor, Department of Finance
• Developed market microstructure and electronic trading course; attracted participants from local hedge
funds.
• Developed commodity/related markets course; will be the only commodities ﬁnance course in Chicago.
Education
The University of Chicago. Chicago, IL
Ph.D. in Statistics (specialization in ﬁnancial econometrics)
August 2008
Dissertation: Trade Classiﬁcation and Nearly-Gamma Random Variables
Committee: Per Mykland (Advisor), Vanja Dukic, David Modest, Stephen Stigler
Cornell University. Ithaca, NY
B.S. in Electrical Engineering
May 1995
Fellowships and Awards
• Inaugural Plotnick Fellowship. Physical Sciences Division, The University of Chicago
2004–2008
• Nominee, Physical Sciences Division annual teaching prize, The University of Chicago
2007
• Travel Award, Kent-Purdue Minisymposium on Mathematical Finance, Kent, OH
Spring 2007
• Admitted with full funding, Institute for Computational Economics, Argonne, IL
Summer 2005
Research Interests
• Financial market microstructure, especially electronic trading and liquidity
• Analysis of high-frequency multivariate ﬁnancial data
• Commodity and related (weather, emissions, shipping) markets
• Eﬀects of ﬁnance industry pay structures
• Likelihood asymptotics for market phenomena
Publications
• “Data Delays, Index Deletions, Prepayments, and Defaults.” Submitted.
• “Modeling Trade Direction.” Submitted.
• “Randomly-Delayed Autoregressive Time Series.” Working paper.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1223738

Dale W.R. Rosenthal (continued)
7
• “Fast Approximate Mean-Expected Shortfall Portfolio Optimization.” Working paper.
• “A Theory of Fat Tails in Commodity Returns.” Working paper.
Presentations
• “Modeling Trade Direction” (Poster). Oxford-Man Institute, University of Oxford.
September 2008
• “Modeling Trade Direction.” University of Illinois at Chicago.
February 2008
• “Modeling Trade Direction.” Illinois Institute of Technology.
January 2008
• “Trade Signing and Nearly-Gamma Random Variables.” Stevanovich Center for Financial Mathematics Seminar Series, The University of Chicago.
December 2007
Industry Experience
Self-employed. Chicago, IL
June 2004–August 2004
• Gathered data from multiple sources; computed daily metrics (spreads, volumes, betas, volatilities).
• Calculated expected mean-reversion alphas; applied belief function to ﬁnd robust candidates.
• Traded 6×6 name long-short equity portfolio to minimize time skew and market impact; hedged excess
market risk with ETFs.
• Made 23% return (despite 18% cash reserve); daily P&L volatility of 1.4%.
Morgan Stanley. New York, NY
March 2000–September 2003
Proprietary Researcher/Trader, Equity Trading Lab
• Researched and traded all sections of index rebalance trade; made ≈$40MM annually for ﬁrm.
• Modeled market impact via three datasets: 1.5MM US ticks, 4MM European ticks, and 250k real trades.
• Analyzed ECN transactions to measure hidden liquidity, execution speed, and depth.
• Analyzed market maker transactions to measure speed, depth, and auto-execution probability.
• Developed trading decomposition into noise and skill, allowing execution analysis with 75% less data.
• Researched/automated trading of guaranteed benchmark (VWAP/close/part-day) and facilitation orders.
• Guaranteed benchmark trading handled about $600MM in order ﬂow/day and made $10MM annually.
Long-Term Capital Management. Greenwich, CT
June 1995–February 2000
Strategist, Equity Derivatives
• Structured optimal equity baskets for index arb and synthetic hedging of CBs/warrants.
• Assisted with trading Japanese warrant strategy.
• Oversaw portfolio valuations and produced risk exposure and P&L reports.
Goldman Sachs. New York, NY
September 1993–August 1994
Intern Programmer/Analyst, Listed Equities (Block Trading Desk)
Memberships
Econometric Society (2005–) • Institute of Mathematical Statistics (2005–) • American Statistical Association (2005–) • Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (2007–) • Society for Financial Studies
(2007–) • American Finance Association (2007–) • Society for Financial Econometrics (2008–)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1223738
