A Simple Approach to Estimating Price Impact and its
Components
Thomas J. George and Moazzam A. Khoja*
This draft: June 16, 2026
First draft: November, 29, 2023
Abstract
We provide a simple approach to estimating price impact and its components from
transaction prices and trades.
Temporary and permanent components are estimated
jointly using OLS, and hypothesis testing is conducted using the delta method. A reliable
estimation approach for transaction price data is an essential tool for researchers and
practitioners because price impacts estimated from transaction prices measure the profit
and loss that traders experience.
The state space approach used in prior work fails
with transaction price data due to violations of Normality assumptions underlying the
Kalman filter; the OLS approach avoids these problems and extends easily to multiple
classifications of trades.
We illustrate the approach by analyzing transaction price
impacts around earnings announcements for counterparty pairings between high-frequency
traders (HFTs) and non-HFTs in a special Nasdaq sample. The OLS approach is fast to
execute on millisecond transactions data and performs well relative to a full-information
GMM benchmark in the rich, eight-parameter HFT/non-HFT setting.
*Acknowledgements: We are very grateful to the Nasdaq Office of the Chief Economist for providing data and answering
questions, and to Terry Hendershott, Albert Menkveld, and seminar participants at the University of Houston and the University
of Texas at San Antonio for helpful comments and suggestions. Any errors are the responsibility of the authors. Earlier drafts of
this paper were circulated under the title Estimating Price Impact and its Components: Evidence from HFT Around Earnings
Announcements. George is from the C. T. Bauer College of Business, University of Houston. Khoja is from the Carlos Alvarez
College of Business, University of Texas at San Antonio.
Email: tom-george@uh.edu and moazzam.khoja@utsa.edu.
The
authors have not received external research support and do not have financial relationships with entities external to their
universities. The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.

1
Introduction
The price impact of a transaction is an important cost of trading securities, and the
components of price impact are often regarded as helpful metrics for understanding how
securities markets perform. In the market microstructure literature, the permanent component
of price impact captures the severity of adverse selection and the contribution of trading to
price discovery. The temporary component captures the compensation liquidity demanders
pay to cover liquidity providers’ direct costs of market making, including managing an
inventory, any profit or rents earned by the liquidity provider, and frictions in the trading
process such as discreteness in prices. Understanding price impact and its components is
also important to industry professionals. Traders with discretion between liquidity seeking
and liquidity providing orders can use estimates of price impact to optimize their strategies
between order types, trading platforms, and across securities that are close substitutes.
Market managers and regulators monitor the performance of markets at least in part by
analyzing price and trading dynamics. They may be interested in understanding how the
components of price impact are associated with particular market clearing mechanisms
or order types (e.g., batch vs continuous, visible vs hidden), routing arrangements (e.g.,
payment for order flow vs market-exposed), or trader identities (e.g., particular liquidity
providers or demanders).1 A large body of asset pricing research also relies on the notion
of price impact or components thereof as the basis for measuring the cost, risk, and return
premium associated with illiquidity.2
In this paper, we provide a simple way to estimate price impact and its components.
The approach can be used unconditionally, with all trades assumed to have the same price
1Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985), and Easley and O’Hara (1987) are classic references for the role of adverse
selection in securities trading.
Ho and Stoll (1980), Grossman and Miller (1988), Menkveld (2013), and Hendershott and
Menkveld (2014) focus on dealer inventory and price dynamics. Glosten (1989) and Kyle (1989) show that dealer monopoly
power results in an additional markup to the temporary component. Rounding due to price discreteness is modeled in Glosten
and Harris (1988) and Allena and Chordia (2025). Batch and continuous trading mechanisms are compared in Stoll and Whaley
(1990) and George and Hwang (2001). Visible and hidden orders are compared in Boulatov and George (2013), Bloomfield et al.
(2015), Foley and Putni¸nˇs (2016), and Edwards et al. (2021). Hasbrouck (1991a), Hasbrouck (1991b), and Hasbrouck (1993)
synthesize these ideas into a general empirical framework that captures how information and frictions affect price dynamics.
2A few examples are Amihud (2002) and Bollen and Whaley (2004) who measure illiquidity as a total price impact, Brennan
and Subrahmanyam (1996), Chordia et al. (2009) and Huh (2014) use measures of the permanent component, and P´astor and
Stambaugh (2003) and Hasbrouck (2009) use measures of the temporary component.
1

impact, or conditionally with trades belonging to different categories for testing hypotheses
about differences in price impacts or components between the categories.
For example,
trades could be categorized by clearing mechanism, route to market, trader type, or by
“ours” versus “others” for an institution benchmarking its own execution quality against the
rest of the market.
The approach is based on the rather general model of Hendershott
and Menkveld (2014) in the framework of Hasbrouck (1991a,b, 1993).
The estimation
only requires transaction prices, signed traded quantities, and (if desired) trade category
assignments as inputs.
Bid, ask and midquotes are not needed, nor is the assumption
that midquotes are reasonable proxies for true security values.
The components can be
estimated for all categories jointly with OLS, which is fast enough to be useful for large-scale
applications in microstructure and asset pricing research. The components can optionally
be estimated using GMM, which further supplies overidentifying restrictions. Either way,
hypothesis testing for the components or functions thereof can be done easily with the delta
method.
A key aspect of our analysis is using individual transactions and transaction prices rather
than midquotes. Using transaction prices enables us to capture the impact of trading on the
prices that agents actually pay and receive. This approach embraces bid-ask bounce, which
contributes to the temporary component of price impact that traders experience. While
midquotes have a statistical advantage of making the data less noisy, they smooth out and
mask variation that is part of the actual changes in traders’ wealth that both researchers
and practitioners would naturally be interested in estimating. We explain in Section 2 that
the temporary price impact has a distinct economic interpretation when estimated from
transaction prices versus midquotes. Midquotes reflect liquidity providers’ reactions to order
flow, whereas transaction prices capture the actual wealth transfers between counterparties
at the moment of execution. Wanting to use transaction prices is an important motivation
for seeking a simple approach to estimation, particularly one that does not rely on specific
distributional assumptions. As we show in Section 5, the state space approach that prior work
2

relies upon for analyzing midquote data fails on transaction price data because distributional
assumptions are violated.
We illustrate and assess how the new approach works using data that contain a rich
set of transaction categories in order to challenge the estimation with a high-dimensional
parameter space. The data are provided by the Nasdaq market covering all transactions for
120 securities over the years 2008-09. The data are special because Nasdaq itself provides
the identity types of high-frequency traders (HFT) and non-HFT, their roles as liquidity
demander or liquidity provider, the sign (buy/sell) and quantity of the liquidity seeking
order, and the transaction price. This level of detail in classifying trades demands that the
approach estimates eight price impact components jointly. While the sample period is from
the earlier days of HFT in equities trading, this is one of the few (perhaps the only) data
sets available to academics that identifies multiple trader types and their roles in individual
transactions. These data serve as an ideal sample to assess the performance of the OLS
approach and to illustrate concretely how it can be used by regulators, market managers,
and institutions whose proprietary data contain information about trade routing, individual
trader identities, or their own trading, as interesting dimensions along which to estimate
and compare price impact components. The approach can also be used straightforwardly
without classifying trades into categories to estimate unconditional measures of illiquidity
as inputs for other studies such as asset pricing tests.
Our empirical illustration focuses on earnings announcements in the time period covered
by the Nasdaq HFT database.
Earnings announcements are a natural setting for this
analysis. They are the primary scheduled events at which fundamental information about
firms is publicly released, making them periods of concentrated information flow and elevated
adverse selection risk.
Indeed, using a different approach from ours, Chordia and Miao
(2020) show that low-latency trading plays an important role in incorporating earnings
information into prices efficiently. The days immediately surrounding announcements and
the corresponding days one week later provide a matched pair of high- and low-information3

asymmetry trading environments that enable us to examine how price impact components
vary with the intensity of information flow.
The permanent component findings confirm what prior work has established using midquotes:
HFTs absorb orders that pose greater adverse selection risk than non-HFTs when trading
as liquidity providers, and HFTs’ liquidity demanding orders are more informative to prices
than those of non-HFTs (e.g., Brogaard et al., 2014).
The temporary component findings are different in character. Temporary price impact
tends to be negative when the liquidity demander is an HFT, regardless of whether the
liquidity provider is an HFT or not, meaning that HFTs actually earn profit on average from
their liquidity demanding trades. The liquidity providers in those trades are not compensated
by transaction prices for market making costs, and the adverse selection they absorb is
underpriced.3
In contrast, when the liquidity demander is a non-HFT, temporary price
impact is neutral or positive—non-HFTs tend to pay rather than receive a price concession.
Results of this kind involving wealth transfers are unique to our approach and not available
through midquote-based estimation.
The economic significance of these findings in both components is amplified around
earnings announcements by elevated trading volume. Dollar volume is approximately twice
as large on the day following an announcement as on the corresponding week-after day
for non-HFT initiated trades, and about 1.7 times as large for HFT initiated trades. The
aggregate wealth transfers and adverse selection differences between counterparty pairings
are correspondingly larger at the moments of greatest information flow.
Cross-sectional analysis of the price impacts indicates that the profitability of HFTs’
liquidity demanding trades is related to the adverse selection they absorb as liquidity providers.
HFTs capture larger price concessions both contemporaneously and in the days following
periods when they absorb more informative trades as liquidity providers, consistent with
absorbing adverse selection being a learning opportunity that supports profitable subsequent
3Liquidity provider losses measured only from transaction prices omit rebates for which they qualify under Nasdaq rules.
Rebates are discussed in the Results section.
4

trade initiations. These findings support theories in which HFTs process information gleaned
from the trading environment for (re)use in their own profitable trading (e.g., Biais et al.,
2015; Foucault et al., 2016; Huang and Yueshen, 2021). This association can be studied
because our estimates are based on transaction prices, for which the temporary component
of price impact is a measure of the profit and loss that traders experience.
Our contribution to the literature is twofold. First, we provide a simple approach to
jointly estimating and formally comparing the components of transaction price impact that
can be implemented easily and reliably with transaction prices and when transactions are
classified into several different categories. Estimation requires only transaction prices and
trades, is done with OLS, and does not rely on distributional assumptions that are likely to
be inconsistent with the dynamics of individual transaction prices and trades. We show that
the state space approach used in prior work with midquote data fails to reliably estimate
the model’s parameters when applied to transaction price data. Since transaction prices are
needed to capture the actual wealth transfers that traders experience from price impact, a
reliable estimation approach for transaction price data is a valuable tool for the analysis of
microstructure data.
We compare the OLS estimates with estimates from a corresponding “full-information”
GMM estimation. The OLS approach performs well, including matching the inferences of the
GMM-based hypothesis tests. Because OLS estimation is fast, our approach is well suited for
use in studies that require estimates of components of price impact (illiquidity) from intraday
data for large panels of securities.4 Because the procedure is simple and hypothesis testing
can be done at the security-day (or finer) level, our approach is also suited to narrower case
or event studies of market or trading-strategy performance that could interest regulators,
market managers, and professional traders.
Second, our findings confirm and extend what is known about HFT participation in
4In the internet appendix, we show that the model our estimates are based upon nests several prominent empirical models
of price dynamics that have been used in the microstructure and illiquidity-in-asset-pricing literatures.
5

markets.5 The most closely related papers are Carrion (2013), which studies the profitability
of HFTs’ trades against benchmarks that represent naive trading strategies, and Brogaard
et al. (2014), which estimates price impact using TAQ midquotes for trades reported in the
Nasdaq HFT data that we analyze. Their conclusions that HFTs absorb adverse selection
and trade in the direction of future price changes are supported in our results. Our findings
are distinctive in showing that the negative temporary price impact of HFT-initiated trades
implies that HFTs actually earn profit on average by taking liquidity from orders that
underprice adverse selection risk, including trades where the counterparty is another HFT,
and that this profit is greater when HFTs also absorb more informative trades as liquidity
providers.
The next section reviews the Hasbrouck (1991a,b, 1993) framework and the refinements
introduced by Hendershott and Menkveld (2014), and explains how the interpretation of
the model differs when estimated using transaction prices versus midquotes. Our estimation
approach is presented in Section 3. Section 4 describes the Nasdaq HFT data. Results are
presented in Section 5. Section 6 offers a brief conclusion.
2
Model
The model we estimate is developed by Menkveld (2013) and Hendershott and Menkveld
(2014) in the framework of Hasbrouck (1991a,b, 1993). In Hasbrouck’s framework, observed
security prices are the sum of two unobserved components that reflect the impact of information
and market frictions, respectively. The specification is
pt = mt + st,
(1)
where pt is the observable security price, mt is the security’s unobservable true economic
value (both in logarithms), and st is drawn from an unobservable mean-zero stationary
stochastic process. The true value is modeled as a random walk because innovations to
5See the excellent review articles Chordia et al. (2013), Biais et al. (2014), O’Hara (2015), Menkveld (2016) and the more
recent studies Chordia et al. (2018) and Chordia and Miao (2020) that examine HFT and price efficiency around macroeconomic
news and earnings announcements, respectively.
6

a random walk are permanent in accordance with the martingale property of (theoretical)
security prices. The mean-zero stationary component models market-microstructure frictions
by capturing deviations of observed prices from true values, which are transitory and die out
over time.6
The variances of these components have interpretations as metrics of market quality.
The variance of the random walk’s innovation is a measure of the rate of information flow
into prices and includes information conveyed by the execution of orders to buy and sell, and
the arrival of public news. The variance of the stationary component is a measure of noise or
friction in the trading process. The stationary component can include the price concession
that liquidity demanders pay to liquidity suppliers for execution services, including profit,
a return on capital, and compensation for bearing inventory risk; and it also includes other
temporary effects on prices such as rounding due to fixed tick sizes and price discreteness.
In this framework, transactions can impact prices through the permanent component by
conveying information and through the temporary component by allowing the price to deviate
temporarily from its true value.
Though the innovation to the random walk and st are unobservable, Hasbrouck shows
that their variances can be identified from the parameter estimates of a vector-autoregression
(VAR) involving observable variables—price changes and non-price variables that describe
the trading process, such as trade indicators (e.g., +1 for buys and -1 for sells) or signed
order quantities. Hasbrouck also shows how the contribution of an observable variable to
the variance of the random walk innovation can be identified from the VAR estimates as
the variance of the infinite impulse response associated with the observable variable. Such
measures can be used to assess the degree to which information flow is attributable to specific
variables that describe the trading process.
To create model parameters that capture the impacts of observable variables on both
6The unobserved components model avoids strong assumptions that can accompany working directly with quotes and spreads,
such as the assumption that the bid-ask midquote is a good proxy for the true security value and the half spread is a good
estimate of the temporary component. Studies of liquidity provision that fit an unobserved components model to midquotes
find temporary components in midquote dynamics, which implies that midquote changes are not ideal proxies for changes in
the true value and that the half spread is an incomplete measure of the temporary component.
7

components of price changes, Menkveld (2013) introduces observables directly into the equations
for st and mt. Hendershott and Menkveld (2014) introduce the additional feature of autoregression in the transitory component. Their model is as follows:
st = ϕ st−1 + ψ xt + ηt
(2)
mt = mt−1 + κ ϵt + ξt
(3)
pt = mt + st,
(4)
where xt is an observable non-price variable, ϵt ≡xt −Et−1[xt] is the unexpected value of
xt, and ηt and ξt are mutually uncorrelated iid disturbances. The ψ parameter captures the
impact of the non-price variable on the temporary component of prices. The κ parameter
captures the impact of the unexpected non-price variable on the permanent change in prices.
The unexpected value of xt is required in Equation (3) to preserve the martingale property
of mt [see Foster and Viswanathan (1993)]. Compared to Equation (1), Equations (2) - (4)
add the minimal structure needed to create specific model parameters that capture the price
impacts of interest. Henceforth, we refer to Equations (2) - (4), coupled with a (V)AR for
xt, as the HHM model (for Hasbrouck, Hendershott, and Menkveld).
The autoregressive term in the equation for st is important because, without it, the
dynamic properties of the temporary component are constrained to mimic those of xt. Even
though xt and ψ can be vectors, this would be a serious constraint because xt contains limited
information about the trading process.
For example, if xt represents signed transaction
quantities and pt represents transaction prices, as in our analysis, then ϕ can capture an
important aspect of inventory management. If liquidity providers reposition their quotes to
elicit liquidity seeking orders that reverse prior shocks to inventories, then trade reversals
will lead to reversals in the temporary component, and ϕ will be negative. The AR(1) is a
parsimonious way to accommodate these dynamics, and our estimates confirm that negative
values of ϕ are an important feature in fitting transaction price dynamics in our sample.
Altogether, the HHM model strikes a balance between additional structure connecting the
8

non-price variables to both components of prices, and flexibility in allowing the temporary
component to reverse or persist for reasons that are not attributable to contemporaneous
variation in the modeled non-price variables.
The selection of the xt variable(s) and the way that prices are measured determine
the interpretations of κ and ψ. Menkveld (2013) uses midquotes sampled at five-minute
intervals as the price variable, and the inventory of a dominant HFT as the non-price
trading variable, to study whether unexpected inventory contributes to price discovery (κ)
and whether the inventory of the HFT is a determinant of the positioning of midquotes in
relation to the true security value (ψ). Likewise, Hendershott and Menkveld (2014) study
NYSE specialist inventories and the positioning of midquotes. Their price variable is the
daily closing midquote, and the key non-price variable xt is the daily change in specialist
inventory. Brogaard et al. (2014) estimate HHM models using the Nasdaq HFT data. Their
price variable is also the midquote, sampled at one-second intervals in their main results.
The xt is the net signed quantities aggregated within those intervals traded by either liquidity
providers (HFTs and non-HFTs), liquidity demanders (HFTs and non-HFTs), or HFTs only
(both liquidity provided and demanded), each in a separate estimation. They also report
some estimations using midquotes and quantities sampled at the transaction frequency. In
each estimation, κ and ψ are interpreted as contributions of the particular measure of net
quantity traded to permanent changes in the midquote and the transitory repositioning of
the midquote in relation to the true security value.
Most prior work estimates the HHM model using midquotes sampled at intervals ranging
from one second to one day, which introduces two distinctions from our approach: the use of
midquotes rather than transaction prices, and the aggregation of order flow within intervals
rather than measuring it trade by trade. Time aggregation changes the interpretation of κ
and ψ from sensitivities of price changes to individual trades to sensitivities to net order flow
aggregated within time intervals. An equally important distinction is the choice of the price
variable.
9

Transaction prices and midquotes capture different economic phenomena even when
both are measured at the transaction frequency, as in Brogaard et al.’s transaction-time
estimations involving midquotes. When estimated from transaction prices, st is the deviation
of the transaction price from true value, which is a wealth transfer between the liquidity
demander and provider that includes bid-ask bounce, dealer compensation, and other frictions.
The parameter ψ is the sensitivity of this wealth transfer to the size of the contemporaneous
trade. When estimated from midquotes, st represents the transitory deviation of the posttrade midquote from true value, usually attributed to liquidity providers positioning quotes
to elicit inventory-equilibrating order flow. The parameter ψ is then the sensitivity of this
positioning to the size of the prior trade and not a wealth transfer associated with the current
trade.
At the transaction frequency, the interpretation of κ is the same whether estimated
from transaction prices or midquotes because both are anchored by the same random walk
representing variation in the true security value. If sampled at the same frequency, transaction
prices and midquotes should produce very similar estimates of the permanent component of
price impact. We return to these distinctions in Section 5 where we compare our estimates
directly to those of Brogaard et al. (2014).
The choice of price variable therefore has implications for the conclusions we draw about
price discovery from the estimates.
Both approaches are informative, but they answer
different questions. Midquote-based estimation is well suited to studying price discovery
as it is reflected in liquidity providers’ responses to order flow. Transaction price estimation
is well suited to studying the actual gains and losses that traders experience and the role
of order flow in price discovery and wealth transfers. Our contribution is in providing an
approach that works well for the latter, since the approach that has been used successfully
with midquotes fails with transaction prices, as we show in Section 5.
Estimating the HHM model is not straightforward because mt, st and ϵt are unobservable.
The three studies cited above estimate the surprises ϵt as residuals from a time-series
10

regression of xt on its own lags. The residuals are then used as observable variables in a statespace estimation [see Hamilton (2020), p. 372–408] (a maximum-likelihood estimation where
the Kalman Filter is used recursively to define forecast errors).7 Thus, their estimations
involve a two-step sequence. The first step is to fit a (V)AR model to the inventory or
trades variable(s) to generate residuals that proxy for true innovations. The second step
is the maximum likelihood state-space estimation using midquotes, the inventory or trades
variable(s), and the VAR residuals as observables.
The equations of the Kalman Filter
and the likelihood function both rely on the assumption that the midquote and aggregated
inventory or trades data are jointly Normal.
In our study, xt is a vector of signed dollar values of individual trades whose four elements
correspond to the distinct possible counterparty pairings in individual transactions between
HFTs and non-HFTs trading as liquidity demanders and suppliers, and our price variable
is the transaction price, to the millisecond. In this setting, the joint Normality assumptions
are unlikely to hold.
In the next section, we provide an estimation method that is suited to transaction prices
and quantities, and that also easily accommodates high-dimensional κ and ψ vectors. We
show that κ and ψ can be estimated using OLS regressions without using residuals as proxies
for disturbances. Hypothesis testing for κ, ψ and functions thereof can be conducted using
the delta method. Some prior work using state space estimation suggests in passing that
ARIMA-based methods can in principle serve as an alternative [e.g., Brogaard et al. (2014),
Hendershott and Menkveld (2014)], but it does not develop the approach. Proposition 1
below fills this gap.
3
Regression Approach
Let xt be a (k × 1) vector of observable variables that describe the dynamics of trading.
In our empirical work, xt contains signed dollar quantities traded for the k = 4 distinct
possible pairings of HFTs and non-HFTs as transaction counterparties.
The position in
7Menkveld et al. (2007) is the first of which we are aware to use a state-space approach to fit a model in the framework of
Hasbrouck.
11

the xt vector that is non-zero indicates the nature of the counterparty pairing, and the
sign of the entry indicates whether the liquidity demander is a buyer (positive) or a seller
(negative). For example, if an HFT liquidity demander buys $20,000 worth of shares from
an HFT liquidity supplier, then xt = (+2, 0, 0, 0)′. If instead an HFT liquidity demander
sells $4,000 worth of shares to a non-HFT liquidity supplier, then xt = (0, −0.4, 0, 0)′. The
third element of xt indicates transactions in which a non-HFT liquidity demander is paired
with an HFT liquidity supplier, and the fourth element indicates transactions in which two
non-HFTs are paired. Transaction values are in units of $10,000 to facilitate reporting κ
and ψ in basis points per $10,000 traded, or equivalently the price impact in dollars for a
$10,000 trade.
As in the studies that use state-space estimation where a VAR is first fitted to obtain
residuals, we also assume that xt follows a vector autoregression of known order n:
xt = B1xt−1 + B2xt−2 + · · · + Bnxt−n + ϵt,
(5)
where each Bj is a (k × k) matrix of VAR parameters and ϵt is a (k × 1) iid vector of
disturbances.
Our approach requires fitting the VAR, but it does not use the residuals
as independent variables in a later estimation.
For now, we assume that the individual
elements of the vector xt are observable to market participants. We revisit this assumption
in subsection 3.1 below.
Proposition 1 shows that the parameters κ and ψ are identified in a simple way as
functions of the coefficients of independent regressions—i.e., the VAR, and a regression
whose dependent variable is the first difference of (log) prices. The proposition allows st
to have a general ARMA(p, q) structure, which includes the simpler AR(1) specification in
Equation (2) as a special case.
The content of the proposition is that the HHM model
parameters are exactly identified by only the contemporaneous and first-order-lag regression
coefficients, adjusted by the first-order VAR parameter matrix, provided that those coefficients
are estimated with higher-order lagged returns and trading variables included as controls in
12

the regression.
Proposition 1. Suppose that the VAR(n) in Equation (5) describes the dynamics of a (k×1)
vector of trading variables xt and the dynamics of prices are described by the HHM model in
which st is ARMA(p, q) plus ψ′xt; i.e.,
st = ϕ1 st−1 + · · · + ϕp st−p + ψ′xt + ηt + θ1ηt−1 + · · · + θqηt−q
(6)
mt = mt−1 + κ′ϵt + ξt
(7)
pt = mt + st,
(8)
where the disturbances ξt, ηt, and ϵt are mutually uncorrelated at all lags.
Under these
conditions, the model parameters ϕ1, κ and ψ can be written as
ϕ1 = a1
(9)
κ′ = (C′ + D′
1) [(1 −a1)Ik −B1]−1
(10)
ψ′ = C′ −(C′ + D′
1) [(1 −a1)Ik −B1]−1 ,
(11)
where Ik is the (k × k) identity matrix, B1 is the (k × k) first-order-lag coefficient matrix of
the VAR, and a1, C′ and D′
1 are coefficient vectors in the regression:
dpt = a1 dpt−1 + C′xt + D′
1xt−1 +
p
X
j=2
aj dpt−j +
n+p
X
s=2
D′
sxt−s + ut,
(12)
where dpt is the first difference of (log) prices, a1 is a scalar, and C′ and D′
1 are (1 × k) row
vectors. The disturbance ut is autoregressive of order max{p, q} and is uncorrelated with ϵt
in Equation (5) at all lags.
Proposition 1 provides a simple recipe for estimation and hypothesis testing with the
HHM model. Estimates of the κ and ψ vectors can be obtained directly from estimating
the parameters of Equations (5) and (12) separately by OLS and plugging a subset of those
estimates into Equations (9) - (11). Because the regression disturbances in (5) and (12) are
13

uncorrelated, a variance-covariance matrix of the coefficient estimates can be constructed in
a block-diagonal manner from the variance-covariance matrices of the separate estimations of
the coefficients of (5) and (12). Newey-West with lag order max{p, q} can be used to account
for the serial covariance in ut when constructing the block that relates to the coefficient
estimates of Equation (12).
The delta method can then be used with the constructed
variance-covariance matrix to test hypotheses about ϕ1, κ, ψ, and functions thereof.
Since ϕ1, κ, and ψ are identified using only the coefficients on the lowest order lags in
(5) and (12), the formulas in Equations (9) - (11) are invariant to the researcher’s choices
of the VAR lag length and the ARMA orders of st. This is an advantage in programming
because the VAR length can be allowed to differ by security and day, while the code for
computing the estimates and hypothesis tests is always the same. The lag and order choices
do matter for the specifications of the regressions (5) and (12), however. The higher-order
lags of variables can be thought of as control variables that are required to obtain consistent
estimates of the coefficients on the lower-order lags that are used to identify and estimate ϕ1,
κ, and ψ. The matrix inverse in Equations (10) and (11) will exist unless 1−a1 happens to be
an eigenvalue of B1, an occurrence that did not appear in our nearly 3050 estimations.
With this approach, estimation and hypothesis testing can be done without the joint
Normality assumptions that are essential for correct specification of the Kalman Filter and
the likelihood function in state-space estimation. This is especially helpful in working with
transactions data, which are unlikely to satisfy such assumptions as we show later.
In
addition, regardless of the dimension of κ and ψ, estimation of the two regressions occurs
in one step using OLS, which is fast because a search-based optimization is not required.
Inferences can be conducted at the firm-day level (or even subintervals of the day) and
justified in the usual way. The ability to conduct inferences at the narrow level of a single
estimation is helpful for analyzing unique events where a cross-sectional distribution of
estimates is not available. The CETV earnings announcement that we study below is such
an example.
14

A practical advantage of the OLS approach is that it estimates the parameters for all
categories of trading variables jointly, regardless of the dimension of κ and ψ.
This is
important because separate estimation yields inconsistent estimates when the cross-serial
covariances between trade categories are non-zero, as the presence of B1 in the formulas for
κ and ψ implies. As long as B1 is not diagonal, the identification of the permanent and
temporary components of price impact for a given category of trades will depend on the
cross-serial covariances between those trades and trades in another category. If the trades in
different categories are motivated by similar economic forces, the true B1 matrix is unlikely
to be diagonal.8
The approach in Proposition 1 treats the regression coefficients of variables at lags greater
than one as nuisance parameters since they are not essential for identification. To see why,
note that Equations (6) - (8) can be differenced and combined to yield
dpt = ϕ1 dpt−1 + (ψ′ + κ′)xt −[ψ′ + κ′(ϕ1Ik + B1)] xt−1 + h.o.t + ut.
(13)
The symbol h.o.t represents linear terms in dp and x of lag orders two and greater. The
coefficients on those terms are non-linear functions of the VAR and HHM structural parameters
(see the explicit version of (13) appearing as Equation (31) in Appendix A). The leading
coefficients in Equation (13) along with B1 from the VAR are sufficient to identify the HHM
structural parameters.
Although the coefficients in h.o.t are not used, the variables themselves are essential to
include in the regression, even, for example, if one is interested only in estimating the total
price impact κ + ψ (and not the separate components). In Proposition 1, the vector C by
itself identifies the total price impact (i.e., C = ψ + κ), but the regression from which C is
estimated must include the lagged variables as controls in order for C to take the value ψ+κ.
In this respect, Proposition 1 cautions against the common practice of estimating a total price
8The classifications of trades that are given in the Nasdaq HFT data we analyze. Hendershott et al. (2022) can also be
thought of as estimating price impact parameters jointly, but for classifications that are inferred from the data via maximumlikelihood estimation of a detailed structural model. Their trade classifications relate to agents who exhibit varying degrees of
inattention to trading, which they show can explain puzzling low frequency patterns in equity returns.
15

impact by regressing returns on a contemporaneous trade variable alone (i.e., estimating an
empirical “Kyle lambda”). If the HHM model with n > 0 describes the true return generating
process, then omitting the controls will lead to inconsistent estimates because the regression
cannot properly isolate the impact of the current trade and its innovation on the price. The
controls are needed in order to separate the impact of the current trade from the effects of
lagged trades on the current return that exist because of serial correlation in both trades
and the temporary component of price changes.
Though not required for identification, the higher-order coefficients can be exploited
as a source of overidentifying restrictions in a GMM approach to estimating the HHM
model. This is because there are more higher-order coefficients that can be estimated than
structural parameters that define them. The VAR and Equation (31) in Appendix A can be
estimated together as a system by selecting values for κ, ψ, ϕs, and Bs to minimize a GMM
objective function in a search-based optimization. As with the OLS approach described
in the Proposition, GMM does not require joint Normality assumptions. The parameters
of the HHM model are overidentified by the usual regression orthogonality conditions for
Equations (5) and (31), so the GMM J statistic can be used to test whether the HHM model
is well-specified. We use GMM estimates and inferences below as benchmarks for assessing
the performance of the OLS approach in Proposition 1 and three alternative approaches. The
numerical optimization takes considerable time, which makes GMM infeasible for large scale
applications that are typical in microstructure and illiquidity-in-asset-pricing research.9
Proposition 1 and our empirical illustrations below focus on the case where xt contains
trades classified into different categories.
However, the identification logic applies more
broadly. Whenever dpt is linear in xt and xt follows a VAR, the HHM model parameters are
identified by the contemporaneous and first-order-lag coefficients as in Proposition 1. This
9State space estimation is sometimes justified on grounds of asymptotic efficiency. However, this property holds only when the
model is correctly specified and the Normality assumptions underlying the Kalman filter are satisfied. When these assumptions
fail, as we document they do for transaction prices in Section 5.1, the efficiency justification does not apply. Our OLS approach
does not impose all the model’s constraints and is therefore not asymptotically efficient. However, the GMM approach does
impose all the constraints implied by the model and is asymptotically efficient without requiring Normality assumptions, making
it a more appropriate efficiency benchmark when working with transaction prices.
16

generality means that many familiar structural models of price dynamics and illiquidity
measures used in market microstructure and asset pricing research are nested within the
HHM framework.
The non-price variables xt in those models take a variety of forms—
signed trade quantities, functions of trade quantities such as trade signs, or demand pressure
measures that are not trade quantities at all. The nesting of those models within HHM also
provides economic intuition for why the contemporaneous and first-order-lag coefficients are
sufficient for identification: those are the same lags that identify the key parameters in
the classic structural models. We work through several cases in the internet appendix to
illustrate the breadth of structural models that are nested within the HHM framework and
can be estimated using Proposition 1.
3.1
Observability of xt to Market Participants
The discussion so far assumes that the individual elements of xt are observable to market
participants in real time. Otherwise, market participants would be unable to compute the
vector ϵt in real time, and Equation (7) would not be a martingale with respect to the market’s
beliefs.
One can imagine that in applications of this estimation approach to blockchain
markets, trader (or wallet) identities may be observable in real time. However, in the Nasdaq
HFT data, market participants were aware of the trades, but not the identity types of the
counterparties, in real time. The procedure in Proposition 1 requires a slight modification
in this case.
The model that traders perceive is one in which a univariate series of signed dollar order
quantities ˆxt is observed, and the unconditional price impact parameters are scalars ˆκ and
ˆψ. Therefore, the equation for return dynamics perceived by market participants is
dpt = ϕ1 dpt−1 + ( ˆψ + ˆκ)ˆxt −
h
ˆψ + ˆκ(ϕ1 + b1)
i
ˆxt−1 + d
h.o.t + ut,
(14)
where b1 is a scalar first-order autoregressive parameter from a univariate AR model for
ˆxt, and d
h.o.t are linear terms in dp and ˆx of lag orders two and greater. Nevertheless, as
researchers, we can do the equivalent of adding dummy variables as interactions with the
17

regressors to estimate and test for differences in coefficients conditional on the data categories
identified by the dummies.
In particular, as researchers and in hindsight we know to which of the four counterparty
bins each ˆxt belongs. So we can define (4 × 1) vectors xt whose elements are each identified
with a particular counterparty pairing. For example, if the transaction at time t is between
two HFTs, then the first element of xt is assigned the value of ˆxt and the other elements of
xt are assigned values of zero; likewise for the other three elements of xt and counterparty
pairings. Thus, ˆxt is the sum of the elements of xt, and Equation (14) is equivalent to
dpt = ϕ1 dpt−1+( ˆψ+ˆκ)(xt1+· · ·+xt4)−
h
ˆψ + ˆκ(ϕ1 + b1)
i
(xt−1,1+· · ·+xt−1,4)+ d
h.o.t+ut. (15)
We can then replace the scalars ˆκ and ˆψ with analogs of dummy slope coefficients to
accommodate different price impacts by counterparty pairing:
dpt =ϕ1 dpt−1 + (ψ1 + κ1)xt1 + · · · + (ψ4 + κ4)xt4
−[ψ1 + κ1(ϕ1 + b1)] xt−1,1 + · · · + [ψ4 + κ4(ϕ1 + b1)] xt−1,4 + d
h.o.t + ut.
(16)
Writing this in vector notation yields
dpt = ϕ1 dpt−1 + (ψ′ + κ′)xt −[ψ′ + κ′(ϕ1 + b1)] xt−1 + d
h.o.t + ut,
(17)
which is the same as Equation (13) except that the identity matrix Ik is not needed, the
scalar b1 replaces the matrix B1, and d
h.o.t includes lags of ˆxt rather than lags of the individual
elements of the vector xt. In Equations (10) and (11) for the model parameters, the scalar
b1 replaces the matrix B1. Our estimations with the Nasdaq HFT data use this modified
procedure. The modified version of the full equation for return dynamics that includes the
higher-order terms, and which we use for the GMM estimations, is given in Equation (38)
in Appendix A.
18

4
Data
The data we analyze are provided by Nasdaq.10 We use these data because the classifications
are extensive and result in eight parameters to be estimated jointly. A high-dimensional
parameter space is challenging, and estimation in this setting provides a good test of the
performance of the approach in Proposition 1. We compare its estimates and inferences
to those that impose overidentifying restrictions and that should be more efficient. If the
simpler approach performs well in this case, it ought to perform well in applications that do
not require classifications of trades, such as estimating illiquidity measures for asset pricing
tests. 11
The Nasdaq HFT data are also used in Carrion (2013) and Brogaard et al. (2014), which
provide excellent descriptions of the data and how it came into existence. We highlight the
aspects that are most relevant to our study.
The data contain all transactions executed on Nasdaq from January 1, 2008, to December
31, 2009 for 120 stocks divided equally between small, medium and large categories by market
capitalization. Each record contains the following fields:
1. Timestamp in milliseconds
2. Stock symbol
3. Number of shares
4. Buy/sell indicator of the liquidity seeking side of the trade
5. Transacted price
6. Trader pairing (i.e., HH, HN, NH, NN)
The trader pairing variable identifies the types of traders who are counterparties to the
transaction (H=HFT or N=non-HFT), with the trader type that was seeking liquidity listed
first. Nasdaq identifies 26 traders as HFTs based on whether a trader exhibits characteristics
10We thank the Office of the Chief Economist for kindly providing the data.
11While the Nasdaq HFT data are special in providing the actual classifications of trades by HFTs and non-HFTs, one could
also use the approach with trades classified by a proxy. In the HFT setting, see for example, Chordia and Miao (2020), who
use the Hasbrouck and Saar (2013) measure of strategic runs of fast message traffic as a proxy for low-latency trading activity,
and runs that end with a transaction as trades in which liquidity is provided by a low-latency trader.
19

usually attributed to HFTs, such as a high frequency of trades, orders, and cancellations,
and low inventory accumulation. A few institutions with large brokerage operations are not
identified as HFTs despite having HFT capabilities. 60 of the stocks are listed on Nasdaq
and 60 are listed on the NYSE, and many trade on other venues. Only trades that are
executed on Nasdaq are included in the sample.
Most of the transaction records have distinct millisecond time stamps, which enable us
to identify the sequence of distinct transactions within each day. When transactions are
distinct, the xt vector of signed trades for millisecond t has only a single non-zero entry
among its four elements. The location of the entry corresponds to the trader pairing for the
transaction, the sign of the entry indicates whether a purchase (positive) or a sale (negative)
was on the liquidity demanding side of the trade, and the magnitude of the entry is the
dollar value of the trade in $10,000 units.
There are some instances in which more than one transaction has the same millisecond
time stamp. Nasdaq advised us that transactions with the same time stamp are not necessarily
written to the database in chronological order within the millisecond. In these instances,
we compute the dollar value of the trades within each trader pairing, and sign the trade
indicator for that pairing according to whether the net liquidity taken is a buy or sell. For
example, if a $30,000 HH buy and a $10,000 HH sell have the same timestamp, the net HH
transaction is a $20,000 buy, which we code as +2 in the first element of xt. If there are
multiple types of pairings within the same millisecond (e.g., HH and HN transactions with
the same timestamp), then the xt vector will have multiple entries, one for each pairing. The
magnitude of each entry is again the dollar value of the net trade in $10,000 units, and the
sign of each entry is positive or negative depending on whether the net liquidity taken in
that pairing was a buy or sell.12
For the stocks and time period covered by the Nasdaq sample, we draw the dates
and times of earnings announcements and analysts’ earnings forecasts from I/B/E/S. The
12The ratio of the mean (median) number of milliseconds with more than one transaction to milliseconds with at least one
transaction is only 0.08 (0.13) across stock-days.
20

vast majority of earnings announcements occur during the overnight period between the
market close and open. We exclude daytime announcements in order to have uniform preannouncement and post-announcement days throughout the sample. We record the number
of analysts forecasting earnings as an indication of the intersection of supply and demand
in the market for public information about a company’s earnings. We use this number to
stratify the sample into quartiles.
We compute the earnings surprise for each announcement as the difference between
realized earnings per share and the median analyst estimate prior to the earnings announcement
reported on IBES, divided by the opening stock price on the day preceding the overnight
announcement. For announcements with two or more analyst forecasts, we compute dispersion
in analysts’ forecasts as the difference between the highest and lowest analyst estimates
divided by the median estimate.
Our estimation and testing focus on prices and trades from four days anchored by each
earnings announcement. The Pre-day is the trading day prior to the overnight announcement
and the Post-day is the trading day following the announcement. The Week-After-Pre (WAPre) day is one week later than the Pre-day on the same weekday, and the WA-Post day
is likewise one week later than the Post-day on the same weekday. We include all days
with 50 or more transactions total and at least 10 trades for each of the four counterparty
pairings HH, HN, NH, NN. After these constraints, we have 3047 security-days relating to 823
earnings announcements belonging to 120 distinct stocks. Cutoffs for the analyst coverage
quartiles are based on the distribution of coverage for these security-days.
A set of parameters ϕ1, ψ, and κ is estimated for each security-day using prices and
trades during daytime trading hours (8:30-4:00pm Eastern Time). We exclude the opening
transaction from all security-days because the first trade of the day is known to have different
characteristics than transactions during the rest of the day [e.g., Amihud and Mendelson
(1987), Stoll and Whaley (1990)]. Table 1 reports summary statistics for the sample. For
the item listed in each row, the columns report statistics describing the distribution of daily
21

values for that item across security-days. For example, the median across security-days of the
daily dollar volume of trades in which both counterparties are HFTs (i.e., the HH category)
is $761,782. HH is the category with the smallest median and mean dollar volume across
security-days, and NN is the category with the largest. However, there is a high degree of
overlap between the distributions of all categories. For example, the 75th percentile for HH
is larger than the median of NN. The 25th percentile of NN is larger than the median of HH,
but substantially smaller than the 75th percentile of HH. As noted earlier, counterparty types
are not reported to traders in transaction records. The high degree of overlap would make
it difficult for traders in real time to infer counterparty types from transaction flows.
Table 1 also reports distributions of the daily numbers of transactions in each counterparty
category. The mean and median numbers of transactions are smallest for HH and largest
for NN. The range of values constituting the middle 98% of each category is impressive.
HH ranges from 10 to 13,442, and NN ranges from 102 to 15,677. These distributions also
exhibit substantial overlap across categories of counterparty pairings.
Items concerning the scale of transaction returns are also reported in the table. Transaction
returns are centered on zero, as is evident by the mean of means and median of median
transaction returns both being zero to the tenth of a basis point. Transaction returns are
also small in magnitude. Across security-days, the mean and median of the mean daily
absolute transaction returns are 4.5bp and 3.1bp respectively; and the 99th percentile is
20.4bp. The mean and median of the median daily absolute transaction returns are smaller
at 1.8bp and 0.0bp, respectively; with a 99th percentile of 14.8bp.
By construction, the Nasdaq sample is diverse in market capitalization, ranging from
about $218 million to $325 billion as of December 2007. The mean and median are $27.5
billion and $2.58 billion, respectively. The number of analysts forecasting earnings ranges
widely—from zero to 34—with a mean and median of 12.6 and 11, respectively.
22

5
Results
We begin with the results of attempting to estimate the model using state space methods
for the days associated with a subsample of 40 randomly chosen earnings announcements (i.e.,
the four days described above for each announcement, or 160 stock-days in total). It turns
out that the state space approach either fails entirely or performs poorly, even when OLS
estimates are supplied as starting values. More focused investigation points to non-Normality
of the data as the reason for both failures, which strongly suggests that having an alternative
to state-space estimation is an essential resource for microstructure researchers, especially
when using transaction price data.
Then we turn to evaluating the quality of the OLS
approach by comparing its estimates and inferences to those of GMM in the full sample. We
take GMM as the gold standard because it incorporates all the restrictions of the model. The
main finding is that estimates and hypothesis tests that follow the approach in Proposition
1 compare favorably to GMM and perform better than other OLS based approaches that
take shortcuts relative to the approach in Proposition 1. Finally, we present detailed results
for the OLS approach in Proposition 1 for the days around earnings announcements and the
week after, and some regression tests that characterize cross-sectional and temporal patterns
in the components of price impacts around earnings. We also conduct an event study of the
single announcement in our sample with the largest earnings surprise.
5.1
State Space Estimation
Since we motivate the OLS approach by observing that the assumptions underlying the
state-space (SS) approach are likely to be violated in transaction price data, we begin by
attempting to estimate the model’s parameters using a SS approach that follows the steps
in Brogaard et al. (2014), which works successfully for estimation using midquote data. For
each stock-day, we estimate a VAR as in Equation (5) whose order is determined by the
AIC, and residuals from the VAR along with signed trades and log price changes are used
as data to estimate ϕ1 and the κ and ψ parameters by maximum likelihood and the Kalman
filter. The ϕ1 parameter is constrained to lie between -0.99 and 0.99 in the optimization,
23

and diffuse priors are used for the disturbance variances of the permanent and temporary
components. A difference from Brogaard et al. (2014) is that we estimate all eight κ and ψ
parameters and ϕ1 jointly for consistency with the OLS and GMM approaches. They group
trades together in various ways, as described in Section 2.
Because these optimizations are resource intensive, we focus on the days surrounding
a subset of 40 randomly chosen earnings announcements in our sample (160 stock-days in
total). We use OLS estimates obtained as described in Proposition 1 (henceforth, OLSProp estimates) as starting values for the nine parameters. 148 of the 160 days satisfy the
intra-day data requirements of at least 50 transactions and 10 transactions for each of the
counterparty pairings. The model converges for 124 of those days. For the other 24 days, the
negative log-likelihood is flat enough not to identify a minimum. More concerning is that the
estimate of ϕ1 is equal to 0.99 for 69 of the 124 days for which there is a solution. Since 0.99
is the upper boundary of the parameter space, this outcome indicates that the optimization
is unable to find an interior solution and is instead being pushed to the boundary ϕ ≈1
where the temporary and permanent components are not separately identified. As far as the
data are concerned in these cases, a temporary component in transaction price changes does
not exist. This conclusion is unreasonable a priori given the vast microstructure literature
that documents its existence with simple estimation approaches. This leaves us with 55
stock-days with useful estimates to characterize, about one-third of the 148 stock-days we
started with.
Details of the results for these 55 estimations are discussed below.
However, before
we get there, and to understand the sources of these failures better, we conduct a series
of focused experiments on five stock-days drawn from the set of problematic cases. The
experiments replace real data with simulated Normal draws in various ways to isolate why
transaction price data cause the SS approach to break down. Table 2 reports the outcomes
of the experiments, with only meaningful details included for brevity.
Panel C of Table 2 reports the results of the first experiment, a Monte Carlo simulation
24

in which all variables are drawn from Normal distributions. The signed trades xt and their
innovations ϵt are drawn as independent standard Normals, and the disturbances ξt and ηt are
drawn as independent mean-zero Normals whose standard deviations are set to the median
standard deviation of transaction returns in the sample. The OLS-Prop estimates of ϕ1, and
the κ and ψ vectors are used as the “true” parameter values in generating the simulated price
data for each of the five stock-days. No VAR is estimated, so this experiment focuses on
the maximum-likelihood-Kalman-filter step in isolation. SS estimation is performed on the
simulated data with zeros as starting parameter values, then next with OLS-Prop estimates
as starting values. With both sets of starting values, the SS estimator converges and provides
valid standard errors (non-singular Hessian) for all five stock-days. The “true” parameter
values are recovered almost exactly, which confirms that the failures observed with the real
data are not attributable to programming errors or numerical problems relating to the OLSProp parameter or starting values.
The second experiment uses real data and is reported in Panel A. Two sets of starting
values are again used for each stock-day, OLS-Prop estimates and zeros. With OLS starting
values, S1, S2, S4 and S5 converge to the boundary where ˆϕ1 = 0.99, and S1 and S3 fail to
produce Hessian-based standard errors because the Hessian is singular. For S3, this indicates
that the negative-log-likelihood surface has a non-convexity in the neighborhood of an interior
value. With zero starting values, all five stock-days converge to the boundary. These results
highlight two important points. First, the failures are not due to poor starting values—
OLS starting values do not help S1, S2, S4 or S5. Second, non-convexities in the negative
log-likelihood appear at both boundary and interior solutions. These findings suggest that
the failures of SS in the larger sample to identify the temporary and permanent components
separately are not related to the starting values used in the estimation, and that impediments
to estimation or inference relating to the shape of the log-likelihood function are not limited
to boundary solutions.
The third experiment, reported in Panel B, combines real trading data with simulated
25

Normal disturbances, which allows the real trading activity data to introduce dynamics
that are possibly contrary to the joint Normality assumptions underlying the SS approach.
In this experiment, we estimate the VAR for trading activity using real data to generate
observations of trading innovations. We then use these innovations and actual trades to
generate a temporary component series, a permanent component series and a price series.
The OLS-Prop estimates are used as the “true” parameter values, and the disturbances ξt
and ηt are drawn as independent Normal random variables with means of zero and standard
deviations that are again equal to the median standard deviation of transaction returns in
the sample. When zeros are used as starting values, four of the five stock-days converge to
the boundary with ˆϕ1 = 0.99, though S3 converges to an interior solution with ˆϕ1 = −0.098.
However, when OLS-Prop starting values are used, all five stock-days converge to plausible
interior values of ϕ1 with small standard errors, and all five match the OLS-Prop values to
the second or third decimal place. The κ and ψ parameters are also recovered accurately.
Interestingly the estimates of ϕ1 for S3 are nearly identical when both zeros and the OLSProp starting values are used, suggesting that it is possible, though not likely, for SS to find
the “true” parameter values even when starting at zero. The results in this panel suggest
that real trading activity introduces non-Normal dynamics into the data that prevents SS
from recovering accurate estimates unless starting values are sufficiently close to the solution.
If the structural disturbances are Normal, SS has a chance of working well, but only reliably
when started from values that are sufficiently close to the solution. In practice, a researcher
would not have access to such starting values without first running OLS-Prop or something
like it, making SS either infeasible or, at best, a refinement of methods that explicitly do not
rely on Normality assumptions.
Our final experiment is reported in Panel D, where the return and four trading activity
series are transformed into univariate Normal series by applying the inverse of the Normal
CDF to “plotting positions” based on a ranking of each original series.13 The SS procedure
13The plotting positions we use are pi = (ri −3/8)/(n + 1/4) where ri is the rank of observation i and n is the number of
observations. This procedure is attributable to Blom (1958).
26

including the VAR and using OLS-Prop initial values is then applied to the transformed data,
just as it was with the original sample. All five stock-days converge to interior solutions with
valid Hessian-based standard errors. The estimate of S3 comes close to the boundary with
ˆϕ1 = 0.973 and a large standard error. The remaining four stock-days produce plausible
estimates ranging from -0.255 to 0.639 with small standard errors, which are consistent with
identifying separately permanent and temporary components of price changes. Although
the parameter estimates are not economically meaningful after the transformation, the
improvement in SS behavior relative to Panel A is informative.
The fact that four of
five stock-days produced well-behaved interior solutions after the transformation strongly
implicates non-Normality of the original transaction price and trading data as the primary
source of SS failures. The case of S3 suggests that univariate Normality of the marginals
alone may not be sufficient, and that violations of the multivariate Normality assumption
underlying the Kalman filter may also play a role.
The failure of the state-space approach documented here is consistent with Allena and
Chordia (2025), who show that the rounding induced by discrete tick sizes destroys the
Gaussian structure that the Kalman filter requires, rendering it unsuitable for transactionlevel data. They provide an estimation method that is Bayesian and numerical but does
not use the Kalman filter for recovering the latent true price purged of tick-rounding effects.
Our objective differs from theirs. Rather than purging frictions from observed prices, we aim
to measure them since the bid-ask bounce, dealer compensation, and rounding that Allena
and Chordia’s framework filters out are elements of the temporary component (and traders’
experience) that we wish to estimate. For our purpose, OLS is preferable because it requires
no structural or distributional assumptions about the frictions. This is important because
our Panel B results indicate that non-Normality intrinsic to the underlying trade dynamics
would remain even after applying a rounding correction.
Returning now to the larger sample of SS estimates, Panel A of Table 3 compares the
performance of the SS approach to GMM for the 55 stock-days with valid SS estimates and
27

ˆϕ1 < 0.99. The distributions of SS estimates and inferences do not match those of GMM
well at all. For ϕ1, the average SS estimate is 0.07 compared to -0.12 for GMM. The median
of -0.08 is closer to the GMM median of -0.12. The match rate with GMM inferences is 67%
when the GMM estimate is positive, but only 13.5% when the GMM estimate is negative.
This is a serious deficiency because the vast majority (80%) of the GMM estimates are
negative and significant. In contrast, corresponding match rates are all above 80% for the
OLS estimates in the full sample in Panel B of the table. The κ parameters are estimated
especially poorly by SS, with match rates of only 9.1% to 13.7% when the GMM estimate
is positive, and a vast majority (89% or more) of the GMM estimates are positive and
significant. SS average and median estimates are all smaller than the GMM averages and
medians. The ψ parameters are estimated somewhat better in matching the average and
median GMM estimates. Nevertheless, the percentages of days that match the inferences of
GMM are uniformly smaller than those of the OLS estimates in the full sample in Panel D
of the table. Taken together, these results confirm that even when SS is seeded with OLS
starting values and produces a valid solution in transaction price data, the SS estimates and
inferences are still unreliable.14
5.2
Assessing the Quality of OLS Estimates
5.2.1
Comparison of OLS and GMM
Having established that the SS estimation is unreliable for transaction price data, we
now turn to evaluating the performance of three OLS-based approaches by comparing their
estimates and inferences to those of GMM. Estimates and tests are conducted at the securityday level for all three OLS approaches and GMM, and performance is evaluated by comparing
the distribution of estimates and inferences across security-days. To ensure uniformity of the
underlying assumptions, GMM and the two OLS approaches that use a VAR are all based
upon an HHM model with (n = 7, p = 1 and q = 0). The lag length of seven was chosen
14The RMSE statistics reported for SS in this panel are smaller than those of OLS in the full sample in later panels. This is
due to differences in the samples. Though details are not tabulated for brevity, OLS performs better overall in this subsample
than in the full sample, and in particular the OLS RMSEs (and RMedSEs) are uniformly smaller in this subsample than those
of SS. These 55 stock-days appear to be atypically easier to estimate by both methods than stock-days in the full sample.
28

after visual inspection of the correlograms of a random selection of security-days before any
estimation was attempted. This choice turned out to be very close to the overall sample
median of eight when lag lengths are selected by the AIC separately on each security-day,
as reported in the next section.
For the GMM estimation of κ, ψ and ϕ1, the moment conditions are the least-squares
normal equations corresponding to an AR(7) for ˆxt and to Equation (38) in Appendix A
altogether in one pass (Equation (5) reduces to an AR(7) and Equation (31) reduces to
Equation (38) in the case where the elements of the xt vector are not individually observable
by market participants). We regard the GMM estimates as a “full information” benchmark
in these performance assessments because GMM imposes the constraints that are implied
by the model on all the regression coefficients in estimating Equations (5) and (38). In
contrast, only the exactly-identifying information from the contemporaneous and first-orderlag regression coefficients are used in the OLS approach of Proposition 1 and the two other
OLS-based alternatives considered below.
The GMM estimations require a numerical optimization that takes considerable processing
time. There are 25 orthogonality conditions and only 19 parameters that define the regression
coefficients, so the system of moment conditions is overidentified.
The overidentifying
restrictions do have some bite. The GMM J statistic rejects the null in 25.9% of the 3047
security-days in the sample. Nevertheless, the HHM model seems to fit the data well for a
large majority of security-days.
The first OLS approach is that of Proposition 1, which estimates Equations (5) and
(38) in Appendix A separately by OLS. Inferences are based on a block-diagonal variancecovariance matrix with a Newey-West adjustment as described following Proposition 1. We
refer to this approach as “OLS-Prop.”
The second OLS approach is a two-step procedure, which first estimates a VAR model
for trades by OLS, then uses its residuals as proxies for the ϵt vector in a second-stage
regression for returns. The second-stage equation corresponds to Equation (27) in Appendix
29

A, where ϵt is treated as an observable variable and the lagged ϵts are absorbed into the
disturbance. Price impact parameters correspond to distinct coefficients in this regression.
This approach does not include the higher order lags of trades as controls because they
are not needed if residuals from the first-stage are regarded as observationally equivalent
to ϵt. Hypothesis tests with this method ignore the estimation error involved in the first
step. Inferences are based on Newey-West standard errors from the second-stage equation.
Comparing the results from this approach to those of Proposition 1 provides evidence on
whether the errors-in-variables arising from using a proxy for ϵt, and ignoring the first stage
estimation error in computing standard errors, matter to the estimates and inferences. We
refer to this method as “OLS-Resid”.
The third OLS approach assumes that Et−1[xt] = 0 for all t, and does not use either
the time-series model residuals or the trades beyond lag-one as controls in the returns
equation.
This approach treats xt entirely as a surprise, and there is no role for fitting
Equation (5).
Price impact parameters are computed from the formulas in Proposition
1 with B1 = 0.
Inferences are based on standard errors with no adjustment for lagged
dependence in residuals. Comparing the results from this approach to the others provides
evidence on the importance of modeling the market’s conditional expectations. As we show
below, this approach exhibits large distortions in the estimates and tests. We refer to this
method as “OLS-Zero”.
Detailed results of the four estimation methods for all the parameters appear in panels
B - D of Table 3. Altogether, OLS-Prop matches the estimates and inferences of GMM
rather well. The overidentifying restrictions GMM brings to the estimation do not change
the estimates and inferences very much from those of OLS-Prop. OLS-Resid is a close second
best. OLS-Zero does poorly, especially with the ψ parameters, which are biased upward and
toward rejecting in the positive direction. The differences between the OLS-based methods
are whether and how conditional expectations of xt are incorporated into the estimation.
The results indicate that care taken in modeling expectations of xt matters to the quality of
30

the estimates and inferences of the price impact parameters.
The lag length was held fixed at seven across these estimations. However, the choice of
lag length is itself an important aspect of modeling the conditional expectations of xt. We
do not know what model market participants use to form beliefs, and the appropriate lag
length could vary by security and by day. Searching over lag lengths and the parameter space
using GMM is infeasible for a panel of security-days as would be typical in microstructure
or asset pricing research. However, allowing such flexibility in selecting lag lengths is easy
with a method based on OLS. We exploit this flexibility in obtaining the estimates for our
main results to which we now turn.
5.3
OLS-Prop with AIC
This section is divided into five subsections. The first three provide detailed results for
each of the key sets of parameters—ϕ1, κs and ψs.
The estimation is done using OLSProp as described in the previous section.
The difference here is that lag lengths are
determined by the AIC for each security-day. These are followed by a fourth subsection
that reports descriptive statistics for trading volume by trade classification and type of
day. The final subsection examines relations between parameters from the same earnings
announcement (and week-after) days for evidence that HFTs use information learned from
liquidity providing trades to enhance the profitability of their liquidity demanding trades.
5.3.1
ϕ1 Estimates
Table 4 reports estimates and tests for ϕ1.
The format of this table is a template
for the tables that follow. Under the heading for a particular counterparty pairing, there
are four rows of statistics that relate to the four classifications of days around earnings
announcements. Those labeled “Pre” are estimates for days prior to the overnights when
earnings announcements occur, those labeled “Post” are for post-announcement days, and
those labeled “WA Pre” and “WA Post” are estimates from the same weekday one week
after the Pre and Post days, respectively. For each day classification, we report the fractions
of the sample for which the estimates of ϕ1 are positive and significant, and negative and
31

significant, followed by the mean and median of the estimates. The fifth row reports statistics
for the pooled set of estimates that includes all four day classifications.
For the full sample, the average (median) ϕ1 parameter estimate is -0.11 (-0.10). Negative
estimates reject the null of equality with zero at a rate of 64% for the full sample, and 42%
and 91% for the low- and high-analyst-coverage quartiles, respectively.
Rejections with
positive estimates are rare at 3% or less.
Negative estimates of ϕ1 indicate reversals in
the temporary component of prices unrelated to contemporaneous trading, consistent with
liquidity providers posting quotes to elicit trades that reverse past shocks to inventory. The
full-sample median lag selected by the AIC is eight, with larger lag lengths selected for
high-coverage (median of 16) than for low-coverage stocks (median of four).
5.3.2
Kappas and their Differences
Table 5 reports estimates of the permanent components of price impact, the κs, and
selected κ differences. The results confirm what prior work has established using midquotes:
permanent price impacts are positive and significant for the vast majority of security-days
across all counterparty pairings, with between 66% and 92% of estimates positive and
significant.
The average estimates range from 6.39bp to 14.55bp per $10,000 traded for
κNN and κHH respectively, and are substantially larger for low-coverage stocks and smaller
for high-coverage stocks; the internet appendix reports corresponding results for the lowand high-coverage quartiles separately.
The differences tests in Table 5 confirm that the identity of the liquidity provider has a
stronger association with permanent price impact than the identity of the liquidity demander.
HFT liquidity providers absorb more adverse selection than non-HFT liquidity providers
regardless of the identity of the liquidity demander, with rejection rates in the positive
direction of 42% and 46% for the two relevant differences. HFTs’ liquidity demanding trades
also pose greater adverse selection than those of non-HFTs, though the differences are smaller
in magnitude and significance. Thus HFTs both pose and absorb greater adverse selection
than non-HFTs in both trading roles—a pattern that will appear in regressions below that
32

investigate how HFTs profit from their liquidity demanding trades. Price priority implies
that HFTs have the most aggressive quotes for the trades to which they provide liquidity;
otherwise, they would not have been paired as counterparties to those trades.
We can
therefore conclude that HFT liquidity providers tend to offer more aggressive quotes than
non-HFTs to the trades that pose the greatest adverse selection risk. Evidence below suggests
that HFTs benefit from doing so by trading more profitably as liquidity demanders.
The cross-sectional regressions in Table 6 confirm these patterns. The first three columns
show that when the liquidity demander is a non-HFT, HFTs absorb orders that move prices
permanently by 2.7bp to 4.8bp more than non-HFTs for stocks with moderate analyst
coverage, with the effect larger for low-coverage stocks, absent for high-coverage stocks,
and stronger around announcements with larger earnings surprises. The last three columns
show that when the liquidity demander is an HFT, HFTs also absorb more adverse selection
than non-HFTs for stocks outside the highest coverage quartile, with marginal evidence of
a significant effect for low-coverage stocks.
5.3.3
Psis and their Differences
Table 7 reports estimates and hypothesis tests for the ψ parameters. The rather surprising
finding is the high frequency with which negative ψ estimates reject the null of equality to
zero compared to positive estimates when the liquidity demander in the transaction is an
HFT. This means that HFTs actually capture, rather than pay, a price concession when
they execute liquidity seeking trades. This finding is contrary to the traditional notion that
liquidity demanders pay for immediacy with price concessions that are greater for larger
orders.
These results appear on the left side of Table 7. When the liquidity provider is also
an HFT, the negative (positive) rejection rate is 33% (8%). When the liquidity provider
is a non-HFT, the negative (positive) rejection rate is 54% (2%). These percentages are
for all days. The overall pattern suggests that when HFTs trade as liquidity demanders,
the counterparty orders that supply liquidity are priced so aggressively that they result in
33

a wealth transfer to the liquidity demander. Those orders could be stale, or they could
be deliberately priced aggressively to attract a counterparty and execution. The fact that
this happens when the liquidity providers are other HFTs, and that the point estimates are
even larger in magnitude for those trades, suggests that staleness is not the full explanation.
The findings suggest that supplying liquidity on favorable terms is common for both HFTs
and non-HFTs, and that HFTs are adept at identifying and trading against such offers as
liquidity demanders.
The internet appendix reports corresponding results for the low- and high-coverage
quartiles separately. The same patterns are apparent in these quartiles as for the full sample.
For all days, the average and median magnitudes of the price concession captured by HFT
liquidity demanders are larger for low-coverage stocks at between 2.83bp and 1.81bp, versus
0.26bp to 0.07bp for the high-coverage stocks.
As described in Section 2, the negative ψ estimates documented here for HFT liquidity
demanders have a different interpretation than a similar finding in midquote-based studies.
Brogaard et al. (2014) interpret a negative temporary component in midquotes as HFTs
trading to correct temporary mispricing—e.g., buying when the midquote is temporarily
below true value and thereby pushing it back toward true value. This is a natural interpretation
from the liquidity demander’s perspective. From the liquidity provider’s perspective, however,
a negative midquote ψ following a purchase means that the midquote has risen to reflect the
information content of the trade but has not risen fully, leaving the midquote below true
value. This is more consistent with slow adjustment of quotes to the information content
of trades than with liquidity providers’ repositioning quotes to elicit offsetting order flow.
The latter would require a positive ψ to push the midquote above true value and discourage
further buying. Our transaction-price ψ speaks to a different question entirely. Namely,
whether the execution price itself is above or below true value at the moment of the trade.
When ψ is negative in transaction prices, HFTs are executing buys at prices below (and
sales at prices above) true value on average, which yield profits on the transactions. The two
34

results are therefore complementary but distinct. Both reflect HFTs trading when prices
favor them, but the midquote result describes the dynamics of quote adjustment following a
trade, while the transaction-price result captures how the execution price itself constitutes
a wealth transfer in the HFT’s favor.
The results are different for transactions in which non-HFTs demand liquidity from
HFTs, depicted in the upper right of the table. In this case, the rejections favor positive
estimates over negative estimates of ψ. In other words, non-HFTs tend to pay price concessions
to HFT liquidity providers. The magnitudes are rather modest—for the full-sample and
all days, the positive (negative) rejection rates are 20% (11%). The average and median
estimates are quite small at 0.27bp and 0.02bp, respectively. The corresponding statistics
are somewhat larger at 1.28bp and 0.52bp for the low-coverage quartile, and they are tiny
at 0.042bp and 0.016bp for the high-coverage quartile (internet appendix).
The frequency of positive versus negative rejections is less when the liquidity provider is
also a non-HFT at 12% and 11% for the full sample, and the average and medians are less
positive at -0.52bp and 0.00bp, respectively. A similar pattern exists for both low- and highcoverage stocks (internet appendix). In these transactions, there appears to be no dominant
direction in which the temporary component of price impact is sensitive to the value of the
transaction, and the magnitudes are very small on average. When non-HFTs trade with
each other, it is just as likely in the panel of stock-days that the liquidity demander pays as
receives a price concession.
During the time of our sample, Nasdaq fees and rebates added costs to demanding
liquidity and added revenue to qualifying liquidity providers such as HFTs. Receiving rebates
reduces the price concessions that liquidity providers must embed in their limit prices to
cover costs, so negative estimates for ψ do not necessarily imply that a liquidity provider
who receives rebates suffers trading losses overall. However, the differences above appear too
large to be attributable to fees and rebates alone.15 In addition, as we show formally next,
15Brogaard et al. (2014) report that in the time period of the Nasdaq HFT data, fees ranged from $0.0025 to $0.00295,
and rebates ranged from $0.0025 to $0.0028 per share.
These correspond to about 1bp or less of the transaction
35

the differences in ψ estimates are more strongly determined by the identity of the liquidity
demander than that of the liquidity provider, which is not the pattern to expect if fees and
rebates are important determinants of differences in ψ estimates.
Formal tests of pairwise differences in ψs are reported in Table 7. The left side of the
table focuses on varying the identity of the liquidity demander. The rejection rates and
difference estimates in the upper left indicate that non-HFT liquidity demanders pay greater
price concessions than HFT liquidity demanders when the liquidity provider is an HFT. The
rejection rates are 33% vs 5% and the average difference is -3.24bp for the full sample, the
median is -0.39bp. The rejection rates are stronger (45% vs 2%), but the average -1.06bp
and median -0.30bp differences are smaller in magnitude, when the liquidity provider is a
non-HFT (lower-left). These patterns hold for the low- and high-coverage quartiles as well,
as reported in the internet appendix. Non-HFTs pay significantly greater price concessions
than HFTs when paired with either other HFTs or non-HFTs as liquidity providers.
The statistics reported on the right side of the table focus on the identity of the liquidity
provider.
The identity of the liquidity provider has only a limited association with the
price concession that HFTs earn when trading as liquidity demanders—rejection rates favor
negative differences only slightly at 17% versus 11% for the sample as a whole, meaning that
HFT liquidity demanders capture profit from HFT and non-HFT liquidity providers alike.
Similarly, when the liquidity demander is a non-HFT, rejection rates favor positive differences
at only 16% versus 8%, suggesting that non-HFTs pay modestly greater price concessions
to HFT liquidity providers than to non-HFT liquidity providers, but the difference is weak.
These results reinforce our conjecture that stale limit orders are not the primary explanation
for why HFTs capture price concessions when they trade as liquidity demanders, and suggest
that HFTs and non-HFTs receive similar compensation when providing liquidity to non-HFT
demanders.
Summarizing, the ψ estimates tend to be negative for trades initiated by HFTs, regardless
value for a stock whose price is $30/share or more.
The current fee and rebate schedule is available online at
http://nasdaqtrader.com/Trader.aspx?id=PriceListTrading2.
36

of whether the liquidity provider is an HFT or non-HFT. The estimates tend to be positive
when HFTs absorb orders initiated by non-HFTs.
The difference in ψ between trades
initiated by HFTs versus non-HFTs suggests that HFTs are more adept than non-HFTs at
targeting aggressively priced orders, regardless of whether the liquidity provider is another
HFT or a non-HFT. Thus, while the results for κs above suggest that HFTs contribute to
price discovery to a greater degree than non-HFTs (by initiating trades that inform market
prices and by offering liquidity to trades that are more informative to market prices), the
results for ψs suggest that HFTs also profit from initiating trades selectively against orders
that are aggressively priced. We examine a possible relation between these aspects of HFTs’
trading further below.
It is instructive to compare our estimates to those of Brogaard et al. (2014), who estimate
the HHM model using the same Nasdaq HFT data but with midquotes as the price variable.
The comparison is approximate since their estimations group trades differently than ours, but
the broad patterns are informative. Averaging our estimates across liquidity provider types,
the average κ for HFT liquidity demanders is 11.62bp and for non-HFT liquidity demanders
is 8.75bp, falling within the range of Brogaard et al.’s medium-stock event-time estimates
of 11.91bp and 6.69bp. These figures are consistent with the Section 2 argument that κ
estimates should be similar since both are anchored on the same permanent component. For
ψ, Brogaard et al. find negative estimates for both HFT and non-HFT liquidity demanders in
midquotes, consistent with liquidity providers being slow to adjust quotes to the information
content of trades. Our transaction-price estimates differ by liquidity demander. Our average
ψ for HFT liquidity demanders is -2.27bp, confirming that HFTs capture profit at the
transaction level, while our average ψ for non-HFT liquidity demanders is only -0.13bp
and tends to be positive in many subsamples, especially when the liquidity provider is an
HFT, meaning non-HFTs pay rather than receive a price concession at execution.
Cross-sectional regressions in Table 8 confirm that HFTs capture more favorable price
concessions than non-HFTs for stocks outside the highest quartile of analyst coverage, with
37

the advantage concentrated in low-coverage stocks, absent for high-coverage stocks, and not
associated with earnings days or announcement attributes. For trades initiated by HFTs,
the price concession advantage is larger when non-HFT liquidity providers absorb the trades
than when HFT liquidity providers do.
5.3.4
Trading Volume
The estimates of parameters κ and ψ are the price impacts per $10,000 traded in a
given category on a given day. The internet appendix reports means and medians of trading
volume by day within each counterparty pairing category. The number of transactions and
transaction sizes are both elevated on the Pre-day and especially so on the Post-day for
trades initiated by non-HFTs compared to the week-after days. The average total dollar
volume for the NH and NN pairings on the Post-day is greater than on the WA-Post day by
factors of 2.01 and 2.02 respectively, and by factors of 1.35 and 1.30 on the Pre-day versus
the WA-Pre day. Dollar volume initiated by HFTs is also elevated on the Post-day by a
factor of 1.70 relative to the WA-Post day. The elevated trading volume around earnings
announcements means that the aggregate economic significance of the κ and ψ differences
reported above are larger around earnings announcements, and especially on the Post-day,
by approximately these same factors.
5.3.5
Event Study and Temporal Regressions
The ψ results establish that HFTs earn profit on average per dollar of liquidity demanded.
The κ results show that HFTs absorb more adverse selection than non-HFTs when they
provide liquidity. A key consequence of estimating the parameters from transaction prices
rather than midquotes is that we can ask whether HFTs’ profit is associated with what
they learn from the adverse selection they absorb as liquidity providers. Several theoretical
models suggest this possibility, predicting that HFTs process information gleaned from the
trading environment for use in their own profitable trading (e.g., Biais et al., 2015; Foucault
et al., 2016; Huang and Yueshen, 2021). We begin with a vivid example.
All except one of the earnings surprises in our sample range from -29% to 13%. The
38

exception is the February 24, 2009 earnings announcement of Central European Media
Enterprises Ltd. (ticker CETV), whose earnings surprise was -145%. The global financial
crisis decimated TV ad spending by CETV’s clients in late 2008 and early 2009, which
depressed revenue and earnings, and caused a suspension in company guidance beyond the
following quarter.16
Panel A of Figure 1 plots the permanent component of price impact, κ, for three
counterparty pairings beginning on day -16 and ending on day 36 relative to the CETV
earnings announcement, which occurs between days 0 and 1. The green line that lies mostly
below the others is κ for trades in which non-HFTs are both the demander and provider
of liquidity (NN). The blue line, mostly in the middle, represents transactions in which
an HFT demands liquidity from a non-HFT liquidity provider (HN). The red line that lies
mostly above the others is κ for trades initiated by non-HFTs and absorbed by HFT liquidity
providers (NH). There is economically significant variation in all three lines over this time
period. Panel B of the same figure plots the temporary component, ψ, for the same set
of counterparty pairings. On most days, the temporary component associated with trades
between non-HFTs (in green) is positive, meaning that non-HFTs pay for liquidity provided
by other non-HFTs. In contrast, the temporary component is often negative for the blue
and red lines. The red line is large and negative in the approximately 10 days following the
earnings announcement. When trading as liquidity providers, HFTs were effectively paying
non-HFTs to take liquidity. Panels A and B together suggest that HFTs were underpricing
the elevated adverse selection they absorbed from non-HFTs in the days following the
earnings announcement. The internet appendix plots ψNH with its 95% confidence bands;
while zero is within the confidence bands for most days, the negative spikes on 10 of the
days are significantly different from zero.
In both panels, peaks in the red line appear to precede peaks in the blue line—periods
in which HFTs absorb a high degree of adverse selection when supplying liquidity to non16See the earnings call transcript at https://seekingalpha.com/article/134262-central-european-media-enterprises-ltd-q1-2009earnings-call-transcript. On March 23, 2009, Time Warner purchased a 31% stake, and by 2013 owned a controlling interest in
CETV.
39

HFTs are followed by periods when HFTs impose greater adverse selection in their liquidity
demanding trades.
Redeploying information gleaned from trading with others is a way
for HFTs to benefit from absorbing adverse selection—like a self-made rebate.
In this
exceptional case the effect spans multiple calendar days, consistent with the hypothesis
that HFTs learn from the order flow they absorb as liquidity providers and re-trade on what
they learn.
To examine whether this pattern is a general feature of HFT trading around earnings
announcements, Table 9 reports regressions for the full sample that test whether κNH leads
ψHN (i.e., “red leads blue”) between the two days that straddle the earnings announcement
(Pre and Post), and separately between the two corresponding days in the week after the
announcement (WA Pre and WA Post). Each earnings announcement is represented by a
single observation in this analysis, so the reason that led us to cluster standard errors by
earnings announcement in the regressions in Tables 6 and 8 is not present here. However, as
a clear outlier, the 2/24/2009 earnings announcement of CETV described above is excluded
from this analysis.
We consider the “normal” pair of days in the week after announcements first. Column
(1) in Table 9 examines whether ψHN on the WA-Post day is related to κNH on the WA-Pre
day. The ψHN on the WA-Pre day is included as a control to account for persistence in
ψHN. The estimates indicate very strong and significant persistence, with a coefficient of
0.76. The coefficient on the WA-Pre day κNH is negative and significant, implying that
HFTs profit more (i.e., ψHN is lower) on days following those in which they absorb greater
adverse selection (i.e., “red leads blue”). The adjusted R2 is 0.53.
The regression in column (2) adds κHH on the WA-Pre day as a regressor to account
for learning from trades absorbed from other HFTs.
We also include κNH and κHH on
the WA-Post day itself to capture the contemporaneous re-use of information gleaned from
informative trades on the same day. Persistence in ψHN is again strong in this regression, with
a coefficient of 0.68. However, the coefficient on the WA-Pre day κNH that was significant
40

in column (1) is not significant here. Instead, the contemporaneous κHH is negative and
significant, and larger in magnitude than the coefficient on κNH in column (1).
After
accounting for persistence, the significant incremental contribution to profitable liquidity
demanding trades by HFTs on the WA-Post day comes from informative trades absorbed
from other HFTs on the same day. The significant coefficient in column (1) and the similarity
of the adjusted R2 at 0.60 suggests that the WA-Pre day κNH is acting as a proxy for, and
is perhaps a determinant of, κHH on the WA-Post day.
The insignificance of the intercept suggests that after accounting for persistence, the
incremental profitability of liquidity-demanding trades would trend toward zero were it not
for information gleaned from trades with other HFTs (i.e., without positive κHH on the WAPost day). Thus, on average across the WA day pairs, absorbing adverse selection from other
HFTs is essential to HFTs profiting from their liquidity demanding trades. These findings
are consistent with the hypothesis that, on “normal” days, HFTs profit from the reuse of
information gleaned mostly from their trading with other HFTs.
Columns (3) and (4) report the same regressions for the days on either side of earnings
announcements, and the results differ from the week-after findings in an interesting way. In
column (3), the coefficient on κNH is negative and highly significant, and it remains so in
column (4) after adding the other κ regressors—i.e., “red leads blue” strongly in the two days
around earnings announcements. In fact, all the κ coefficients are negative and significant
except the contemporaneous κHH, and the largest in magnitude are those relating to trades
absorbed from non-HFTs. The trades that HFTs absorb from non-HFTs on both the Pre
and Post days contribute most to the profitability of their liquidity demanding trades on the
Post-day, with trades absorbed from other HFTs on the Pre-day contributing as well but to
a lesser degree. Thus, around earnings announcements, the source of profitable information
for HFTs shifts toward the trades they absorb from non-HFTs, in contrast to the week-after
days where trading with other HFTs dominates.
Despite these stronger regression relations, the results around earnings announcements
41

are less statistically reliable than those for the week-after days. The adjusted R2 in the
column (4) regression is only 0.23 versus 0.60 for the WA days.
Unlike the WA days, there is negative persistence in ψHN from the Pre to the Post day,
which is highly significant. This means that Post days with the most profitable liquidity
demanding HFT trades (controlling for the other price impacts) follow Pre days having the
least profitable liquidity demanding trades. HFTs are informed and profit most after days
of initiating trades that profit least. We do not have a simple explanation for this finding,
though the contrast with the strong positive persistence on the “normal” WA days suggests
that earnings announcements disrupt the dynamics of HFT learning and profitability.
Taken together, the results in Table 9 lend support to the hypothesis that HFTs profit
in their liquidity demanding trades for having learned from the adverse selection they absorb
when providing liquidity. Hirschey (2021) shows that HFTs’ liquidity demanding trades lead
those of non-HFTs. The learning channel documented here offers a possible explanation for
how HFTs come to anticipate non-HFT order flow.
Interestingly, the counterparties from whom HFTs learn are different around earnings
announcements than in the week after. Around earnings announcements, the important
source of the information tends to be trades initiated by non-HFTs, whereas trades initiated
by other HFTs are important on the “normal” week-after days.
Of course, the regressions document associations rather than causal relations. It could
be that greater profits from liquidity demanding trades follow directly from losses when
providing liquidity; or it could be that some feature of the information environment leads
HFTs to (rationally) believe that there are greater gains to be had demanding liquidity
after learning more, which then leads HFTs to tolerate greater risk of loss in liquidity
provision.
Either way, what the regressions establish is that periods of greater adverse
selection absorbed by HFTs as liquidity providers are associated with greater profits from
their liquidity demanding trades, regardless of the channel through which this association
arises.
42

6
Conclusion
We provide a simple approach to estimating price impact and its components based on
a model attributable to Hasbrouck (1991a, 1991b, 1993) and Hendershott and Menkveld
(2014) that is rather general and descriptive of many securities market settings.
The
approach handles situations in which transactions are categorized by trader type, order type,
trading platform, or trade routing, estimating temporary and permanent components for all
categories jointly in a consistent framework with hypothesis testing via the delta method. It
requires no distributional assumptions, avoids the Normality failures that cause state space
estimation to break down with transaction price data, and is fast enough for large-scale
applications while performing well relative to a full-information GMM benchmark.
We illustrate the approach using millisecond-level Nasdaq data with trades categorized
by counterparty pairings between HFTs and non-HFTs—the kind of analysis that regulators
and market operators could conduct with proprietary data that identifies categories of trades
in various ways. We find that HFTs capture rather than pay concessions in their liquidity
demanding trades, and these wealth transfers are related in the cross-section to the adverse
selection HFTs absorb as liquidity providers, consistent with absorbing adverse selection
being a learning opportunity that supports profitable subsequent trade initiations.
Two natural extensions are worth highlighting for future research. First, the approach in
Proposition 1 accommodates nonlinear price impact simply by including higher-order terms
in the xt vector, which could be used to test whether price impact is convex in order size
and whether the illiquidity of entering and exiting large positions carries a return premium.
Second, because OLS estimation is fast, the approach is well suited for generating illiquidity
estimates from intraday data for large panels of securities for use in asset pricing tests.
Comparing permanent, temporary, and total price impact as competing illiquidity measures,
and examining whether the finer decomposition enabled by the HHM model improves on
simpler constructs, seems a particularly fruitful avenue for future research.
43

Appendix A: Proofs and Additional Equations
Proof of Proposition 1: To simplify notation, the proof considers the case in which st follows an ARMA(2,1)
plus ψ′xt. This case is sufficient to infer the implications for a general ARMA(p, q). In the ARMA(2,1) case,
Equations (6) -(8) in the text are:
st = ϕ1st−1 + ϕ2st−2 + ψ′xt + ηt + θηt−1
(18)
mt = mt−1 + κ′ϵt + ξt
(19)
pt = mt + st,
(20)
where xt and ϵt are (k × 1) vectors. Writing these equations in first differences yields
dst = ϕ1 dst−1 + ϕ2 dst−2 + ψ′dxt + ηt −(1 −θ)ηt−1 −θηt−2
(21)
dmt = κ′ϵt + ξt
(22)
dpt = κ′ϵt + dst + ξt,
(23)
where dxt ≡xt−xt−1 and where we have substituted from Equation (22) for the dmt term into Equation (23).
Next, we substitute for lags of dst in terms of observables. Lagging Equation (23) by one, then by two, and
multiplying by the corresponding ϕj yields
ϕ1dst−1 = ϕ1 dpt−1 −ϕ1 κ′ϵt−1 −ϕ1 ξt−1
(24)
ϕ2dst−2 = ϕ2 dpt−2 −ϕ2 κ′ϵt−2 −ϕ2 ξt−2.
(25)
Substituting these into Equation (21) yields
dst = ϕ1dpt−1 + ϕ2dpt−2 −ϕ1κ′ϵt−1 −ϕ2κ′ϵt−2 −ϕ1ξt−1 −ϕ2ξt−2 + ψ′dxt + ηt −(1 −θ)ηt−1 −θηt−2. (26)
Substituting this into Equation (23) yields
dpt = ϕ1 dpt−1 + ϕ2 dpt−2 + ψ′dxt + κ′(ϵt −ϕ1ϵt−1 −ϕ2ϵt−2) + η∗
t ,
(27)
where η∗
t = (ξt + ηt) −(ϕ1ξt−1 + (1 −θ)ηt−1) −(ϕ2ξt−2 + θηt−2) is an AR(2) disturbance. In general, if st
follows an ARMA(p,q) process, then η∗
t is autoregressive of order max{p, q}. Mutual uncorrelatedness of ξ,
η and ϵ at all lags implies that η∗
t is uncorrelated with ϵt at all lags as well.
44

Using the VAR model, Equation (5), we write
ϵt −ϕ1ϵt−1 −ϕ2ϵt−2 =
 
xt −
n
X
s=1
Bsxt−s
!
−ϕ1
 
xt−1 −
n
X
s=1
Bsxt−s−1
!
−ϕ2
 
xt−2 −
n
X
s=1
Bsxt−s−2
!
(28)
= xt −(ϕ1Ik + B1)xt−1 −(ϕ2Ik + B2 −ϕ1B1)xt−2
−
n
X
s=3
(Bs −ϕ1Bs−1 −ϕ2Bs−2)xt−s
+ (ϕ1Bn + ϕ2Bn−1)xt−n−1 + ϕ2Bnxt−n−2,
(29)
where Ik is the k × k identity matrix. Substituting Equation (29) into Equation (27) yields
dpt = ϕ1 dpt−1 + ϕ2dpt−2 + ψ′(xt −xt−1) + κ′

xt −(ϕ1Ik + B1)xt−1 −(ϕ2Ik + B2 −ϕ1B1)xt−2
−
n
X
s=3
(Bs −ϕ1Bs−1 −ϕ2Bs−2)xt−s + (ϕ1Bn + ϕ2Bn−1)xt−n−1 + ϕ2Bnxt−n−2

+ η∗
t
(30)
= ϕ1 dpt−1 + (ψ′ + κ′)xt −[ψ′ + κ′(ϕ1Ik + B1)] xt−1
+ ϕ2 dpt−2 −κ′(ϕ2Ik + B2 −ϕ1B1)xt−2 −
n
X
s=3
κ′(Bs −ϕ1Bs−1 −ϕ2Bs−2)xt−s
+ κ′(ϕ1Bn + ϕ2Bn−1)xt−n−1 + ϕ2κ′Bnxt−n−2 + η∗
t .
(31)
It is clear from inspection that the highest-order lags of dp and x on the right-hand side of Equation (31)
are determined as p and n + p, respectively, where p is the AR order of the ARMA specification for st and
n is the lag order of the VAR.
The rest of the proof involves matching the coefficients in Equation (12) in the text and Equation (31)
here. Matching the first terms of both equations yields ϕ1 = a1. Matching the second and third terms
yields
C′ = ψ′ + κ′
(32)
D′
1 = −ψ′ −ϕ1κ′ −κ′B1 = −ψ′ −a1κ′ −κ′B1,
(33)
which imply that ψ′ = C′ −κ′, and therefore
D′
1 = κ′ −C′ −a1κ′ −κ′B1
(34)
D′
1 + C′ = κ′[(1 −a1)Ik −B1]
(35)
κ′ = (D′
1 + C′)[(1 −a1)Ik −B1]−1,
(36)
and
ψ′ = C′ −(D′
1 + C′)[(1 −a1)Ik −B1]−1.
(37)
45

Finally, noting that ut = η∗
t establishes that ut is autoregressive of order max{p, q + 1} and uncorrelated
with ϵt at all lags. □
Additional Equations: When the individual elements of xt are not observable to market participants, the
equation for price dynamics in Equation (31) is modified as follows:
dpt = ϕ1 dpt−1 + (ψ′ + κ′)xt −[ψ′ + κ′(ϕ1 + b1)] xt−1
+ ϕ2 dpt−2 −ˆκ(ϕ2 + b2 −ϕ1b1)ˆxt−2 −
n
X
s=3
ˆκ(bs −ϕ1bs−1 −ϕ2bs−2)ˆxt−s
+ ˆκ(ϕ1bn + ϕ2bn−1)ˆxt−n−1 + ϕ2ˆκbnˆxt−n−2 + η∗
t .
(38)
If st = ϕ1st−1 + ψ′xt + ηt then the disturbance to the regression in Proposition 1 (denoted in the proof
by η∗
t ) given by
ut = (ξt + ηt) −(ϕ1ξt−1 + ηt−1),
(39)
whose variance and first-order serial covariance are
Var[ut] = (1 + ϕ2
1)σ2
ξ + 2σ2
η
(40)
Cov[ut, ut−1] = −ϕ1σ2
ξ −σ2
η.
(41)
Solving for σ2
η and σ2
ξ yields:
σ2
η = ϕ1Var[ut] + (1 + ϕ1) Cov[ut, ut−1]
2ϕ1 −(1 + ϕ2
1)
(42)
σ2
ξ = Var[ut] −2σ2
η
1 + ϕ2
1
.
(43)
These formulas can be used to estimate σ2
η and σ2
ξ based on moments of the regression residuals and the
regression estimate of ϕ1 (i.e., a1 in Proposition 1).
46

Table 1: Summary Statistics
The table reports summary statistics for all four stock days defined in the paper (i.e., Pre, Post, WA-Pre and WA-Post) for 823 earnings
announcements from 120 distinct stocks in our sample that spans 2008-2009. Each row corresponds to a statistic that is computed from
Nasdaq daytime trading hours for each stock-day. For each row, the numbers reported across the columns correspond to the distribution of
the statistic across stock-days. Statistics include the dollar volume of transactions within each counterparty pairing: HH, HN, NH, and NN,
where H represents HFT and N represents non-HFTs. The first letter identifies the liquidity demander and the second letter identifies the
liquidity provider. Also included are statistics on the transaction returns, the number of transactions by counterparty pairing, equity market
capitalization at the end of December 2007, and analyst coverage taken from I/B/E/S.
Median
Mean
Standard deviation
1st percentile
25th percentile
75th percentile
99th percentile
Dollar volume HH ($)
761,782
15,948,604
54,888,290
6,753
109,326
11,722,029
241,017,598
Dollar volume HN
4,043,612
29,415,150
96,184,331
41,269
847,259
24,731,626
467,411,748
Dollar volume NH
1,856,180
29,676,621
91,006,027
23,888
292,077
21,581,772
408,913,358
Dollar volume NN
7,016,318
36,589,210
103,331,394
161,090
1,705,066
32,708,586
475,522,937
Dollar volume All
13,857,100
111,629,585
332,655,730
265,547
3,266,132
95,893,555
1,612,497,009
Number of transactions HH
298
1,542
3,131
10
49
1,890
13,442
Number of transactions HN
1,026
2,407
3,630
42
303
3,237
16,879
Number of transactions NH
562
2,036
3,720
18
121
2,510
16,308
Number of transactions NN
1,350
2,516
3,280
102
573
3,289
15,677
Number of transactions All
3,362
8,500
13,166
242
1,119
11,286
60,840
Mean transaction return
0.000%
0.000%
0.005%
-0.015%
0.000%
0.001%
0.015%
Median transaction return
0.000%
0.000%
0.000%
0.000%
0.000%
0.000%
0.000%
Std. dev. of transaction returns
0.062%
0.092%
0.103%
0.012%
0.029%
0.117%
0.422%
Mean absolute transaction return
0.031%
0.045%
0.045%
0.006%
0.014%
0.059%
0.204%
Median absolute transaction return
0.000%
0.018%
0.031%
0.000%
0.000%
0.027%
0.148%
Std. dev. of absolute transaction returns
0.053%
0.079%
0.093%
0.010%
0.025%
0.101%
0.391%
Market capitalization (millions $)
2,579
27,530
56,574
218
1,442
29,339
324,786
Number of Analysts
11.00
12.60
7.79
0.00
7.00
18.00
34.00

Table 2: State Space Estimation Results: Focused Diagnostic Experiments
The table reports state space estimation outcomes for five stock-days selected from cases in which the state space estimator failed
on the full data (non-convergence, ˆϕ1 = 0.99, or hessian singluar). The state space model is estimated by maximum likelihood
using the Kalman filter. The parameter ϕ1 governs persistence of the temporary component st; values near unity indicate
failure to distinguish the stationary and permanent components. “Valid” indicates that the estimation produced parameter
estimates and valid standard errors.
Stock-Day
Experiment
Outcome
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Panel A: Real Data
Real data, OLS starting values
Valid
Nob
Yes
Noc
Yes
Yes
ˆϕ1
0.99
0.99
−0.31
0.99
0.99
Real data, zero starting values
Valid
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
ˆϕ1
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
Panel B: Semi-Simulation (real trades xt, simulated Normal disturbances)
Semi-simulation, zero starting values
Valid
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
ˆϕ1
0.99
0.99
−0.098a
0.99
0.99
Semi-simulation, OLS starting values
Valid
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
ˆϕ1
−0.074
−0.125
−0.011
−0.032
−0.072
(s.e.)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.001)
Panel C: Monte Carlo (all variables simulated with Normal distributions)
Monte Carlo, Normal disturbances
Valid
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
ˆϕ1 ≈input
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel D: Rank-Transformed Data (univariate Normal marginals)
Rank-transformed, OLS starting values
Valid
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
ˆϕ1
0.639
−0.255
0.973
0.089
0.177
(s.e.)
(0.118)
(0.032)
(986)
(0.012)
(0.124)
a Standard error = 0.131.
b Estimation converged but the Hessian is singular, preventing computation of standard errors. ˆϕ1 = 0.99 indicates
failure to identify the temporary component.
c Estimation converged but the Hessian is singular, preventing computation of standard errors. Unlike S1, ˆϕ1 = −0.31
is a reasonable value, suggesting the likelihood surface is flat in the neighborhood of a valid solution rather than at a
boundary.
48

Table 3: GMM vs State Space and OLS
The HHM model is estimated for each security-day in five different ways. The rows under each parameter
heading correspond to the estimation approach. Average and median estimates and rejection rates computed
under each approach appear in columns on the left. Rejection rates correspond to the null hypothesis that
the parameter is equal to zero. Columns to the right compare the state space (SS) and OLS approaches to
GMM by reporting percentages of security-days for which the inference of the SS or OLS-based approach
matches those of GMM. Also reported are root-mean-squared differences and root-median-squared differences
between the SS or OLS-based estimate and the GMM estimate. Panel A reports results for the SS estimator
and GMM for a subset of 55 stock-days. To be included in this subset, a stock-day must (i) have a valid SS
estimate (i.e., the numerical maximization converged), and (ii) have an SS estimate of ˆϕ1 that is strictly less
than 0.99 when rounded to two decimal places. The 0.99 threshold is the upper bound imposed on ϕ1 in the
SS estimation; stock-days hitting this bound are excluded because the estimate is constrained rather than
interior. Panels B–D report results comparing three OLS-based approaches to GMM for the full sample of
3047 stock-days. All models are estimated with n = 7 lags. Note that the large percentages for SS and the
small percentages reported for all OLS methods for κNN in matching GMM when the GMM estimate is less
than zero reflects only a few security-days. Very few days have negative GMM estimates for any of the four
κ parameters.
Panel A - State Space (SS) vs GMM: 55 stock-days with valid SS and GMM estimates and ˆϕ1 < 0.99
% rej>0
% rej<0
ave
median
% match GMM>0
% match GMM<0
RMSE
RMedSE
Phi 1
GMM
2%
80%
-0.12
-0.12
SS
16%
2%
0.07
-0.08
66.7%
13.5%
0.41
0.02
Kappa HH
GMM
89%
2%
2.41
0.59
SS
5%
4%
1.54
0.45
9.8%
75.0%
8.37
0.13
Kappa HN
GMM
91%
0%
1.87
0.24
SS
7%
0%
0.79
0.16
13.2%
100%a
4.29
0.04
Kappa NH
GMM
89%
0%
2.64
0.50
SS
9%
0%
1.43
0.37
13.7%
100%a
8.66
0.04
Kappa NN
GMM
96%
0%
2.85
0.24
SS
5%
0%
0.49
0.11
9.1%
nab
7.32
0.05
Psi HH
GMM
5%
51%
-0.65
-0.12
SS
5%
4%
-0.40
-0.07
66.7%
39.1%
4.33
0.04
Psi HN
GMM
2%
62%
-0.61
-0.06
SS
0%
2%
-0.88
0.00
90.0%
22.2%
3.67
0.02
Psi NH
GMM
18%
15%
0.29
0.00
SS
4%
4%
0.38
0.00
63.0%
64.3%
4.88
0.02
Psi NN
GMM
7%
11%
-0.38
0.00
SS
4%
0%
-0.05
0.00
82.1%
74.1%
3.35
0.01
a The 100% match rate is a small-sample artifact (2 and 4 observations respectively) where the GMM
estimate is negative. In every such instance neither estimator produces a significant result.
b No GMM estimates are negative for Kappa NN in this subsample.
49

Table 3 (continued): GMM vs State Space and OLS
Panel B - ϕ1
% rej>0
% rej<0
ave
median
% match GMM>0
% match GMM<0
RMSE
RMedSE
Phi 1
GMM
1.5%
64%
-0.10
-0.10
OLS Prop
0.9%
64%
-0.11
-0.10
86%
92%
0.03
0.004
OLS resid
0.9%
65%
-0.11
-0.11
86%
92%
0.04
0.005
OLS zero
1.2%
62%
-0.11
-0.10
82%
86%
0.03
0.004
Panel C - Kappas
% rej>0
% rej<0
ave
median
% match GMM>0
% match GMM<0
RMSE
RMedSE
Kappa HH
GMM
68%
0.5%
14.85
2.29
OLS Prop
68%
0.3%
14.74
2.39
95%
94%
13.99
0.04
OLS resid
69%
0.3%
13.67
2.31
93%
92%
22.21
0.11
OLS zero
68%
0.3%
13.43
1.98
94%
93%
39.04
0.21
Kappa HN
GMM
85%
0.1%
8.96
1.59
OLS Prop
85%
0.03%
8.49
1.59
94%
83%
13.16
0.02
OLS resid
83%
0.1%
8.68
1.67
92%
80%
14.58
0.05
OLS zero
88%
0.03%
7.36
1.44
93%
69%
13.31
0.09
Kappa NH
GMM
76%
0.3%
10.84
1.99
OLS Prop
76%
0.3%
11.24
2.08
94%
88%
14.24
0.04
OLS resid
77%
0.2%
10.69
1.99
92%
87%
15.42
0.08
OLS zero
75%
0.2%
9.81
1.77
93%
88%
15.30
0.17
Kappa NN
GMM
92%
0.1%
7.13
1.43
OLS Prop
90%
0.03%
6.25
1.38
94%
33%
16.66
0.03
OLS resid
91%
0.03%
6.42
1.41
95%
27%
17.42
0.04
OLS zero
92%
0.03%
5.43
1.22
94%
27%
16.90
0.06
50

Table 3 (continued): GMM vs State Space and OLS
Panel D - Psis
% rej>0
% rej<0
ave
median
% match GMM>0
% match GMM<0
RMSE
RMedSE
Psi HH
GMM
8.2%
35%
-4.66
-0.37
OLS Prop
7.7%
33%
-4.11
-0.35
95%
93%
12.58
0.03
OLS resid
7.8%
32%
-3.29
-0.32
90%
87%
18.77
0.10
OLS zero
13%
24%
-2.33
-0.13
82%
81%
37.29
0.21
Psi HN
GMM
2.0%
56%
-2.65
-0.32
OLS Prop
2.0%
53%
-2.16
-0.31
92%
92%
11.40
0.02
OLS resid
1.4%
52%
-2.34
-0.36
89%
87%
12.51
0.04
OLS zero
3.7%
44%
-0.84
-0.18
80%
78%
12.31
0.09
Psi NH
GMM
20%
12%
-0.86
0.02
OLS Prop
20%
11%
-0.20
0.02
92%
92%
15.09
0.02
OLS resid
25%
8.4%
0.38
0.04
83%
86%
16.96
0.07
OLS zero
40%
3.7%
1.94
0.18
69%
72%
16.65
0.17
Psi NN
GMM
14%
14%
-1.35
-0.001
OLS Prop
12%
10%
-0.37
0.001
90%
88%
16.11
0.01
OLS resid
11%
9.9%
-0.53
0.001
86%
84%
17.19
0.02
OLS zero
30%
6.3%
0.54
0.06
66%
78%
17.17
0.06
51

Table 4: Phi Parameter Estimates and AIC Autoregression Order
The HHM model is estimated for each security-day in the sample. Panel A reports average and median
estimates of ϕ1 by day in proximity to the earnings announcement (Pre and Post bracket the announcement,
WA Pre and WA Post are the week after). Also reported are rejection rates for security-day hypothesis
tests of ϕ1 = 0, where the > 0 and < 0 columns report the percentage of days with rejections in which the
parameter estimate is positive and negative, respectively. Numbers in the row labeled ALL are computed
using all security-days. Panels B and C report the same statistics for the subsamples of stocks in the lowest
and highest quartiles by analyst coverage, respectively. Panel D reports statistics for the distribution of
auto-regression lag orders selected by the AIC for the full sample and for the low and high quartiles of
analyst coverage.
Panel A: Full Sample
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
1%
63%
-0.10
-0.10
Post
1%
68%
-0.12
-0.11
WA Pre
1%
64%
-0.11
-0.10
WA Post
1%
62%
-0.11
-0.10
ALL
1%
64%
-0.11
-0.10
Panel B: Low Coverage Quartile
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
1%
40%
-0.08
-0.07
Post
3%
45%
-0.09
-0.09
WA Pre
1%
42%
-0.09
-0.08
WA Post
1%
41%
-0.08
-0.08
ALL
2%
42%
-0.09
-0.08
Panel C: High Coverage Quartile
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
1%
89%
-0.14
-0.13
Post
0%
96%
-0.16
-0.15
WA Pre
1%
89%
-0.15
-0.13
WA Post
0%
88%
-0.15
-0.14
ALL
0%
91%
-0.15
-0.14
Panel D: AIC Autoregression Order
ave
median
25th %tile
75th %tile
Full Sample
10.4
8
4
17
Low Coverage Quartile
6.3
4
2
8
High Coverage Quartile
15.6
16
10
22
52

Table 5: Kappa Estimates and Differences
The HHM model parameters are estimated jointly for each security-day in the sample. Reported for the full
sample are average and median estimates of the κs and selected κ differences for all counterparty pairings by
day in proximity to the earnings announcement (Pre and Post bracket the announcement, WA Pre and WA
Post are the week after). Particular counterparty pairings are identified by HH, HN, NH, and NN, where e.g.,
HN indicates that an HFT takes liquidity from a non-HFT. Also reported are rejection rates for security-day
hypothesis tests of κxy = 0 and κxy −κwz = 0, where the > 0 and < 0 columns report the percentage
of days with rejections in which the parameter estimate or difference is positive and negative, respectively.
Numbers in the row labeled ALL are computed using all security-days. The internet appendix reports the
same statistics for the subsamples of stocks in the lowest and highest quartiles by analyst coverage.
Full Sample
Estimates
Kappa HH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Kappa NH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
68%
0%
17.72
2.37
Pre
75%
0%
11.02
2.05
Post
66%
0%
14.76
2.68
Post
81%
0%
13.39
3.32
WA Pre
68%
0%
12.01
2.08
WA Pre
71%
1%
10.92
1.72
WA Post
69%
0%
13.65
2.27
WA Post
73%
0%
10.43
1.62
ALL
68%
0%
14.55
2.35
ALL
75%
0%
11.49
2.09
Kappa HN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Kappa NN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
85%
0%
9.21
1.65
Pre
90%
0%
6.15
1.33
Post
84%
0%
10.03
1.75
Post
91%
0%
7.96
1.39
WA Pre
85%
0%
7.45
1.44
WA Pre
92%
0%
5.89
1.39
WA Post
85%
0%
8.68
1.55
WA Post
89%
0%
5.38
1.41
ALL
85%
0%
8.88
1.59
ALL
90%
0%
6.39
1.39
Differences
KappaHH −KappaNH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
KappaHH −KappaHN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
23%
4%
6.70
0.20
Pre
42%
3%
8.51
0.65
Post
20%
6%
1.37
0.08
Post
46%
2%
4.72
0.73
WA Pre
22%
5%
1.09
0.16
WA Pre
38%
3%
4.55
0.52
WA Post
22%
4%
3.21
0.21
WA Post
40%
2%
4.96
0.49
ALL
22%
5%
3.06
0.16
ALL
42%
2%
5.67
0.61
KappaHN −KappaNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
KappaNH −KappaNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
25%
6%
3.06
0.12
Pre
44%
4%
4.87
0.56
Post
24%
6%
2.07
0.10
Post
58%
2%
5.43
1.05
WA Pre
22%
8%
1.57
0.11
WA Pre
39%
4%
5.03
0.36
WA Post
23%
6%
3.30
0.09
WA Post
41%
4%
5.05
0.40
ALL
23%
7%
2.49
0.11
ALL
46%
4%
5.11
0.56
53

Table 6: Regressions - Kappa Parameter Differences
Differences between κs of selected counterparty pairings for each security-day are regressed on day and coverage dummies and attributes of the
earnings announcement associated with each κ difference. Particular counterparty pairings are identified by HH, HN, NH, and NN, where e.g.,
HN indicates that an HFT takes liquidity from a non-HFT. Each earnings announcement contributes up to four security-days to the sample.
Standard errors are clustered by earnings announcement.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Kappa NH-NN
Kappa NH-NN
Kappa NH-NN
Kappa HH-HN
Kappa HH-HN
Kappa HH-HN
Lowest Quartile Analyst Coverage=1
3.84∗∗
4.745∗∗∗
4.769∗∗∗
.8264
5.334
5.363
(2.26)
(2.61)
(2.62)
(0.17)
(1.15)
(1.15)
Highest Quartile Analyst Coverage=1
-4.451∗∗∗
-3.072∗∗∗
-3.063∗∗∗
-6.405∗∗∗
-3.376∗∗∗
-3.365∗∗∗
(-6.46)
(-4.72)
(-4.69)
(-4.53)
(-3.35)
(-3.32)
Pre Day=1
.01509
.5743
.02963
3.818
2.364
1.012
(0.01)
(0.48)
(0.03)
(1.28)
(0.92)
(0.41)
Post Day=1
.2787
1.246
1.463
-.08203
1.427
1.963
(0.18)
(0.87)
(1.03)
(-0.02)
(0.38)
(0.51)
Abs(Earning Surprise)
141.2∗∗∗
167.0∗∗
267.7
264.6
(2.62)
(2.07)
(1.52)
(0.90)
Abs(Analyst Dispersion)
53.15
23.04
43.79
17.89
(1.23)
(0.41)
(0.46)
(0.13)
Pre Day=1 × Abs(Earning Surprise)
49.66
152.4
(0.42)
(0.76)
Post Day=1 × Abs(Earning Surprise)
-137.3
-123.5
(-1.17)
(-0.34)
Pre Day=1 × Abs(Analyst Dispersion)
38.64
74.29
(0.51)
(0.41)
Post Day=1 × Abs(Analyst Dispersion)
71.59
20.18
(0.90)
(0.11)
Constant
4.839∗∗∗
2.674∗∗∗
2.75∗∗∗
5.981∗∗∗
2.364
2.559
(5.15)
(2.98)
(3.10)
(3.24)
(1.41)
(1.52)
Const + Low Covg Coeff
8.679∗∗∗
7.419∗∗∗
7.519∗∗∗
6.8074
7.698
7.922∗
Const + High Covg Coeff
0.388
-0.398
-0.313
-0.424
-1.012
-0.806
Observations
3042
2823
2823
3042
2823
2823
R2
0.010
0.023
0.025
0.002
0.008
0.009
t statistics in parentheses
∗p < .1, ∗∗p < .05, ∗∗∗p < .01
54

Table 7: Psi Estimates and Differences
The HHM model parameters are estimated jointly for each security-day in the sample. Reported for the full
sample are average and median estimates of the ψs and selected ψ differences for all counterparty pairings by
day in proximity to the earnings announcement (Pre and Post bracket the announcement, WA Pre and WA
Post are the week after). Particular counterparty pairings are identified by HH, HN, NH, and NN, where e.g.,
HN indicates that an HFT takes liquidity from a non-HFT. Also reported are rejection rates for security-day
hypothesis tests of ψxy = 0 and ψxy −ψwz = 0, where the > 0 and < 0 columns report the percentage
of days with rejections in which the parameter estimate or difference is positive and negative, respectively.
Numbers in the row labeled ALL are computed using all security-days. The internet appendix reports the
same statistics for the subsamples of stocks in the lowest and highest quartiles by analyst coverage.
Full Sample
Estimates
Psi HH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Psi NH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
6%
37%
-8.73
-0.46
Pre
17%
14%
0.04
0.01
Post
12%
24%
0.17
-0.16
Post
20%
13%
0.59
0.02
WA Pre
7%
36%
-3.05
-0.45
WA Pre
21%
8%
-0.63
0.02
WA Post
6%
37%
-0.55
-0.39
WA Post
23%
8%
1.06
0.03
ALL
8%
33%
-2.96
-0.35
ALL
20%
11%
0.27
0.02
Psi HN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Psi NN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
1%
63%
-3.20
-0.40
Pre
10%
13%
-0.62
-0.010
Post
4%
36%
-1.76
-0.22
Post
13%
10%
-1.11
0.003
WA Pre
2%
59%
-1.26
-0.35
WA Pre
11%
10%
-0.24
0.002
WA Post
2%
58%
-0.09
-0.33
WA Post
12%
9%
-0.05
0.002
ALL
2%
54%
-1.58
-0.32
ALL
12%
11%
-0.52
0.000
Differences
PsiHH −PsiNH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
PsiHH −PsiHN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
4%
36%
-8.78
-0.50
Pre
10%
18%
-5.53
-0.08
Post
9%
26%
-0.42
-0.18
Post
13%
14%
1.93
-0.01
WA Pre
3%
35%
-2.42
-0.50
WA Pre
11%
18%
-1.80
-0.05
WA Post
3%
37%
-1.60
-0.49
WA Post
11%
16%
-0.46
-0.05
ALL
5%
33%
-3.24
-0.39
ALL
11%
17%
-1.38
-0.05
PsiHN −PsiNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
PsiNH −PsiNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
1%
49%
-2.58
-0.40
Pre
15%
10%
0.67
0.02
Post
3%
34%
-0.64
-0.20
Post
17%
10%
1.70
0.02
WA Pre
1%
49%
-1.02
-0.30
WA Pre
17%
5%
-0.40
0.04
WA Post
1%
50%
-0.04
-0.36
WA Post
16%
6%
1.11
0.04
ALL
2%
45%
-1.06
-0.30
ALL
16%
8%
0.80
0.03
55

Table 8: Regressions - Psi Parameter Differences
Differences between ψs of selected counterparty pairings for each security-day are regressed on day and coverage dummies and attributes of the
earnings announcement associated with each ψ difference. Particular counterparty pairings are identified by HH, HN, NH, and NN, where e.g.,
HN indicates that an HFT takes liquidity from a non-HFT. Each earnings announcement contributes up to four security-days to the sample.
Standard errors are clustered by earnings announcement.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Psi HN-NN
Psi HN-NN
Psi HN-NN
Psi HH-HN
Psi HH-HN
Psi HH-HN
Lowest Quartile Analyst Coverage=1
-.5517
-3.013∗∗∗
-3.019∗∗∗
3.647
-2.053
-2.044
(-0.22)
(-3.10)
(-3.10)
(0.78)
(-0.73)
(-0.72)
Highest Quartile Analyst Coverage=1
.9457∗∗∗
1.263∗∗∗
1.262∗∗∗
3.283∗∗∗
1.858∗∗
1.876∗∗
(2.60)
(4.29)
(4.27)
(2.69)
(2.20)
(2.19)
Pre Day=1
-2.044
-.4821
-.2318
-4.407∗
-2.932∗
-.05829
(-1.48)
(-0.73)
(-0.38)
(-1.89)
(-1.65)
(-0.03)
Post Day=1
-.06938
.8756
.8328
2.925
.6709
2.37
(-0.07)
(1.50)
(1.41)
(1.11)
(0.33)
(0.98)
Abs(Earning Surprise)
13.88
10.97
-79.34
-74.46
(0.69)
(0.35)
(-0.60)
(-0.29)
Abs(Analyst Dispersion)
7.64
16.98
11.49
168.8
(0.40)
(0.49)
(0.12)
(0.93)
Pre Day=1 × Abs(Earning Surprise)
-22.78
-104.1
(-0.58)
(-0.45)
Post Day=1 × Abs(Earning Surprise)
30.65
74.41
(1.01)
(0.25)
Pre Day=1 × Abs(Analyst Dispersion)
-17.67
-314.1
(-0.46)
(-1.46)
Post Day=1 × Abs(Analyst Dispersion)
-16.91
-284.2
(-0.46)
(-1.30)
Constant
-.6107
-1.608∗∗∗
-1.659∗∗∗
-2.971∗∗
-1.267
-2.452
(-0.83)
(-3.52)
(-3.43)
(-2.03)
(-1.05)
(-1.46)
Const + Low Covg Coeff
-1.1624
-4.621∗∗∗
-4.678∗∗∗
0.676
-3.32
-4.496
Const + High Covg Coeff
0.335
-0.345
-0.397
0.312
0.591
-0.576
Observations
3042
2823
2823
3042
2823
2823
R2
0.001
0.017
0.017
0.002
0.003
0.009
t statistics in parentheses
∗p < .1, ∗∗p < .05, ∗∗∗p < .01
56

Table 9: Redeploying Information Gleaned from Absorbing Adverse Selection
The temporary component of price impact of transactions where HFTs take liquidity from non-HFTs (ψHN) is regressed on its prior-day value
and contemporaneous and prior-day values of κNH and κHH, which measure the permanent price impact (informativeness) of trades absorbed
by HFTs providing liquidity. Columns (1) and (2) analyze sample days in the week after each earnings announcement; columns (3) and (4)
analyze the days bracketing each earnings announcement. Each announcement contributes at most one observation to each regression.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
PsiHN (WA Post)
PsiHN (WA Post)
PsiHN (Post)
PsiHN (Post)
PsiHN (WA Pre)
.7579∗∗∗
.6809∗∗∗
(27.09)
(24.88)
KappaNH (WA Pre)
-.05679∗∗∗
.006134
(-4.45)
(0.40)
KappaNH (WA Post)
.001178
(0.07)
KappaHH (WA Pre)
-.003796
(-0.43)
KappaHH (WA Post)
-.07187∗∗∗
(-8.88)
PsiHN (Pre)
-.1171∗∗∗
-.2359∗∗∗
(-4.00)
(-7.56)
KappaNH (Pre)
-.1156∗∗∗
-.06423∗∗∗
(-10.49)
(-5.25)
KappaNH (Post)
-.09716∗∗∗
(-7.30)
KappaHH (Pre)
-.02656∗∗∗
(-3.86)
KappaHH (Post)
.004249
(0.32)
Constant
-.4202
-.1407
-.6566∗∗∗
-.3636∗
(-1.57)
(-0.55)
(-2.94)
(-1.66)
Observations
666
666
666
666
R2
0.533
0.600
0.143
0.235
t statistics in parentheses
∗p < .1, ∗∗p < .05, ∗∗∗p < .01
57

Figure 1
Panel A: Permanent component of price impacts, κ
Panel B: Temporary component of price impacts, ψ
Permanent and temporary components of price impacts for various counterparty pairings on the
days prior and subsequent to the February 24, 2009 (day 0) earnings announcement by Central
European TV. The red line (NH) represents trades initiated by non-HFTs and absorbed by HFT
liquidity providers; the blue line (HN) represents trades initiated by HFTs against non-HFT liquidity
providers; and the green line (NN) represents trades between non-HFT counterparties.
58

References
Allena, R. and Chordia, T. (2025). True liquidity and fundamental prices: Us tick size pilot. Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Amihud, Y. (2002). Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. Journal of Financial Markets,
5(1):31–56.
Amihud, Y. and Mendelson, H. (1987). Trading mechanisms and stock returns: An empirical investigation. The
Journal of Finance, 42(3):533–553.
Biais, B., Foucault, T., et al. (2014). Hft and market quality. Bankers, Markets & Investors, 128(1):5–19.
Biais, B., Foucault, T., and Moinas, S. (2015). Equilibrium fast trading. Journal of Financial Economics, 116(2):292–
313.
Blom, G. (1958). Statistical Estimates and Transformed Beta Variables. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Bloomfield, R., O’Hara, M., and Saar, G. (2015). Hidden liquidity: Some new light on dark trading. The Journal of
Finance, 70(5):2227–2274.
Bollen, N. P. and Whaley, R. E. (2004). Does net buying pressure affect the shape of implied volatility functions?
The Journal of Finance, 59(2):711–753.
Boulatov, A. and George, T. J. (2013). Hidden and displayed liquidity in securities markets with informed liquidity
providers. The Review of Financial Studies, 26(8):2096–2137.
Brennan, M. J. and Subrahmanyam, A. (1996). Market microstructure and asset pricing: On the compensation for
illiquidity in stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 41(3):441–464.
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., and Riordan, R. (2014). High-frequency trading and price discovery. The Review of
Financial Studies, 27(8):2267–2306.
Carrion, A. (2013). Very fast money: High-frequency trading on the nasdaq. Journal of Financial Markets, 16(4):680–
711.
Chordia, T., Goyal, A., Lehmann, B. N., and Saar, G. (2013). High-frequency trading. Johnson Graduate School
Research Paper Series.
Chordia, T., Green, T. C., and Kottimukkalur, B. (2018). Rent seeking by low-latency traders: evidence from trading
on macroeconomic announcements. The Review of Financial Studies.
Chordia, T., Huh, S.-W., and Subrahmanyam, A. (2009). Theory-based illiquidity and asset pricing. The Review of
Financial Studies, 22(9):3629–3668.
Chordia, T. and Miao, B. (2020). Market efficiency in real time. The Journal of Accounting and Economics, (70):1–27.
Easley, D. and O’Hara, M. (1987). Price, trade size, and information in securities markets. Journal of Financial
Economics, 19(1):69–90.
Edwards, A. K., Hughes, P., Ritter, J., Vegella, P., and Zhang, H. (2021). The effect of hidden liquidity: Evidence
from an exogenous shock. Available at SSRN 3766512.
Foley, S. and Putni¸nˇs, T. J. (2016). Should we be afraid of the dark? dark trading and market quality. Journal of
Financial Economics, 122(3):456–481.
Foster, F. D. and Viswanathan, S. (1993). Variations in trading volume, return volatility, and trading costs: Evidence
on recent price formation models. The Journal of Finance, 48(1):187–211.
Foucault, T., Hombert, J., and Ro¸su, I. (2016). News trading and speed. The Journal of Finance, 71(1):335–382.
George, T. J. and Hwang, C.-Y. (2001). Information flow and pricing errors: A unified approach to estimation and
testing. The Review of Financial Studies, 14(4):979–1020.
Glosten, L. R. (1989). Insider trading, liquidity, and the role of the monopolist specialist. Journal of Business, pages
211–235.
59

Glosten, L. R. and Harris, L. E. (1988). Estimating the components of the bid/ask spread. Journal of Financial
Economics, 21(1):123–142.
Glosten, L. R. and Milgrom, P. R. (1985). Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously
informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1):71–100.
Grossman, S. J. and Miller, M. H. (1988). Liquidity and market structure. the Journal of Finance, 43(3):617–633.
Hamilton, J. D. (2020). Time series analysis. Princeton University Press.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991a). Measuring the information content of stock trades. The Journal of Finance, 46(1):179–207.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991b).
The summary informativeness of stock trades: An econometric analysis. The Review of
Financial Studies, 4(3):571–595.
Hasbrouck, J. (1993). Assessing the quality of a security market: A new approach to transaction-cost measurement.
The Review of Financial Studies, 6(1):191–212.
Hasbrouck, J. (2009). Trading costs and returns for us equities: Estimating effective costs from daily data. The
Journal of Finance, 64(3):1445–1477.
Hasbrouck, J. and Saar, G. (2013). Low-latency trading. Journal of Financial Markets, 16(4):646–679.
Hendershott, T. and Menkveld, A. J. (2014). Price pressures. Journal of Financial Economics, 114(3):405–423.
Hendershott, T., Menkveld, A. J., Pratz, R., and Seasholes, M. (2022). Asset price dynamics with limited attention.
The Review of Financial Studies, 35:962–1008.
Hirschey, N. (2021).
Do high-frequency traders anticipate buying and selling pressure?
Management Science,
67(6):3321–3345.
Ho, T. and Stoll, H. R. (1980). On dealer markets under competition. The Journal of Finance, 35(2):259–267.
Huang, S. and Yueshen, B. Z. (2021). Speed acquisition. Management Science, 67(6):3492–3518.
Huh, S.-W. (2014). Price impact and asset pricing. Journal of Financial Markets, 19:1–38.
Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica, pages 1315–1335.
Kyle, A. S. (1989). Informed speculation with imperfect competition. The Review of Economic Studies, 56(3):317–355.
Menkveld, A. J. (2013). High frequency trading and the new market makers. Journal of Financial Markets, 16(4):712–
740.
Menkveld, A. J. (2016).
The economics of high-frequency trading: Taking stock.
Annual Review of Financial
Economics, 8:1–24.
Menkveld, A. J., Koopman, S. J., and Lucas, A. (2007). Modeling around-the-clock price discovery for cross-listed
stocks using state space methods. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 25(2):213–225.
O’Hara, M. (2015). High frequency market microstructure. Journal of Financial Economics, 116(2):257–270.
P´astor, L. and Stambaugh, R. F. (2003). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political Economy,
111(3):642–685.
Stoll, H. R. and Whaley, R. E. (1990). Stock market structure and volatility. The Review of Financial Studies,
3(1):37–71.
60

Internet Appendix to: A Simple Approach to Estimating Price
Impact and its Components
Thomas J. George and Moazzam A. Khoja
June 16, 2026

IA.1
Nesting Certain Structural Models
In this appendix, we show how several familiar structural models that are used to
estimate price impact or illiquidity are nested within the HHM structure. This discussion is
helpful in several ways. It provides intuition for why κ and ψ are identified by contemporaneous
and lag-one dependence, and it shows how trading variables that are non-linear in quantity
traded can fit within the HHM structure. In addition, the connections to the nested models
highlight the generality of the HHM model and offer some clear avenues for future research.
In these applications, trades are not classified into separate categories as in our empirical
analysis with the Nasdaq HFT data.
Rearranging Equation (13) in the paper yields:
dpt = ϕ1 (dpt−1 −κ′xt−1) + ψ′(xt −xt−1) + κ′(xt −B1xt−1) + h.o.t + ut.
(1)
Following the taxonomy of models in Huh (2014), we begin with two classic market microstructure
models of price dynamics.
In our notation, the basic Glosten and Harris (1988) model
is,
dpt = ψ(St −St−1) + κQt + ut,
(2)
where Qt is the signed quantity traded at time t and upper-case St is an indicator variable
+1 or -1 for the sign of Qt. The Foster and Viswanathan (1993) model is
dpt = ψ(St −St−1) + κ(Qt −Et−1[Qt]) + ut.
(3)
These models are nested in the return equation of the paper by defining xt = (St, Qt)′ and
adding the “loadings constraints” that ϕ1 = 0, and that ψ and κ are non-zero on only the St
and Qt components of xt, respectively. Under these constraints, the temporary component
of price changes is fixed with respect to trade size and the permanent component is variable
(scales linearly) with trade size. If, in addition, (St, Qt)′ is AR(1), then the second element
of the 2 × 1 vector B1xt−1 is exactly the expectation at t −1 of Qt.1
1Adding more constraints nests the equilibrium pricing equations in Glosten and Milgrom (1985) and Kyle (1985).
In
1

Note that St is a non-linear function of Qt, but both models are easily nested in the
HHM structure because dpt depends linearly on St. A related example is Sadka (2006),
who adds the unexpected sign St, computed from a Normal CDF of a forecast of Qt, as
another predictor of price changes. This variable is highly non-linear in Qt, but because dpt
is linear in this variable, Sadka’s model can be nested in the HHM structure by including an
additional element to the vector xt.
The Glosten-Harris and Foster-Viswanathan models capture the economics that are
essential to the HHM model, all of which are reflected in contemporaneous and lag-one
relations. It is therefore probably not surprising that the key parameters in the HHM model
are identified by coefficients for the same lags as are needed to estimate the classic models.
But the approaches are not identical. Glosten and Harris (1988) show that the “loadings
constraints” described above are necessary for identification of κ and ψ when estimating a
single equation model. However, nesting the classic models within HHM makes it evident
that the loadings constraints are not necessary for identification when additional information
from the dynamics of xt is incorporated in the estimation. Adding the B1 parameter(s) is
just enough to preserve identification while relaxing the loadings constraints. Provided that
(1 −ϕ1) is not an eigenvalue of B1, the temporary and permanent components of prices
can both be modeled as having fixed and variable parts and estimated using the recipe in
Proposition 1. Exponents of Qt could also be added as variables to the xt vector to allow the
permanent and temporary components of price impact to be polynomial functions of signed
trades, for example. All these variations are easily accommodated in the HHM model and
estimated via Proposition 1.
Some asset pricing studies that incorporate illiquidity use measures that are motivated
heuristically, such as the Amihud (2002) measure, while other studies use measures that are
model-based. Those that are model-based can differ in their focus. For example, Brennan
those models, transaction prices are equal to the market makers’ conditional expected value of the security and the transitory
component is non-existent, ψ = 0. In Glosten-Milgrom, the permanent component is fixed because transactions are unit sized,
so κ is constrained to zero on the Qt element in xt. In Kyle, prices depend linearly on signed order flow and the permanent
component is variable, so κ is constrained to zero for the St element in xt.
2

and Subrahmanyam (1996) and Huh (2014) measure illiquidity using intraday estimates
of κ from the classic models above, which places their focus on illiquidity associated with
permanent price impacts. In contrast, P´astor and Stambaugh (2003) estimate illiquidity as
the temporary price impact of signed volume. They define illiquidity as γ in a regression
involving daily returns and lagged daily volume signed by the stock’s net-of-market return:
dpt = ϕo + ϕ1dpt−1 + γ Qt−1 + ut.
(4)
The regression is designed so that γ captures the price impact of yesterday’s signed volume
that reverses today. The P´astor-Stambaugh measure is also nested in the HHM model. By
reference to the coefficient on xt−1 in the return equation of the paper, γ is a combination of
all the HHM parameters. Its partial derivative with respect to ψ is indeed positive. However,
if contemporaneous Qt is excluded from the estimation, there is no assurance that γ will be
equal to its counterpart in the return equation. Even if the Qt process is AR(0), both Qt
and Qt−1 must be included in the regression. Thus, if the HHM model describes the data
generating process at the daily frequency, then Proposition 1 indicates that the P´astorStambaugh measure could be improved as a proxy for ψ by including contemporaneous Qt
when estimating γ. Hasbrouck (2009) also proposes a temporary component measure based
on ψ in Equation (2) with κ constrained to zero. Under the assumption that the St are iid
at the daily frequency, the ψ parameter is then estimated along with trade signs that are
inferred from price changes rather than constructed from signed trading volume as in P´astor
and Stambaugh.
In light of these contrasting approaches, Proposition 1 suggests that the HHM model can
be used to estimate illiquidity parameters at large scale with OLS to compare the performance
of, say, κ, ψ, and κ + ψ as measures of illiquidity in asset pricing tests. As noted above,
the impact of higher orders of trades can be estimated easily too, which could be used to
investigate whether, for example, price impact is convex in order size and the illiquidity of
entering and exiting especially large positions is priced. Looking deeper into these questions
3

is likely to be a fruitful avenue for future research. Huh (2014) conducts a large-scale study
of illiquidity premia in the cross-section of equity returns and finds that intraday estimates
of κ using even the simpler classical models strongly dominate the best performing daily
measures (e.g., Amihud, 2002; P´astor and Stambaugh, 2003). Extending Huh’s study using
the HHM model as suggested in Proposition 1 can provide greater specificity to whether
permanent, temporary, or both types of price impacts are priced as illiquidity costs or risks
in equity markets.
The nested models above have the common feature that they all apply to equity markets,
where signed trading volume is the natural non-price variable. The HHM structure is more
general than this, however, and the same identification logic applies for any price-like market
statistic that has permanent and temporary components, and any non-price variables that
are thought to be determinants of those components.
For example, Bollen and Whaley
(2004) estimate the impact of measures of buying pressure on option implied volatilities.
They use heuristic economic arguments to motivate a model specification that turns out to
be a constrained version of the return equation of the paper with implied volatilities replacing
prices:
∆σt = ϕo + ϕ1∆σt−1 + β′xt + controlst + ut,
(5)
where σt is option implied volatility on day t and xt is a vector of demand pressure measures.
Bollen and Whaley are interested in estimating a total contemporaneous price impact, and
indeed their β′ maps to κ′ + ψ′ in the HHM framework. The approach in Proposition 1
suggests that by including lags of the demand pressure measures, and estimating a VAR
to capture their dynamics, one can further identify the separate permanent and temporary
components of buying pressure on implied volatility in Bollen and Whaley’s experiment.
Such measures, perhaps estimated using intraday data, could then be used as inputs to study
further whether illiquidity premia exist in options markets [see Christofferson, et al. (2018)
for such a study where intraday realized spreads are used as the measure of illiquidity].
4

IA.2
Coverage Quartile Results for Tables 5 and 7
This section reports the low-coverage (Panel B) and high-coverage (Panel C) quartile
results for Table 5 (κ estimates and differences) and Table 7 (ψ estimates and differences)
of the paper. The full-sample results for each table appear in the paper. The quartiles are
based on the number of analysts forecasting earnings as reported on I/B/E/S.
5

Table 5: Kappa Estimates and Differences (continued)
Panels B and C report average and median estimates of the κs for all counterparty pairings by day in
proximity to the earnings announcement, for the subsamples of stocks in the lowest and highest quartiles by
analyst coverage, respectively. See Table 5 in the paper for full caption and full-sample results.
Panel B - Low Coverage Quartile
Kappa HH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Kappa NH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
37%
0%
32.69
12.23
Pre
47%
1%
19.67
8.70
Post
34%
0%
30.66
9.99
Post
60%
0%
25.46
12.24
WA Pre
34%
0%
16.51
7.08
WA Pre
47%
2%
19.88
7.99
WA Post
36%
0%
25.32
8.44
WA Post
44%
0%
22.15
7.56
ALL
35%
0%
26.56
9.08
ALL
50%
1%
22.03
9.15
Kappa HN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Kappa NN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
74%
0%
18.47
7.03
Pre
81%
0%
12.00
5.95
Post
70%
0%
21.60
6.05
Post
87%
0%
16.57
5.81
WA Pre
76%
0%
14.08
6.28
WA Pre
85%
0%
11.29
5.99
WA Post
76%
0%
19.03
6.78
WA Post
81%
0%
10.32
5.83
ALL
73%
0%
18.50
6.59
ALL
83%
0%
12.82
5.92
Panel C - High Coverage Quartile
Kappa HH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Kappa NH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
97%
0%
1.13
0.64
Pre
98%
0%
0.89
0.57
Post
97%
0%
1.03
0.61
Post
100%
0%
0.95
0.56
WA Pre
96%
0%
1.03
0.57
WA Pre
96%
0%
0.77
0.49
WA Post
95%
0%
1.02
0.57
WA Post
98%
0%
0.84
0.55
ALL
96%
0%
1.05
0.61
ALL
98%
0%
0.86
0.55
Kappa HN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Kappa NN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
93%
0%
0.56
0.28
Pre
97%
0%
0.38
0.19
Post
94%
0%
0.44
0.20
Post
97%
0%
0.32
0.17
WA Pre
91%
0%
0.61
0.25
WA Pre
97%
0%
0.45
0.19
WA Post
91%
0%
0.54
0.23
WA Post
95%
0%
0.46
0.20
ALL
92%
0%
0.54
0.24
ALL
97%
0%
0.40
0.19
6

Table 5: Kappa Estimates and Differences (continued)
Panels B and C report average and median estimates of κ differences between selected counterparty pairings
by day in proximity to the earnings announcement, for the subsamples of stocks in the lowest and highest
quartiles by analyst coverage, respectively. See Table 5 in the paper for full caption and full-sample results.
Panel B - Low Coverage Quartile
KappaHH −KappaNH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
KappaHH −KappaHN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
10%
1%
13.02
2.17
Pre
13%
2%
14.23
3.07
Post
6%
4%
5.20
0.13
Post
14%
2%
9.06
3.55
WA Pre
6%
5%
-3.37
0.05
WA Pre
11%
3%
2.42
1.02
WA Post
8%
6%
3.17
1.39
WA Post
14%
2%
6.29
1.23
ALL
8%
4%
4.53
0.69
ALL
13%
2%
8.06
2.18
KappaHN −KappaNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
KappaNH −KappaNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
16%
6%
6.46
0.94
Pre
22%
7%
7.67
2.02
Post
15%
6%
5.03
0.51
Post
32%
3%
8.89
5.22
WA Pre
15%
11%
2.80
0.56
WA Pre
18%
4%
8.59
2.37
WA Post
17%
6%
8.71
0.74
WA Post
21%
8%
11.83
2.43
ALL
16%
7%
5.69
0.71
ALL
24%
5%
9.21
2.97
Panel C - High Coverage Quartile
KappaHH −KappaNH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
KappaHH −KappaHN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
38%
4%
0.24
0.09
Pre
76%
3%
0.57
0.31
Post
39%
5%
0.08
0.07
Post
85%
1%
0.58
0.40
WA Pre
34%
6%
0.26
0.06
WA Pre
71%
2%
0.42
0.25
WA Post
31%
7%
0.18
0.08
WA Post
69%
2%
0.48
0.30
ALL
36%
6%
0.19
0.07
ALL
75%
2%
0.51
0.31
KappaHN −KappaNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
KappaNH −KappaNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
32%
7%
0.18
0.03
Pre
72%
3%
0.51
0.24
Post
31%
9%
0.12
0.02
Post
86%
0%
0.63
0.35
WA Pre
26%
10%
0.16
0.03
WA Pre
66%
2%
0.33
0.18
WA Post
24%
9%
0.08
0.02
WA Post
66%
1%
0.38
0.22
ALL
28%
9%
0.14
0.03
ALL
73%
1%
0.46
0.24
7

Table 7: Psi Estimates and Differences (continued)
Panels B and C report average and median estimates of the ψs for all counterparty pairings by day in
proximity to the earnings announcement, for the subsamples of stocks in the lowest and highest quartiles by
analyst coverage, respectively. See Table 7 in the paper for full caption and full-sample results.
Panel B - Low Coverage Quartile
Psi HH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Psi NH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
2%
20%
-15.35
-3.79
Pre
12%
6%
0.26
0.28
Post
7%
9%
3.20
-2.19
Post
13%
6%
2.87
0.88
WA Pre
5%
16%
-2.46
-1.86
WA Pre
12%
4%
-1.39
0.14
WA Post
6%
17%
3.31
-2.26
WA Post
17%
4%
2.98
0.82
ALL
5%
15%
-2.43
-2.38
ALL
13%
5%
1.28
0.52
Psi HN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Psi NN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
0%
50%
-5.80
-3.00
Pre
6%
9%
-1.29
-0.06
Post
4%
28%
-3.88
-1.42
Post
9%
8%
-2.63
-0.03
WA Pre
4%
43%
-4.28
-1.64
WA Pre
10%
7%
-0.55
0.07
WA Post
3%
35%
2.99
-2.02
WA Post
9%
5%
0.17
0.04
ALL
3%
39%
-2.83
-1.81
ALL
8%
7%
-1.18
-0.001
Panel C - High Coverage Quartile
Psi HH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Psi NH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
12%
52%
-0.318
-0.104
Pre
29%
20%
0.022
0.003
Post
24%
37%
-0.128
-0.027
Post
37%
19%
0.042
0.015
WA Pre
12%
50%
-0.327
-0.084
WA Pre
35%
10%
0.066
0.024
WA Post
9%
49%
-0.275
-0.076
WA Post
33%
8%
0.039
0.023
ALL
14%
47%
-0.26
-0.07
ALL
34%
14%
0.042
0.016
Psi HN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Psi NN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
1%
79%
-0.24
-0.09
Pre
17%
19%
-0.018
-0.005
Post
5%
44%
-0.10
-0.02
Post
18%
12%
0.005
0.003
WA Pre
0%
77%
-0.27
-0.08
WA Pre
18%
12%
-0.009
0.003
WA Post
0%
73%
-0.20
-0.08
WA Post
17%
13%
-0.005
0.001
ALL
1%
68%
-0.20
-0.07
ALL
18%
14%
-0.007
0.001
8

Table 7: Psi Estimates and Differences (continued)
Panels B and C report average and median estimates of ψ differences between selected counterparty pairings
by day in proximity to the earnings announcement, for the subsamples of stocks in the lowest and highest
quartiles by analyst coverage, respectively. See Table 7 in the paper for full caption and full-sample results.
Panel B - Low Coverage Quartile
PsiHH −PsiNH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
PsiHH −PsiHN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
1%
15%
-15.61
-4.46
Pre
7%
8%
-9.56
-1.26
Post
4%
11%
0.33
-2.16
Post
8%
4%
7.08
-0.13
WA Pre
3%
12%
-1.07
-2.32
WA Pre
8%
7%
1.82
-0.05
WA Post
4%
16%
0.34
-3.54
WA Post
8%
8%
0.32
-0.54
ALL
3%
13%
-3.71
-2.92
ALL
8%
7%
0.40
-0.36
PsiHN −PsiNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
PsiNH −PsiNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
2%
36%
-4.51
-2.75
Pre
12%
5%
1.55
0.52
Post
3%
25%
-1.25
-1.49
Post
11%
4%
5.50
0.64
WA Pre
2%
37%
-3.73
-1.93
WA Pre
10%
3%
-0.84
0.24
WA Post
2%
32%
2.82
-2.15
WA Post
13%
4%
2.81
0.60
ALL
2%
32%
-1.65
-2.01
ALL
11%
4%
2.46
0.53
Panel C - High Coverage Quartile
PsiHH −PsiNH
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
PsiHH −PsiHN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
6%
57%
-0.34
-0.11
Pre
18%
31%
-0.08
-0.01
Post
19%
41%
-0.17
-0.03
Post
24%
23%
-0.02
0.00
WA Pre
4%
55%
-0.39
-0.12
WA Pre
21%
28%
-0.06
-0.01
WA Post
2%
56%
-0.31
-0.11
WA Post
22%
22%
-0.08
-0.02
ALL
8%
52%
-0.30
-0.10
ALL
21%
26%
-0.06
-0.01
PsiHN −PsiNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
PsiNH −PsiNN
% rej >0
% rej <0
ave
median
Pre
1%
65%
-0.22
-0.08
Pre
23%
16%
0.04
0.01
Post
4%
44%
-0.11
-0.03
Post
29%
13%
0.04
0.02
WA Pre
0%
61%
-0.26
-0.09
WA Pre
29%
7%
0.08
0.02
WA Post
0%
67%
-0.19
-0.08
WA Post
27%
5%
0.04
0.02
ALL
1%
59%
-0.20
-0.06
ALL
27%
10%
0.05
0.02
9

IA.3
Trading Volume by Counterparty Pairing
This section reports trading statistics by counterparty pairing and by day in proximity
to the earnings announcement, for the full sample and for the subsamples of stocks in the
lowest and highest quartiles by analyst coverage.
10

Trading Volume by Counterparty Pairing
The table reports trading statistics by counterparty pairing and by day in proximity to the earnings
announcement. The Pre and Post days bracket the announcement, the WA Pre and WA Post days are the
corresponding weekdays the week after the announcement. Particular counterparty pairings are identified by
HH, HN, NH, and NN, where e.g., HN indicates that an HFT takes liquidity from a non-HFT. For each stockday, dollar volume is computed as the within-day sum of the product of transaction prices and quantities
for a given counterparty pairing. Dollar volume per transaction is dollar volume divided by the number of
transactions in that day with that counterparty pairing. For each day type and counterparty pairing, means
and medians are computed across stock-days. Mean and median dollar volume in the right-most columns
are reported in thousands of dollars. Panel A reports results for the full sample. Panels B and C report
results for the subsamples of stocks in the lowest and highest quartiles by analyst coverage, respectively.
Panel A: Full Sample
HH
Dollar Volume Per Transaction
Number of Transactions
Dollar Volume ($thousands)
day
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Pre
$5,280
$3,659
1526
316
$14,978
$802
Post
$5,428
$3,831
1973
318
$22,665
$878
Week-After Pre
$5,323
$3,715
1306
297
$12,617
$667
Week-After Post
$5,278
$3,627
1318
260
$12,859
$638
HN
Pre
$6,404
$4,580
2393
1001
$28,673
$3,731
Post
$6,765
$4,876
3017
1198
$40,407
$4,744
Week-After Pre
$6,575
$4,699
2087
947
$23,727
$3,954
Week-After Post
$6,530
$4,634
2069
931
$23,756
$3,688
NH
Pre
$6,999
$4,614
2028
558
$29,390
$1,655
Post
$7,199
$4,571
2789
747
$44,136
$2,734
Week-After Pre
$6,813
$4,712
1612
478
$21,743
$1,496
Week-After Post
$6,752
$4,594
1635
451
$21,942
$1,456
NN
Pre
$8,085
$5,481
2430
1277
$35,440
$6,967
Post
$8,726
$5,858
3461
2000
$54,711
$10,828
Week-After Pre
$7,928
$5,678
2052
1172
$27,325
$6,036
Week-After Post
$7,854
$5,556
2015
1090
$27,002
$5,597
11

Panel B: Lowest Quartile
HH
Dollar Volume Per Transaction
Number of Transactions
Dollar Volume Traded ($thousands)
day
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Pre
$2,778
$2,304
102
40
$245
$85
Post
$2,779
$2,422
112
43
$313
$118
Week-After Pre
$2,783
$2,421
88
29
$217
$92
Week-After Post
$2,671
$2,274
87
31
$204
$86
HN
Pre
$3,409
$2,924
325
236
$1,105
$720
Post
$3,673
$3,241
418
287
$1,702
$946
Week-After Pre
$3,676
$3,176
315
229
$1,346
$836
Week-After Post
$3,724
$3,087
292
232
$1,170
$829
NH
Pre
$2,944
$2,540
176
85
$528
$212
Post
$3,081
$2,760
267
122
$915
$298
Week-After Pre
$3,092
$2,556
173
71
$562
$197
Week-After Post
$3,014
$2,635
151
65
$459
$200
NN
Pre
$3,856
$3,528
514
380
$2,033
$1,424
Post
$4,081
$3,693
916
639
$4,256
$2,123
Week-After Pre
$3,966
$3,492
552
421
$2,588
$1,404
Week-AFter Post
$3,805
$3,308
486
387
$1,980
$1,314
12

Panel C: Highest Quartile
HH
Dollar Volume Per Transaction
Number of Transactions
Dollar Volume Traded ($thousands)
day
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Pre
$8,630
$6,367
3280
2386
$36,888
$13,230
Post
$9,440
$6,692
4739
3268
$62,164
$20,476
Week-After Pre
$8,667
$6,402
2747
1848
$30,158
$12,132
Week-After Post
$8,587
$6,474
2808
1917
$30,972
$12,420
HN
Pre
$10,500
$7,552
5132
3814
$73,374
$30,318
Post
$11,644
$8,527
7001
5498
$111,642
$43,243
Week-After Pre
$10,601
$7,982
4379
3428
$58,925
$26,680
Week-After Post
$10,472
$7,991
4356
3254
$58,847
$25,114
NH
Pre
$11,825
$8,269
4368
3076
$69,821
$27,079
Post
$12,826
$8,924
6484
4837
$113,865
$41,157
Week-After Pre
$11,359
$8,237
3385
2399
$50,927
$22,048
Week-After Post
$11,152
$8,212
3466
2530
$51,372
$21,259
NN
Pre
$13,630
$9,946
5028
3973
$88,698
$38,783
Post
$15,628
$11,620
7321
5709
$145,697
$70,101
Week-After Pre
$13,211
$10,343
4119
3521
$67,188
$36,072
Week-After Post
$12,980
$10,110
4068
3287
$65,531
$32,837
13

IA.4
CETV Event Study: Additional Figure
Figure IA.1:
The solid line is the temporary component of price impacts, ψNH, for
transactions initiated by non-HFTs and absorbed by HFTs on the days prior and subsequent
to the February 24, 2009 (day 0) earnings announcement by Central European TV. The
dashed lines are 95% confidence bands.
14

References
Amihud, Y. (2002). Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. Journal of Financial Markets,
5(1):31–56.
Bollen, N. P. and Whaley, R. E. (2004). Does net buying pressure affect the shape of implied volatility functions?
The Journal of Finance, 59(2):711–753.
Brennan, M. J. and Subrahmanyam, A. (1996). Market microstructure and asset pricing: On the compensation for
illiquidity in stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 41(3):441–464.
Foster, F. D. and Viswanathan, S. (1993). Variations in trading volume, return volatility, and trading costs: Evidence
on recent price formation models. The Journal of Finance, 48(1):187–211.
Glosten, L. R. and Harris, L. E. (1988). Estimating the components of the bid/ask spread. Journal of Financial
Economics, 21(1):123–142.
Glosten, L. R. and Milgrom, P. R. (1985). Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously
informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1):71–100.
Hasbrouck, J. (2009). Trading costs and returns for us equities: Estimating effective costs from daily data. The
Journal of Finance, 64(3):1445–1477.
Huh, S.-W. (2014). Price impact and asset pricing. Journal of Financial Markets, 19:1–38.
Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica, pages 1315–1335.
P´astor, L. and Stambaugh, R. F. (2003). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political Economy,
111(3):642–685.
Sadka, R. (2006). Momentum and post-earnings-announcement drift anomalies: The role of liquidity risk. Journal
of Financial Economics, 80(2):309–349.
15
