 
1 
 
Draft: September 19, 2012 
 
 
 
Ethics, Finance, and Automation 
A Preliminary Survey of Problems in High Frequency Trading 
 
Michael Davis 
Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions 
Illinois Institute of Technology 
3241 S Federal Street, 204 HH 
Chicago, IL 60616 
davism@iit.edu 
 
Andrew Kumiega 
Illinois Institute of Technology 
 
Ben Van Vliet 
Illinois Institute of Technology 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
All of finance is now automated, most notably high frequency trading. This paper examines the 
ethical implications of this fact. As automation is an interdisciplinary endeavor, we argue that 
the interfaces between the respective disciplines can lead to conflicting ethical perspectives; we 
also argue that existing disciplinary standards do not pay enough attention to the ethical 
problems automation generates. Conflicting perspectives undermine the protection those who 
rely on trading should have. Ethics in finance can be expanded to include organizational and 
industry-wide responsibilities to external market participants and society. As a starting point, 
quality management techniques can provide a foundation for a new cross-disciplinary ethical 
standard in the age of automation.   
 
Key words: 
High-frequency trading, Automation, Ethics, Quality management.

 
2 
 
 
Ethics, Finance, and Automation 
A Preliminary Survey of Problems in High Frequency Trading 
 
In this article, we discuss ethics in finance in the age of automation rather than the ethics 
of automated trading. By “ethics”, we mean those special, morally permissible standards of 
conduct (rules, principles, or ideals) that apply to members of a group simply because they are 
members of that group. Business ethics applies to people in business and no one else; legal ethics 
to lawyers and no one else; and so on. By “finance”, we mean (at a minimum) financial markets 
and financial services—equities and derivatives exchanges, market making, liquidity provision, 
and buy-side money management.  Today, of course, high-frequency trading is a central part of 
finance so defined. 
Our goal is to provide a structured description of the evolving ethical landscape as 
finance tries to take account of how automation has changed its relation to external market 
participants and society. Automation has changed boththose whom trading can harm , how they 
might be harmed, and the scale of harm. (Harm here means both direct, in the sense of immediate 
financial loss, and indirect, in the sense of diminished confidence in financial markets.) 
Consider, for example, what happened to Knight Capital Group on August 1, 2012. The firm lost 
$440 million in less than thirty minutes when its new trading software flooded the market with 
orders, forcing the temporary closing of the New York Stock Exchange. , The direct harm to the 
firm itself and its shareholders was catastrophic, almost bankrupting the firm (McCrank and 
Mollenkamp, 2012). More indirect is the impact on the investing public's confidence in the structure 
of financial markets. A loss of confidence may reduce investors' appetite for risk and may 
thereby stall economic growth.None of that harm was necessary. Better release management, 
software operational controls, and testing, that is, Quality Management System (QMS) should 

 
3 
 
have prevented it.  .  Traditionally, the professions have treated preventing such harm to their 
clients, employers, and the public as a central ethical undertaking. 
Since a structured description of the evolving ethical landscape of finance invariably 
leads to ideas for new standards, we make some initial proposals, for example, for standards of 
quality that fill gaps between disciplines, gaps that now seem responsible for many of the 
financial disasters arising from automated trading. 
 
1. 
Background 
 
All financial markets and financial services are now automated: quantitative and 
fundamental research, data management, trade execution, and risk management. A macrocosm of 
this phenomenon is automated trading.12 In all its forms, including high-frequency trading, 
automation now accounts for more than 75% of daily trading volume (Brogaard, 2012). The 
advantage of automation to firms involved—proprietary trading and brokerage firms, hedge 
funds, clearing houses, exchanges—is the performance of tasks that are beyond human ability. 
Computers can perform financial calculations cheaper, faster, with (virtually) no mistakes across 
thousands of instruments and transactions (no matter how complex the math).  
                                                 
1 By “automated trading”, we mean any computerized system.  We consider high frequency trading to be a subset of 
automated trading.  High-frequency trading systems include automated stock and option market-making systems, 
index arbitrage and equity long-short systems.  Automated trading is a broader term encompassing high-frequency 
trading as well as longer term strategies such as statistical arbitrage, merger arbitrage, and execution systems for 
volume-weighted average price. What all automated trading systems have in common is that technology (computers, 
mathematical modeling, and the like) is a source of competitive advantage. 
 
2 In this paper, we consider the automation of trading decisions and their execution on electronic market venues.  
However, a subset or adjunct of automated trading (and just as important) is the use of automated algorithms that 
guide financial decisions that do not result in computer-generated executions, such as theoretical pricing and risk 
management algorithms.  We do not address these forms of financial automation specifically, but recognize that our 
conclusions may have implications algorithms as well.. 

 
4 
 
 
Though not everyone agrees, most studies support the claim that automation benefits the 
overall functioning of both society and markets. Brogaard (2012) shows that high frequency 
trades and quotes “contribute more to price discovery than do non-[high-frequency trading] 
activity,” and that such trading reduces volatility; Jovanovic and Menkveld (2011), that highfrequency traders narrow the bid-ask spreads and argue that they may help unlock adverseselection problems in markets; Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011), that automated trading 
improves liquidity; and Hendershott and Riordan (2011),that it makes markets more efficient. 
“The net benefit is that we have a better market with the participation of [high frequency 
traders]” (Fabozzi, Focardi & Jonas, 2011). Automated trading tends to mitigate volatility, add 
liquidity, and reduce transaction costs for all market participants.  
 
There is, however, no longer any reason to doubt that automation can have bad effects. 
The question is why 
 
 
 
Some have argued that high-frequency trading inevitably corrupts orderly markets, that 
automated systems only provide liquidity during normal markets, only to disappear during 
extreme events, thereby creating liquidity vacuums and exacerbating problems. But, automated 
trading systems did not invent liquidity vacuums. They happened in human-driven markets, too. 
Pit traders walked off the floor in the 1987 crash. Likewise, brokers can refuse to answer the 
phone, and human market-makers can widen their bid-ask spreads. During normal market 
periods, competition aids in the creation of deep, liquid markets and price discovery. During 
times of market stress, society decries traders’ lack of communal obligation to the greater good. 
Kearns, Kulesza, and Nevmyvaka (2010) suggest that this “debate over [automated 
trading] can be viewed as concern over the practices of one group of ‘players’ and the resulting 

 
5 
 
costs to other players.” Thus, some have decried the potential for automated trading systems to 
game the market. “One smart computer may attempt to take advantage of the order-placement 
strategy of another not-so-smart computer with the possible effect that prices are driven away 
from equilibrium” (Stoll, 2006). We call this automated trading system “quality arbitrage”.3 High 
quality systems gain at the expense of low quality ones. Again, this is nothing new. Good traders 
have been making money off bad traders since markets began. And, surely, other systems will 
take advantage of disequilibria to make profit, forcing prices back into balance. As long as there 
is no systematic defrauding of other players (i.e. long-term investors), it’s hard to see how this 
activity (done right) could be construed as unethical (that is, as a violation of an actual or 
desirable standard). 
 
Where once trading decisions were made based purely on human judgment, advances in 
quantitative analysis and technology enable mathematical models to approximate valuation and 
risk more closely. Nevertheless, these approximations have in the past still been tempered by 
human oversight. The evolution to full automation of trading systems (especially, its speed) 
means that reaction to mis-approximations of value and risk can only be handled by computers 
within the prescribed decision structures of the software. Mis-approximations may occur because 
of inaccurate models, computer bugs, unstable designs, or lack of consideration of possible 
outcomes (i.e. “we didn’t know that could happen.”). Finance has evolved from human traders 
and manual control to automation and computer numerical control (Hassan, Kumiega, and Van 
Vliet, 2010). 
                                                 
3 Quality arbitrage occurs when one automated market participant knows the automated (therefore, deterministic) 
behavior of other market participants—trading firm, clearing firm, exchange—and profits by exploiting that 
behavior.  For example, if firm A’s trading system knows how firm B’s trading system will react under certain 
circumstances, firm A’s trading system can cause that circumstance to occur repeatedly and profit at the expense of 
firm B.  It can also occur if firms A and B use identical strategies, but gain market access through technologies with 
varying degrees of speed or quality.  Further, if one exchange has poor quality technology, a trading firm may be 
able exploit that weakness relative to other exchanges/execution venues.  Thus, at each point of trade selection and 
execution, quality may be the determining factor of sustainable competitive advantage. 

 
6 
 
 
Automated trading systems lack human judgment, but their consequences can 
nevertheless be unethical (that is, the result of human conduct that, all things considered, should 
be prohibited). Moor (2006) calls such automatons “implicit ethical agents”. An implicit ethical 
agent is “programmed to behave ethically, or at least avoid unethical behavior, though without 
explicit representation of ethical principles”—much as a safety catch on a gun may prevent 
unintended killing (Anderson & Anderson, 2007). Trading systems implement rule-based 
decisions, essentially executing the ethics derived from their human designers. Thus, as 
emotionless agents, they break the traditional connection between human agency and social 
structure—the micro-macro link. See Von Scheve & Von Leude (2005).  
 
Ethics in financial services generally takes the form of “codes”, that is, systematic 
statements of standards of conduct (e.g. those of the Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) (2008) 
and Certified Financial Planner (CFP) (2008)). These codes typically demand “integrity, 
objectivity, competence, fairness, confidentiality, professionalism and diligence.” (Ragatz & 
Duska, 2010) Traders too have rules they must abide by, those of their exchange. However, the 
evolution to automationpresents an opportunity to expand the role of ethics in finance beyond the 
domain of fiduciaries (i.e. money managers) and intermediaries (i.e. brokers and investment 
advisors) to include “financial engineers”4 (i.e. mathematicians, usually called “quants”), 
software engineers, and computer engineers5. Automated finance brings together members from 
these different professions, but no one automatically or routinely  takes responsibility for the 
consequences of their joint activity. “There is clearly an ethical imperative implicit in the 
                                                 
4 “Financial engineering” is generally synonymous with mathematical finance, financial mathematics, quantitative 
finance, or computational finance.  A survey of the codes of ethics of the relevant organizations—International 
Association of Financial Engineers, Professional Risk Managers International Association, and the Global 
Association of Risk Professionals—uncovered no discussion of the ethics of financial automation.  Programs in 
financial engineering are not accredited by ABET. Hence, the quotation marks around the term. Generally, 
“financial engineers” are not engineers strictly speaking 
5 By “computer engineers”, we mean to include programmers, software quality engineers, and network engineers—
many of whom will be computer scientists rather than engineers strictly speaking. 

 
7 
 
growing influence of automation in market behavior. The ethical dimension of market 
automation is therefore worthy of serious study.” (Hurlburt, Miller & Voas, 2009) Because 
automation enables virtually instantaneous trading between continents, that serious study should 
be global. The interface of the three different professions (traders, quants, and computer 
engineers) gives rise to new ethical issues at the organizational (or system) level. 
In the age of automation, innovation—new strategies, methods of analysis, execution 
venues, instruments, technologies, data sources—is the ultimate source of competitive 
advantage. How is innovation to be kept socially useful? Given innovation’s rapid pace, neither 
governmental nor exchange regulation can keep up. Only ethics can fill the gap between where 
innovation is and where governmental regulations and exchange rules suppose it to be. But, 
innovation’s pace also leaves little time for ethical reflection. As a new body of knowledge, the 
automated trading gold-rush has ignored the possibility of the self-organization of certain 
occupations into professions, the moment when codes of professional ethics generally appear 
(Davis, 1991). Thus, no code addresses ethical responsibilities in automated trading. None even 
requires (as engineering codes of ethics typically do) holding “paramount the safety, health, and 
welfare of the public.” (American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), 2011, American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), 2011, and so on.) One of the problems in finance is that 
“people…believe that the task of creating and enforcing ethical rules and standards is the job of 
legislatures and regulators, not themselves.” (Boatright, 2010)  
 
  
2 
Competitive Advantage 
 
Parker (1998) argues that the challenge of globalization is the balancing of competing 
objectives such as ethics and competitive advantage. So, to understand that challenge, we must 

 
8 
 
understand the sources of competitive advantage. Let us begin with a brief description of the 
three sources of competitive advantage in automated (or high-frequency) trading identified in 
Perkins, Van Vliet and Kumiega (2009) as carry-over from the traditional literature on finance: 
1. 
Strategic Creativity (or Differentiation): from an empirical perspective, the 
ability to perceive opportunities in a market that are unnoticed by human traders 
or other firms.   
2. 
Quantitative Improvement: the ability to capture profitable opportunities 
through more capable valuation and forecasting models, order management 
techniques, and trading logic. 
3. 
Data Cleaning and Optimization: the ability to uncover profitable strategies by 
repairing and manipulating financial data and optimizing signals. 
To this short list should be added five more sources of advantage: 
4. 
Order Execution Speed: the ability to respond more quickly to real-time market 
movements than market competitors. For example, given that two or more firms 
may become aware of the same arbitrage opportunity, only one firm, the firm with 
the fastest technology, can respond fast enough to capture that opportunity. This 
creates an ethical problem, how to resolve the conflict between speed and the 
inclusion of fail-safe code that may add latency (that is, slowness in execution of 
strategy decision logic). 
INSERT FIGURE 2.1 HERE 
 
 
Of course, achieving low latency costs money. Figure 2.1 shows the trade-off 
between latency and the launch cost of technology. The physical barrier is the 

 
9 
 
geographical distance from the exchange, d, divided by the speed of light, c. This 
implies a trade-off between speed and context. There isn’t much time to think. 
5. 
Cost Minimization  
 Variable Cost Minimization (i.e. commission minimization or rebate 
maximization): the ability to execute strategic decisions more cheaply than 
competitors. That is, one firm may be able to execute a strategy profitably, 
while another firm may not be able to execute the same strategy profitably 
because of a higher commission or rebate structure. 
 Fixed Cost Minimization (i.e. minimizing fixed costs allocated to trading 
systems per accounting period): Building a trading infrastructure with 
direct market access alone could cost upwards of $15 million. Information 
technology, research and development, and overhead costs mean that one 
firm may be able to execute a strategy profitably, while another firm may 
not be able to do so because of higher fixed costs. An ethical conflict then 
exists between minimizing costs and satisfying obligations to foster a 
stable-market mechanism by, for example, paying for redundant systems.  
6. 
Rapid Model Deployment: the ability to manage trading-system research and 
development projects in order to quickly deploy capable systems on a 
technological platform. That is, given the perishable nature of strategies and 
because the value of a strategy is a function of the duration of expected cash 
flows, one firm may be able to capture more of a trading opportunity than other 
firms.  
INSERT FIGURE 2.2 HERE 

 
10 
 
 
Figure 2.2 shows that a strategy fails at time τ. Thus, if deployment at time d 
occurs earlier, the cash-flow period τ – d is longer, thereby increasing the present 
value of the strategy at t = 0. Of course, production pressure may lead to 
circumvention of safety-driven project management processes and to the  launch 
of a risky trading system, something that, all else equal, everyone involved in 
financial markets would like to avoid. 
7. 
Trading System Portfolio Management: the ability to optimize capital 
allocations across a group of working trading systems and the research and 
development of new systems. Portfolio management considers not only 
correlations of returns but also project and technology correlations. 
8. 
Defect Minimization (or Quality): not only do defects (such as software bugs or 
holes in the trading logic) impact market return, but also investors’ confidence in 
the organization’s ability to succeed. The need for high quality in individual 
trading systems must, however, not take precedence over the overall quality—
stability and reliability—of the global market system. 
 
We will hereafter refer to the sources of ethical problems by the names given here to the 
corresponding source of competitive advantage. Since regulators have begun to focus on 
automated trading, we shall now describe where regulation is (though it is evolving). We shall 
then describe the gap ethics can fill.  
 
3 
Regulation 
 
In the case of intentional or unintentional market manipulation, regulators in the U.S. 
have addressed the ethical issues raised by automation. So, for example, because ethics starts at 

 
11 
 
the top (or, at least, is supposed to), Chief Executive Officers of automated trading firms must 
now annually certify the quality of their systems. The broadest regulation of electronic markets 
in the U.S. is Reg. NMS (National Market System) of the Security Exchange Commission 
(SEC). Its rules concerning order protection require traders and brokers to route client orders to 
the execution venue (such as an exchange or electronic communications network) publishing the 
best price, not the one offering the fastest execution or the greatest reliability. Some argue that 
the SEC has gone too far in managing business conduct, while others point out that Reg. NMS 
merely forces brokers to act in their client's best interests (Stoll, 2006). Reg. NMS does not, 
however, specifically discuss any particular form of buy-side high-frequency or automated 
trading. 
 
SEC Rule 15c3-5 prohibits direct market access (DMA) to securities markets.6 It requires 
trading firms connected to the exchange servers to establish and maintain risk-control systems 
and procedures. These systems must permit only electronic order requests (of the firm and its 
customers) that satisfy all pre-trade regulations. DMA precludes an intermediary (such as a 
broker-dealer or clearing member) from interceding in the flow of order requests a particular 
trading firm may generate. Thus, for DMA firms, there is a higher burden of responsibility to 
ensure the stable operation of their trading systems. For example, such firms must ensure that 
surveillance personnel receive real-time (or near real-time) post-trade exception reports. In this 
way, the regulation is an attempt to guarantee a level of quality control at the final link in the 
order entry chain.   
 
More specifically, the regulations of SEC and the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission (CFTC) have prohibited market manipulation, though there is no definition of 
                                                 
6 DMA describes the facilities that allow a financial institution to route orders to the exchange order book without 
first passing through its clearing member or broker’s technology for pre-trade approvals. 

 
12 
 
manipulation. Exchanges and courts are left to make their own decisions. What one exchange or 
one jury may consider manipulation, another may not, so arbiters must also consider the extent to 
which exchanges are complicit with strategies that occur on their electronic platforms. Recently, 
however, new regulations have lowered the bar for proving manipulation using automation (see 
SEC Rule 10b-5 and CFTC Rule 17 CFR Part 180.1). Where once the prosecutor’s burden was 
to prove intent, now a merely manipulative outcome and proof of recklessness (i.e. conscious 
negligence or imprudence7) suffice to establish liability. The obligation is on the accused trading 
firm to prove prudence in its trading system research, development, operations, and control 
processes. 
 
We may divide manipulation another way, into strategies and technology. Figure 2.3 
shows the resulting four categories of market manipulation. 
INSERT FIGURE 2.3 HERE 
 
In box A of Figure 2.3, a firm manipulates a market by intentionally developing a 
manipulative trading strategy. In box B, a firm deploys a reckless strategy in a trading system, 
though the technology is of high quality. Traders and quants design a strategy that, being poorly 
thought out, may behave in unexpected ways in certain market conditions. Programmers may be 
unaware of the potential outcomes of such a system. In box C, the strategy may be prudently 
researched and tested, but malicious technological implementation could introduce manipulation 
in its execution. For example, programmers could intentionally remove pre-trade safeguards to 
increase speed of order execution. This may violate the code of ethics governing programmers. 
In box D, reckless coding could introduce software bugs and lack of testing could permit 
deployment of a system that could go haywire. Box Q represents prudence in both strategy and 
                                                 
7 Prudence has long been an ethical obligation in financial services.  The Prudent Man Rule is an outgrowth of the 
landmark Harvard College v. Amory case in Massachusetts in 1830. 

 
13 
 
technology R&D.  Whatever the source of a manipulative outcome, the ethical failing was not in 
the real-time conscience of a trader, but rather in the weeks or even months of conscious research 
and development. But, what constitutes prudence, or good faith, in trading system research and 
development? This is where ordinary regulation ends, and the new ethical territory begins: at the 
interface between quantified trading strategy and technological implementation. 
 
Exchanges and governments sometimes prohibit specific intentional strategic 
manipulation (i.e. box A). In addition to the traditional prohibitions—against, for example, front 
running, late trading by mutual funds, cornering the market, squeezing, pumping-and-dumping, 
market conditioning, and wash trading (see Kyle & Viswanathan, 2008)—governmental 
regulations and exchange rules have banned or may ban certain intentional automation-enabled 
trading tactics. The most notable of these are flash trading, quote stuffing, and spoofing. Flash 
trading is the practice by which the exchange exposes a trade request to subscribers of the 
exchange’s data feed while not publishing the best price in the national market system. If any 
firm wishes to take the other side of the trade, the exchange can execute the trade (and keep the 
associated fees) before routing the order to another venue. Quote-stuffing is an attempt to 
overwhelm the network of an exchange by sending and cancelling thousands of trade requests 
per second, thereby blocking other market participants’ access to a market, a practice not only 
unfair but inconsistent even with an orderly market. Spoofing creates a false market, transmitting 
trade requests to an exchange with the express intent of cancelling them before execution, the 
goal being to create the illusion of a deep liquid market in order to fool other market participants 
or their systems. Exchanges have the ability to limit quote-stuffing and spoofing by fining firms 
based on a message-to-fill ratio, say 50 to 1. Firms that fail to execute at least one trade for every 
fifty messages (i.e. trade requests) sent to the exchange server are in violation. Some exchanges 

 
14 
 
assess these fines, some don’t. Exchanges are then complicit in the rate of spoofing and quotestuffing they allow. This presents an ethical question. What amount of messaging promotes a fair 
market, without infringing upon development of otherwise ethical trading strategies? 
Conceptually, spoofing is easily understood, but it’s far harder to enforce regulations 
against it. In the Trillium Brokerage Services case, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority 
(FINRA) was able to prosecute the firm successfully.8 But, consider options market-making, as 
an alternative example. As underlying prices change, market-makers continuously update their 
option bids and offers, though potentially never actually executing a trade. This well-understood 
strategy is not spoofing under any definition. Consider, on the other hand, a prudently-researched 
(i.e. box Q) trading strategy involving complex statistical relationships between multiple 
instruments. As prices in some markets change, the system may update bids and offers in other 
markets in a way not intuitive to regulators or individual exchanges. The messaging activity in 
any individual instrument may appear (in isolation) to be spoofing. Yet, the trading system is in 
fact in box Q. For any observed behavior, the question is: Is it driven by a box Q model, or is it 
spoofing?  Is there, or is there not, a proven mathematical reason that the system is updating 
quotes and cancelling orders? Few firms would divulge such mathematical proof. They prefer to 
fight a spoofing charge rather than give away their strategic creativity or quantitative 
improvements.  
 
Over-regulation may stifle competition, forcing a one-size-fits-all solution to such 
problems. Further, regulation in finance may result (and often has resulted) in “regulatory 
capture” (the delegation of regulatory responsibility to the regulated).  Because “self-regulation 
is generally more cost-effective than [governmental regulation]” (Lichtenberg, 1996), the 
industry has long established the individual exchanges and the Financial Industry Regulatory 
                                                 
8 Reference? 

 
15 
 
Authority as proxy regulators of their markets and members. Yet, even exchange regulations 
cannot cross national borders without significant international coordination. Only ethics (and 
similar guides to conduct) adopted by international bodies, such as the IEEE or the International 
Standards Organization (ISO), can adopt general principles and specific rules that cross national 
borders, market cultures, and even professional disciplines.  
 
4 
Ethical Responsibilities 
 
 
Discussions of ethics in financial markets and financial services generally focus on 
professional responsibilities of money managers, brokers, investment advisors, and traders, who 
are bound by the codes of ethics of their respective professions as well as by governmental 
regulation and exchange rules. In the new age, however, the intermediaries are automated agents 
in a global automated mechanism (not members of any profession). As automation is an 
interdisciplinary endeavor, firms should also consider their organizational responsibilities to 
external stakeholders. As enablers of automated trading, the exchanges—NASDAQ, NYSE, 
CME, and so on—and even the off-exchange execution venues should consider their ethical 
responsibilities (the tasks that should, in part at least, be guided by ethical standards). And, in 
fact, the exchanges, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, and their member firms are 
collectively and continually examining their industry-wide responsibilities to create an ethical 
climate, construct fair markets, and conduct themselves in a way that ultimately benefits society 
and helps to sustain confidence in the markets. There is, however, no single code of ethics or 
ethical theory defining the firm’s or the industry’s responsibilities to external stakeholders in the 
age of automated finance.   

 
16 
 
 
Automated trading is complex. No one person knows all the strategies, all the 
quantitative methods, and all the technologies that produce competitive advantage. Teams of 
professionals—traders9, quants, and computer engineers—come together to move these systems 
from idea to operation. But, these professionals as well as management have conflicting 
perceptions and priorities. Each perceives the project through his or her own “intentions, 
interests, desires, points of view, or biases, all of which work as selective and restrictive filters.” 
(Werhane, 1991) To appreciate the interactions between the functional areas, we generalize 
trading system R&D project management (in Stages 1-3) and O&C (in Stage 4) into four 
activities (see Kumiega & Van Vliet, 2008): 
 
1. 
Design: Research into quantitative methods. The search for strategic 
differentiation and quantitative improvement invariably makes use of automated 
tools (e.g. spreadsheets, statistical software packages, and the internet). Yet, these 
tools may create “ranks of sorcerer’s apprentice user-programmers…who have 
little training or expertise in how to avoid or detect high-risk ...” (Boehm & Basili, 
2001)  
 
2. 
Test: Performance Testing (a.k.a. Backtesting). Data cleaning and parameter 
optimization involves backtesting often to maximize some objective function, 
such as a Sharpe ratio (a measure of risk-adjusted performance). Yet, stability and 
safety is often unconsidered; such methods focus on profit, not safety or potential 
harm. 
 
3. 
Implement: Order Management and Trade Execution. Computer programs, 
hardware, and network platform encapsulate the strategy. The push for execution 
                                                 
9 In the age of automated finance, the definition of trader is evolving. 

 
17 
 
speed may neglect the stability of the firm’s systems or that of the execution 
venue. 
 
4. 
Management: Risk Management and Process Control. Performance 
monitoring should manage market and operational risks in real-time. But, pre- and 
post-trade controls are often viewed as adding too much latency, infringing on 
technological speed.  
The role of each functional area in these activities in shown in Figure 4.1. 
INSERT FIGURE 4.1 HERE 
 
Traders are traditionally (and often still) viewed as the primary drivers of profits, and 
often lead trading system research and development. They can push timelines, but they should 
not have the ability to override reliable data. They are the primary (but certainly not the only) 
source of strategic creativity. Encapsulation of their strategies into quantified logic—a process 
consisting of derivation and empirical testing of pricing, forecasting, risk management models, 
and trading logic—is usually performed by quants. Quants turn these algorithms over to 
programmers who implement them in computer code and optimize technological speed. There 
are interactions between the data, the math, and the technology. Speed may be traded off against 
numerical precision.  
 
Projects themselves have human components and therefore ethical considerations. The 
human aspects of trading systems are not in emotional reactions to market moves (as in the past), 
but rather in the individual reactions to various facets of management of trading system projects 
(see Kumiega & Van Vliet (2008) and (2011) for these facets). Traders, quants, computer 
engineers, and management can view the same facts from different perspectives. Communication 
about trading system problems has to overcome barriers to moving news (especially bad news) 

 
18 
 
between traders, quants, and engineers, as well as up to management. It should hardly be 
surprising that such communications sometimes fail. All three disciplines should be aware of 
erring on the side of optimism in trading system research and development. Fear of admitting 
intellectual failure can prove expensive, as demonstrated by the Challenger disaster (see Winsor, 
1988). Furthermore, past success can impact beliefs about the probability of future success. 
“Organizations often evolve gradually and incrementally into unexpected states.” (See Starbuck 
& Milliken, 1988) 
As in much of the project management and software engineering literature, ethics is 
embedded within discussions of methodology. (See PMI, 2011; Rogerson & Gotterbarn, 1998.) 
As it is the primary vehicle through which firms negotiate the tension between rapid model 
deployment, professional perspectives, and ethical obligations (Behnke, 2009), rigorous 
methodology can prevent a normalization of deviance, prove prudence (i.e. Figure 2.3, box Q), 
and reduce risk through objective criteria for project evaluation. As De Mast and Bisgaard 
(2007) point out: “if problems are not quantified, the trade-off nature is obscured and people tend 
to treat them as either/or problems and frequently politicize them.” A pre-condition of an ethical 
global trading mechanism, then, is that ethical cognitive processes drive trading-system research 
and development, and trump decisions driven by politics, fear, or greed.   
 
Overall organizational success is determined by the quality of the firm’s systems, not just 
the acumen of its individual traders. A brief review of ethical orientations of professionals, 
organizations, and the industry vis-à-vis the other stakeholders will frame further discussion of 
ethical problems. 
Professional Responsibilities. Ideally, ethics are those morally permissible standards of 
conduct everyone in the relevant group (at their rational best) wants everyone else in the group to 

 
19 
 
follow even if following them would mean having to do the same (Davis, 2002). Ethics should 
guide behavior. But, human emotions can get in the way of both rational thinking and ethics. 
Emotions are part of the problem in trading, too. Fear and greed interfere with good decisionmaking. Lo, Repin, and Steenbarger (2005) and Steenbarger (2002) show a negative correlation 
between successful trading and emotional reactivity. Lo and Repin (2002) show that “even the 
most seasoned trader exhibits significant emotional response…during certain transient market 
events such as increased price volatility or intra-day breaks in trend.” Emotional responses—fear 
and greed—tend to encourage ethical violations as well (see Sims, 1992). Explicit ethical 
standards can remind people of the need to overcome fear and greed; license them to guide the 
conduct of others, whether by advice or criticism; and even justify procedures that make it harder 
to act on fear and greed. Hence, ethics has long been part of finance.  But, each of the disciplines 
involved in automated trading has its own ethical climate, which affects how its members 
understand their respective roles and how they work with other disciplines. 
Victor and Cullen (1988) identify five types of ethical climate by criteria for moral 
(including ethical) choice. An instrumental climate follows ethical egotism, often ignoring the 
interests of others. Caring climates consider others, but may provide justification for 
circumvention of organizational policies in order to help. Law and order climates rely on 
regulations, including ethical codes, without ethical reflection. Rules climates rely on internal 
policies and procedures irrespective of external norms (even ordinary morality). Independence 
climates permit individual reflection and action but provide little guidance. 
 
Traders. Traders focus on markets and opportunities for profit. Of the rules and codes 
pertinent to traders (e.g. the regulations of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (2011), the National 
Futures Association, New York Stock Exchange, and the SEC) most developed in the age of 

 
20 
 
face-to-face pit trading. (So, for example, some still prohibit smoking and fighting.) But, 
automated trading creates an anonymous environment without human interaction. Traditionally, 
the work climate among traders themselves has been instrumental and independent. This was 
easily justified because society benefited from their egotistic pursuit of their own interests. 
Which isn’t to say traders often behave badly. As liquidity providers, many take seriously their 
principal function of providing for orderly markets. Yet, no rule or code applying to them 
specifically says anything about creating robust automated systems. 
Computer Engineers. Computer engineers (including software engineers and computer 
scientists) focus on technological optimization. Computer engineers have their own codes of 
ethics which shape their professional climate. (See Association for Computing Machinery 
(ACM) (2011), IEEE (formerly, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) (2011), 
International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE) (2011).) These codes require computer 
engineers to give special weight to the public interest, avoid unsafe practices, and accept prudent 
measures (see INCOSE, 2011). The Software Engineering Body of Knowledge (Abran, Moore, 
Bourque, Dupuis & Tripp, 2005) embeds ethics within the topic of software quality.10 Kamthan 
(2008) points out that “the issue of information technology in general, and the role of quality in 
software development in particular, have been addressed in (Reynolds, 2003; Tavani, 2004). 
Moreover, software quality is viewed as an ethical issue (Peslak, 2004).” As a body of 
knowledge, the focus on software quality and fail-safe design are part of both academic and 
professional software engineering. Ethics by way of software quality is taught in college and 
applied on the job. 
                                                 
10 There is also a Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional Practice (ACM/IEEE, 1999), the result of a 
joint effort of the ACM and IEEE. 

 
21 
 
Quants. Quants focus on mathematical constructs and data. Ethics in quantitative analysis 
is largely thought to be superseded by adherence to mathematical truth, exchange rules, and 
governmental regulation. Mathematical algorithms cannot run afoul of regulations. While quants 
do have codes of ethics (see Professional Risk Managers’ International Association (PRMIA) 
(2011), American Statistical Association (ASA) (2011)), they have little if any codified 
principles related to automation, though algorithms can be ethics-laden (see Kraemer, van 
Overveld & Martin Peterson, 2010). In the academy, quantitative finance is a discipline generally 
excluding normative questions (Boatright, 2010). In practice, however, where implementation 
often converts “positive” research (that is, research where the goal is truth whatever the 
consequences) into normative automated algorithms (where the goal is profit), an ethical divide 
is crossed. Horrigan (1987) has traced this divide in the use of positive research to justify realworld decisions. For example, assumptions that need not conform to reality in a theoretical 
setting can take on potentially harmful implications in practice. Models that are put into a 
production environment need to be controlled. Further, Hurlburt et al. (2009) note that “when 
quants create and implement a model by focusing exclusively on short-term shareholder value, 
the social and economic consequences of the trades themselves might be completely ignored 
[allowing for great harm to be done].”  
Whose responsibility is it, then, to ensure that these systems are prudently designed and 
controlled? Professionals in each discipline may fail to recognize the ethical climates of the other 
two. Traders and quants are not bound by any code of ethics that binds computer engineers. 
Likewise, computer engineers may not grasp the ethical implications of the quantified algorithms 
they code or the market impact of the systems they design. They are not experts in finance, 
mathematics, or financial regulation.  

 
22 
 
 
Automated trading systems cannot be designed and controlled without taking a stand on 
ethical issues. (See Kearns, Kulesza, & Nevmyvaka (2010) for a similar conclusion.) Automation 
is an interdisciplinary endeavor. Traders, quants, and computer engineers each analyze data and 
perceive risk differently. While each profession may correctly perceive its own responsibilities in 
isolation, there are ethical problems at the interfaces between them. These problems may be 
resolved by “organizational ethics”. 
Organizational Ethics. “The ethical climate of an organization is the shared set of 
understandings about what is correct behavior and how ethical issues will be handled…. When 
the ethical climate is not clear and positive, ethical problems will often result in unethical 
behavior.” (Sims, 1992) In automated finance, the ethical agents are no longer self-interested 
people, but rather implicit ethical agents developed by self-interested organizations. Trading 
algorithms are fostering new organizational climates for the development, control, and protection 
of the firms’ intellectual property.  
 
In automated trading, it is the behavior of the interdisciplinary organization that really 
matters. The organization’s ethical problem is that the push for rapid model deployment conflicts 
with (time-consuming) backtesting, software quality testing, and consideration for the stability of 
the overall marketplace. Figure 4.2 relates the team’s activities to professional and organizational 
sources of competitive advantage.  
INSERT FIGURE 4.2 HERE 
 
The ethics of automation (which is closely related to computer ethics, machine ethics, 
and ethics of robotics) has recently emerged (Anderson & Anderson, 2006). Seminal 
contributions by Moor (2006), Allen, Wallach and Smit (2006), and Ramaswamy and Joshi 
(2009) have given it structure. As a starting point, many authors point to the basic premise of 

 
23 
 
Isaac Asimov’s Laws of Robotics (Asimov, 1942): “a robot may not harm humanity, or, by 
inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.” If a trading system is to prevent harm, “it must be 
cognizant of possible harmful consequences and select its actions accordingly.” (Allen et al., 
2006)  
 
Ramaswamy and Joshi (2009) point out that automation enables unethical behavior and, 
furthermore, simplifies it by obscuring its source (“it wasn’t me, it was the computer, or the 
vendor’s software, or the other department.”) The presence of teams—where each member is 
bound (in theory) to a different professional standard—plus vendor-supplied components, creates 
plausible deniability for any individual. Programmers (bound in theory to the ethics of computer 
science) cannot foresee all possible evolutions of market prices and the reactions the system may 
take when functioning. “Hence the programmer cannot be held responsible if harm should be 
done as a secondary effect of the [system] interacting with [external market participants], so long 
as the [system] was not explicitly programmed to do harm… [Furthermore,] the modular design 
of systems can mean that no single person or group can fully grasp the manner in which the 
system will interact or respond to a complex flow of new inputs.” (Allen et al., 2006) “This kind 
of blamelessness provides insufficient protection for those who might be harmed.” (Allen et al., 
2006) 
 
In addition, monitoring of market performance of working systems allows humans to 
adjust trading decision parameters in real-time. At what point and to what extent does the 
organization allow individuals to modify or overrule a machine or make on/off decisions?11 
Much of this research shows that humans tend to over-correct and hence add to rather than 
                                                 
11 The engineering literature has examined behavioral aspects of systems monitoring and adjustment.  Adaptive failsafe controllers have proven to manage high-speed machines better than human controllers.  The research of Suh 
and Cheon (2002), Williams and Davies (1986) is notable in this regard.  Bilson, Kumiega and Van Vliet (2010) and 
Hassan et al. (2010) have argued that an R&D process should prove stability and establish quantified limits for 
control of trading systems. 

 
24 
 
subtract from risk. Like an amoral calculator (Kagan & Scholz, 1984), the trading firm may have 
the attitude that as long as it can pay for its losses (whether caused by reckless design or overcorrecting), the risks associated with trading system failure are acceptable. If the trading firm 
settles at night (i.e. covers any margin requirements) with its clearing firms, it can trade the next 
day. Consideration of harm to external market participants has often been left out. But, 
regulation and ethics are changing this attitude. The ethical conflicts between professional 
climates are being resolved by new structures of organizational responsibilities and a new 
industry-wide climate.  
Industry-wide Responsibilities. One problem for ethics in finance is that market 
outcomes (as with all outcomes) are uncertain and ambiguous. Ethical lapses may accidentally 
lead to good outcomes or vice versa, which can lead to “ethics in hindsight” (“no harm, no 
foul”). Yet, the best way to produce the social benefits of free markets is to foster market agents 
with good ethics. An industry-wide ethical climate can determine how organizations and 
professionals perceive problems, obligations to external stakeholders, and formal standards of 
right and wrong. 
The industry-wide climate has been “law and order”, driven by exchange rules and 
government oversight. Nevertheless, independence is still a widely held ideal. No industry-wide 
ethical climate should (it is felt) infringe upon a trading firm’s ability to innovate with new 
trading ideas and technologies. Any single prescriptive method would limit analysis and 
research, and hence restrict the efficiency of markets. Pluralism improves the critical power and 
evolution of markets. Some argue that automated trading’s high barriers to entry decrease this 
pluralism in the name of efficiency. But, automation has fragmented markets to such an extent 
that others decry the new existence of too much pluralism.  

 
25 
 
 
In the age of automation, other cultural differences are complicating Hurlburt et al.’s 
(2009) imperative.12 Though virtually all exchanges seek the ethical goal of fair markets, the 
definition of fairness may vary. What is ethical in futures markets may be unethical in stock 
markets (e.g. in equities there are down-tick rules for short selling, in futures there is no such 
rule). Likewise, what is ethical in one country (or region) may be unethical in another. As noted 
earlier, what is unethical in one of the functional disciplines may be un-addressed in another (and 
therefore ethical by default). Where individual markets, countries, organizations, and disciplines 
have their own rules, the new discussion must cross all such boundaries.  Because these systems 
may trade across jurisdictions and countries, discussions in the industry have moved toward 
consistent regulations and shared understanding of how ethics should fill the gap.  
 
5 
Ethical Problems 
 
 
Figure 5.1 summarizes our discussion thus far. The left-hand side depicts the traditional 
ethics of fiduciaries and intermediaries—money managers and investment advisors. Their ethical 
guidelines are codified in exams for Certified Financial Analyst (CFA), Certified Financial 
Planner (CFP), Series 7, and so on. The right-hand side depicts trading-firm involvement in highfrequency trading (HFT). The HFT firm contains three functional areas each with its own ethics. 
Computer engineers’ ethics—derived from IEEE, ACM and INCOSE codes—focus on software 
testing and fail-safe mechanisms. Traders’ ethics derived from exchange rules traditionally focus 
on maintenance of orderly markets. Quant’s ethics—derived from professional organizations 
such as Professional Risk Managers International Association (PRMIA) and American Statistical 
                                                 
12 By culture, we simply mean a distinctive way of doing things. Not only nations and regions have cultures, but 
organizations, professions, and even occupations have them. 
 

 
26 
 
Association (ASA)—focus on mathematical truth and adherence to rules and regulations. The 
exchanges’ ethics focus on the operation of fair markets. 
INSERT FIGURE 5.1 HERE 
 
Depicted in the lines connecting four ethical foci are the interfaces between them. This is 
where a new discussion can expand ethics in finance. To satisfy the ethical interface between 
professional climates, other industries have turned to “quality”. Quality is not only a software 
testing or statistical framework, but also an ethical one (insofar as the standards in question are 
ones everyone in the relevant disciplines—at their rational best—want everyone else in those 
disciplines to follow even if that would mean having to do the same). The ethics literature has a 
long list of articles equating quality management and social responsibility. (See Tari (2011) for a 
comprehensive literature review.) Thus, quality may seem to fill the regulation-innovation gap 
and the interfaces of the disciplines in automated finance (depending on how “quality” is 
understood).  
 
The benefit to firms of understanding ethics as quality is that quality (generally) improves 
the bottom line. See, for example, Hendricks and Singhal (1997) and (2000); Powell (1995); 
Flynn, Schroeder and Sakakibara (2007); Kaynak (2002); Chapman, Murray and Mellor (1997); 
and Handfield, Ghosh and Fawcett (1998). To be sure, many trading firms (and third-party 
vendors of trading system components) understand this.  They perform rigorous quality control 
over their processes—not strictly out of ethics, but out of an understanding that a quality 
approach to innovation is, in the end, the source of competitive advantage. However, even these 
systems can fail at the disciplinary interfaces because methodology has not been coordinated. 
What we would like to do now is address particular issues in financial automation that require 
cross-disciplinary ethical decisions that discipline-based concepts of quality do not. 

 
27 
 
 
The Flash Crash. The flash crash of May 6, 2010 illustrates the value-ladeness of a 
trading firm’s decision to stop trading and the variety of ethical perspectives now interacting. 
Some automated trading firms shut down their systems because they thought it was the ethical 
thing to do. After all, something seemed to have gone wrong with the market, and profiting from 
operational failure of its infrastructure would be unethical. (The motivation behind this reasoning 
is the fail-safe ethics of computer engineers.) Others chose to leave their machines on because 
they thought it was the ethical thing to do. After all, liquidity vacuums create volatility and 
perhaps panic, and the best we can do in a suddenly contracting market is to continue to provide 
liquidity, albeit at safe prices. (The motivation behind this reasoning is traders’ ethics, a focus on 
orderly markets.)  
 
Liquidity providers had two options: 1) shut down their systems until the problems were 
rectified, at which time they would reboot and reconnect to the exchange servers, a process 
which could take at least 20 minutes; and 2) continue to provide quotes to the marketplace, 
though with wider bid/ask spreads to protect the firm (i.e. say bids of one penny), so that when 
problems were resolved, real bids and offers could be posted immediately. Is it fair that (even 
ethically-minded) liquidity providers bought stock at one penny? 
 
Some exchanges sought to rectify (what they considered) unfairness by “busting trades” 
in subsequent days. But, some liquidity providers had already taken other positions in other 
markets to reduce risk. The original trades (made in good faith) were hedged in other markets. 
Busting the initial trade after the fact left firms’ subsequent positions unhedged, leading to 
potentially large losses. Going forward, liquidity providers would have a disincentive to continue 
trading under the risk of such a scenario repeating. The incentive is to pull liquidity as soon as 

 
28 
 
there is any sign of market stress. This would surely add to the stress by causing a liquidity 
vacuum.  
 
Contrast this policy of busting trades to the response of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange 
(CME) to an exchange testing mistake in September, 2010, which accidentally sent 30,000 
orders onto its live electronic platform. The orders left some traders with positions they did not 
expect. The CEO and President of the CME quickly issued a written apology, but in deference to 
trades placed in good faith, did no busting. Rather, the CME "work[ed] with all affected 
customers to neutralize the financial effect of these transactions, including making customers 
whole for net losses they incurred in exiting positions." (Lynch, 2010) (By “net losses” they 
meant to include losses from subsequent hedging transactions.) This response seems better, since 
it fits the interface between traders’ ethics and the exchange’s ethics—on Figure 5.1, the 
fairness-orderliness interface. Nevertheless, there is no industry-wide agreement as to what 
standard should prevail in future situations. So, the lack of agreement on a standard at the 
interfaces could still lead to a crash. 
 
Of course, some of these problems will correct themselves. Today’s murky ethical waters 
may tomorrow be seen merely as missed opportunities through the clarity of historical testing of 
new automated strategies (backtesting). Market data becomes part of the historical record. New 
strategies to exploit a particular extreme circumstance will tend to reduce the probability of its 
recurrence.  
 
Direct Market Access. While SEC Rule 15c3-5 prohibiting direct market access defines 
organizational responsibilities for controlling order entry to electronic exchanges, it falls short of 
fostering an ethical industry-wide climate. So, according to the principles of the American 
Society for Quality, the risk of failure still exists. To make matters worse, the SEC rule creates a 

 
29 
 
false sense of security, only shifting the ethical problems from trading firms to brokers, under the 
assumption that brokers’ systems are of higher quality. So, the ethical problem remains as well. 
Viewed from an ethical standpoint, direct market access touches on all the interfaces in Figure 
5.1. To satisfy all the ethical perspectives, trading firms must have a way to test the fail-safeness 
of their technologies and the robustness of their quantified strategies. One way to test is to use 
the world (live trading). That is much like flying experimental planes over crowded cities to test 
their airworthiness. Much better for testing would be some simulation or laboratory. Yet, such 
safe venues for testing rarely exist—or, at least, rarely exist in a form sufficiently robust to serve 
in place of live trading. To satisfy the ethical obligations at the fairness-fail-safe interface 
between a firm’s computer engineers and the exchange, software quality techniques address 
methods for testing exchange network gateways. But, without full testing environments and 
defined acceptance tests, strategies cannot be vetted safely. Thus, neither the fairness-rule 
interface between quant and exchange ethics, nor the orderliness-fairness interface between 
traders and exchange ethics can be satisfied by current regulations. 
Exchanges and execution venues in coordination with trading firms and clearing 
members have (or at least should have) an ethical obligation to create test environments and 
standards for system run-off tests, where all manner of market and technological scenarios 
bombard each system to verify its robustness. The availability of such venues would provide a 
means for all professionals and organizations to satisfy their own obligations. This would fix the 
problem, not just contain it as the current solution does. Better regulation could encourage an 
industry-wide ethical climate through mandatory inter-firm coordination for development of 
these venues. In the end, it is the quality of the industry’s interconnected systems that will 

 
30 
 
determine fairness, the ultimate ability of markets to benefit society and sustain confidence in the 
markets. 
 
Project Management. Figure 5.1 shows the interfaces between professionals, which can 
cause inappropriate decisions to be made. Each professional analyzes data and risk from his own 
profession’s perspective and considers its own priorities. From a project management 
framework, rigorous inter-disciplinary methodology and management check points (often called 
Stage-GatesTM (see Cooper, 2001)) in research and development can align professional ethics 
with the ethics of the exchange.  
Success in automated trading depends on success of the firm’s business model, which 
demands rapid model deployment. Scarce resources lead to production pressure and decisions to 
launch otherwise risky trading systems. Managers of research and development for trading 
systems are forced to consider tradeoffs between ethics (including quality standards) and the 
bottom-line. Within research and development, conflicts can occur between disciplines. Is there a 
difference between thinking like a trader rather than a computer engineer?13 In automated 
trading, there is. If a trader or quant tells a programmer not to test her code, neither has 
committed any violation with respect to the relevant code of ethics (that is, the trader’s code, the 
quant’s code, or the programmer’s code). Each has this plausible deniability in the event of harm. 
Each side can argue it was ethical. Poor project management across the three professional areas 
and the lack of robust test platforms leads inevitably to boxes B, C, and D in Figure 2.3. The 
existence of schedule-minded, amoral calculations among top management may violate safety 
norms protecting external market participants. For management, profit goals often have priority 
                                                 
13 Mason asked Lund to think like a manager rather than an engineer prior to Lund’s approving the launch of the 
Challenger space shuttle (Davis, 1991). 

 
31 
 
over the safety of the global trading mechanism. The industry needs a holistic framework, where 
ethical problems can be addressed before management has begun to worry about schedule.  
 
6 
Quality Climate 
 
 
Quality processes operationalize an organization’s ethics (in part at least). In the financial 
industry, discussion of quality focuses on specific guidance for improvement of trading systems 
within the professional ethical silos. But a focus on quality can also avoid compromising trader 
independence, methodological pluralism, and disclosure of proprietary sources of competitive 
advantage. This is why in Figure 2.3, Q stands for quality. Beyond simple software testing, 
quality in finance can include all professionals—computer engineers, quants, and traders alike.  
 
The ISO 9000 family of standards, and its industry-specific derivatives, are the most 
widely recognized quality management system standards. In other industries (where public safety 
must be ensured), ISO standards define how firms ought to do business in, for example: 
aerospace (which operates under its industry-specific standard AS 9000); chemicals (The Dow 
Chemical Company Quality Management System Manual, for instance); medical devices (which 
uses its own ISO 13485); and, food safety (which has its own, ISO 22000).  
 
A similar standard for finance should include software and hardware testing that prove 
the firm has demonstrated that its automated trading systems function properly, are operationally 
safe, and robust enough to behave acceptably during potential extreme events. 
 
The ability of automated trading firms to prove the stability of their systems depends 
upon the availability of execution-venue-simulation facilities to fully test those systems. Such 

 
32 
 
simulation facilities should provide testing against all manner of extreme market and 
infrastructure events. 
 
By following ISO 9000-style standards, an automated trading firm can satisfy its 
organizational obligations to prove and document that trading strategies and technologies will 
operate safely, reliably, and profitably. There is a large literature demonstrating that the use of 
quality management systems increases the financial performance of the firm. 
 
But, how can the government get high-frequency trading firms to improve their quality 
climate? Since it is top management’s responsibility to ensure that both strategies and 
technologies are researched, developed, and controlled according to quality standards (whoever 
else may share in that responsibility), governmental regulation should hold management 
accountable for the failure of employees to design quality in. This may be done by some 
combination of criminal and civil liability.   
 
These standards should mean the financial industry is taking the lead role in improving 
their own management systems. Thus, the federal government may be less likely to issue 
prescriptive, rules-based regulation, allowing it to concentrate surveillance efforts on the 
integrity of the trading organization as opposed to the details of individual trading systems 
compliance. (That is how regulators have responded to aerospace's AS 9000.)  Likewise, global 
industry standards should present significant opportunities for regulatory harmonization across 
national boundaries.  
7 
Conclusion 
 
 
The Challenger disaster was caused by pressure to launch, communication breakdowns 
between engineers and management, and differing perspectives and priorities (Werhane, 1991). 

 
33 
 
To mitigate the possibility of a breakdown in the global trading mechanism, the financial 
industry needs a holistic cross-cultural ethical framework to fill the innovation-regulation gap in 
the age of automation. Properly framing the ethical problems will enable root-cause analysis and 
long-term fixes, rather than short-term regulatory containments of undesirable outcomes. In the 
new age of automation, quality is (or should be) a professional, organizational, and industry-wide 
obligation to external market participants and society. Even optimal professional ethics (in 
isolation) will not provide adequate protection for those who might be harmed by failures of 
trading systems or the global trading mechanism. A broad ethical framework must ensure 
prudence without infringing on the necessary independence of trading firms.  
 
As a starting point, quality management techniques can provide a structure for 
understanding and solving the inter-disciplinary ethical problems. Then quality techniques can be 
employed to find solutions to root causes rather than (the industry’s current mode) containment 
of individual outcomes. Rigorous quality methodology can prove good faith and reduce risk 
through objective criteria for project evaluation. Since all of finance is (more or less) automated, 
these concepts could be broadly expanded to areas external to automated trading, such as risk 
and portfolio management.  
 
Regulators can encourage ethics through quality mandates that focus on the whole 
system, not professional silos. A project management framework that includes stage-gates could 
reduce the potential risks individual trading systems may pose to the global trading mechanism. 
Given formal decision-making structures for organizational responsibility, regulators can assess 
the rigor of research, development, operations, and control without infringing on the secrecy of 
proprietary trading strategies and their sources of competitive advantage. 

 
34 
 
References  
 
Abran, A., J. Moore, P. Bourque, R. Dupuis, and L. Tripp. 2005. Guide to the Software 
Engineering Body of Knowledge, 2004 Version. IEEE Computer Society Press.  
 
Allen, Colin, Wendell Wallach and Iva Smit. 2006. Why Machine Ethics? IEEE Intelligent 
Systems. July/August. 
 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). 2011. Code of Ethics. See www. asce.org. 
 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). 2011. Code of Ethics of Engineers. See 
www.asme.org. 
 
American Statistical Association (ASA). 1999. Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice. 
Available at: www.amstat.org. 
 
Anderson, Michael and Susan Leigh Anderson. 2007. Machine Ethics: Creating an Ethical 
Intelligent Agent. AI Magazine. 28(4). 
 
Asimov, Isaac. 1942. Runaround. Astounding Science Fiction. March. 
 
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). 2011. Code of Ethics, 1. General Moral 
Imperatives. See www.acm.org/about/code-of-ethics. 
 
ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Task Force on Software Engineering Ethics and Professional Practices. 
1999 Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional Practice. See 
http://www.acm.org/about/se-code. 
 
Behnke, Stephen. 2009. A Classic Study: Revisited. Monitor on Psychology. 40(5): 76.  
 
Bilson, John F.O., Andrew Kumiega, and Ben Van Vliet. 2010. Trading Model Uncertainty  
and Statistical Process Control. Journal of Trading. 5(3). 
 
Boatright, John. 2010. Ethics in Finance, in John Boatright (ed.), Finance Ethics. John Wiley & 
Sons. 
 
Boehm, B. and V.R. Basili. 2001. Top 10 list [software development]. Computer. 34(1): 135137. 
 
Brogaard, Jonathan A. 2010. High frequency trading and its impact on market quality. 
Northwestern University. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1641387 or 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1641387 
 
Certified Financial Planner (CFP). 2008. Standards of Professional Conduct. Available at: 
www.cfp.net/Downloads/2008Standards.pdf 
 

 
35 
 
Chapman, Ross L., Peter Charles Murray, and Robert Mellor. 1997. Strategic quality 
management and financial performance indicators. International Journal of Quality and 
Reliability Management. 14(4): 432-448. 
 
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA). 2008. Code of Ethics and Standards of Professional 
Conduct. Available at: www.cfainstitute.org/centre/codes/ethics/ 
 
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). 2011. Rulebook Chapter 5: Trading Qualifications and 
Practices Rule 5. Interpretations & Special Notices Relating to Chapter 5. Available at: 
www.cmegroup.com/rulebook/CME/index.html. 
 
Cooper, Robert G. 2001. Winning at New Products. Basic Books, Cambridge, MA. Stage-Gate 
is a registered trademark of R.G. Cooper & Associates Consultants, Inc., a member company of 
the Product Development Institute. See www.prod-dev.com 
 
Davis, Michael. 1991. Thinking Like an Engineer: The Place of a Code of Ethics in the  
Practice of a Profession. Philosophy & Public Affairs. 20(2): 150-167. 
 
Davis, Michael. 2002. Profession, Code, and Ethics. Ashgate, Aldershot, England. 
 
De Mast, Jeroen and Soren Bisgaard. 2007. The Science of Six Sigma. Quality Progress. 
January, 25-29. 
 
Fabozzi, Frank, Sergio M.Focardi, and Caroline Jonas. 2011. High-Frequency Trading: 
Methodologies and Market Impact. Review of Futures Markets. 9, Special Issue: 7-38.               
 
Flynn, Barbara, Roger G. Schroeder, and Sadao Sakakibara. 2007. The Impact of Quality 
Management Practices on Performance and Competitive Advantage.  Decision Sciences. 26(5): 
659-691. 
 
Handfield, Robert, Soumen Ghosh, and Stanley Fawcett. 1998, Quality-Driven Change and Its 
Effects on Financial Performance. Quality Management Journal. 5(3): 13-30. 
 
Hassan, M. Zia, Andrew Kumiega, and Ben Van Vliet. 2010. Trading Machines: Using SPC to 
Assess Performance of Financial Trading Systems. Quality Management Journal. 17(2): 42-53. 
 
Hendershott, Terrence and Riordan, Ryan. 2011. Algorithmic Trading and Information. NET 
Institute Working Paper No. 09-08. Available at: ssrn.com/abstract=1472050 
 
Hendershott, Terrence, Charles Jones, and Albert Menkveld. 2011. Does Algorithmic Trading 
Improve Liquidity? Journal of Finance. 66(1): 1-33. 
 
Hendricks, Kevin B. and Vinod R. Singhal. 1997. Does Implementing an Effective TQM 
Program Actually Improve Operating Performance? Empirical Evidence from Firms That Have 
Won Quality Awards. Management Science. 43(9): 1258 ff. 
 

 
36 
 
Hendricks, Kevin B. and Vinod R. Singhal. 2000. Firm characteristics, total quality management, 
and financial performance. Journal of Operations Management. 238: 1-17. 
 
Horrigan, James. 1987. The Ethics of the New Finance. Journal of Business Ethics. 6(2): 97110. 
 
Hurlburt, George F., Keith W. Miller, and Jeffrey M. Voas. 2009. An Ethical Analysis of  
Automation, Risk, and the Financial Crises of 2008. IEEE IT Professional. January/February. 
 
IEEE (formerly, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers). 2011. IEEE Code of Ethics. 
See www.ieee.org. 
 
International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE). 2011. INCOSE Code of Ethics. See 
www.incose.org/about/ethics.aspx 
 
Jovanovic, Boyan and Albert Menkveld. 2011. Middlemen in Limit-Order Markets. New York 
University. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1624329. 
 
Kagan, Robert A., and John T. Scholz. 1984. The ‘criminology of the corporation’ and 
regulatory enforcement strategies, in Keith Hawkins and John M. Thomas (eds.), Enforcing 
Regulation. Kluwer-Nijhoff, Boston. 
 
Kamthan, Pankaj. 2008. Ethics is Software Engineering, in Marian Quigley (ed.), Encyclopedia 
of information ethics and security. IGI Global. 266-272.  
 
Kaynak, Hale. 2003. The relationship between total quality management practices and their 
effects on firm performance. Journal of Operations Management. 21(4): 405-435. 
 
Kearns, Michael, Kulesza, Alex and Nevmyvaka, Yuriy. 2010. Empirical Limitations on High 
Frequency Trading Profitability. Available at: ssrn.com/abstract=1678758 
 
Kraemer, Felicitas, Kees van Overveld, and Martin Peterson. 2010. Is there an ethics of 
algorithms? Ethics and Information Technology. 13(3): 251-260. 
 
Kumiega, Andrew and Ben Van Vliet. 2008. Quality Money Management. Elsevier/Academic  
Press. 
 
Kumiega, Andrew and Ben Van Vliet. 2011. Automated Finance: The Assumptions and  
Behavioral Aspects of Algorithmic Trading. Journal of Behavioral Finance. 13(1): 51-55. 
 
Kyle, Albert S., and S. Viswanathan. 2008. How to Define Illegal Price Manipulation. American 
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2008. 98(2). Available at: 
http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi510.1257/aer.98.2.xx 
 
Lichtenberg, Judith. 1996. What are Codes of Ethics For? in Margaret Coady and Sidney Bloch 
(eds.), Codes of Ethics and the Professions. Melbourne University Press.  

 
37 
 
 
Lo, A. and Repin, D. 2002. The Psychophysiology of Real-Time Financial Risk Processing. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 14(3): 323–39. 
 
Lo, Andrew W., Repin, Dmitry V. and Steenbarger, Brett. 2005. Fear and Greed in  
Financial Markets: A Clinical Study of Day- Traders. National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Inc., NBER Working Papers: No. 11243. 
 
Lynch, Sarah. 2010. CME Issues Apology Letter To Clients Affected By Botched Order Tests. 
Dow Jones Newswire. Sept. 16th. Available at: www.automatedtrader.net/real-time-dowjones/17349/cme-issues-apology-letter-to-clients-affected-by-botched-order-tests 
 
McCrank , John and Carrick Mollenkamp, “Knight getting costly $400 million lifeline after trading debacle”, 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/08/06/us-knightcapital-deal-financing-idUSBRE8740JE20120806 (accessed 
September 19, 2012) 
 
 
 
Moor, J.H. 2006. The Nature, Importance, and Difficulty of Machine Ethics. Intelligent Systems. 
21(4): 18-21.  
 
Parker, B. 1998. Globalization and Business Practice: Managing Across Boundaries. London: 
Sage Publications. 
 
Perkins, Phil, Ben Van Vliet and Andy Kumiega. 2009. The Five Drivers of Profitability. 
Automated Trader. Issue 12, Q1. 
 
Peslak, A.R. 2004. Improving software quality: An ethics based approach. Proceedings of the 
2004 SIGMIS Conference on Computer Personnel Research: Careers, Culture, and Ethics in 
a Networked Environment. April 22-24. Tucson, AZ. 
 
Powell, Thomas C. 1995. Total Quality Management as Competitive Advantage: A Review and 
Empirical Study. Strategic Management Journal. 6(1): 15-37. 
 
Professional Risk Managers’ International Association (PRMIA). 2009. Standards of Best 
Practice, Conduct and Ethics. Available at: www.prmia.org. 
 
Project Management Institute (PMI). 2011. Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. Available 
at: www.pmi.org/About-Us/Ethics/Code-of-Ethics.aspx. 
 
Ragatz, Julie and Ronald Duska. 2010. Financial Codes of Ethics, in John Boatright (ed.), 
Finance Ethics. John Wiley & Sons. 
 
Ramaswamy, Srinivasan and Hemant Joshi. 2009. Automation and Ethics, in Shimon Y. Nof 
(ed.), Springer Handbook of Automation. Springer. 
 
Reynolds, G. 2003. Ethics in information technology. Thompson Publishing Group.  

 
38 
 
 
Rogerson, S. and D. Gotterbarn. 1998. The Ethics of Software Project Management, in G. 
Collste (ed.), Ethics and Information Technology. New Delhi: New Academic Publishers. 137154. 
 
Sims, Ronald. 1991. The institutionalization of organizational ethics. Journal of Business  
Ethics. 10(7). 
 
Sims, Ronald. 1992. The Challenge of Ethical Behavior in Organizations. Journal of Business 
Ethics. 11(7): 505 ff. 
 
Starbuck, William, and Frances Milliken. 1988. Challenger: Fine-tuning the Odds Until 
Something Breaks. Journal of Management Studies. 25(4). 
 
Steenbarger, Brett. 2002. The psychology of trading: Tools and techniques for minding the 
markets. New York: Wiley. 
 
Stoll, Hans R. 2006. Electronic Trading in Stock Markets. The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives. 20(1): 153-174. 
 
Suh, S.H., and S.U. Cheon. 2002. A Framework for an Intelligent CNC and Data Model. The  
International Journal of Advance Manufacturing Technology. 19(10): 727-735. 
 
Tari, Juan Jose. 2011. Research into Quality Management and Social Responsibility. Journal of 
Business Ethics. 102: 623-638. 
 
Tavani, H.T. 2004. Ethics and technology: Ethical issues in an age of information and 
communication technology. John Wiley & Sons. 
 
Victor, B. and J.B. Cullen. 1988. The organizational bases of ethical work climates. 
Administrative Science Quarterly. 33: 101-125 
 
Von Scheve, Christian, and Rolf Von Luede. 2005. Emotion and Social Structures: Towards an 
Interdisciplinary Approach. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour. 35(3): 303-328. 
 
Werhane, Patricia. 1991. Engineers and Management: The Challenge of the Challenger Incident. 
Journal of Business Ethics. 10: 605-616. 
 
Williams, John, and Alan Davies. 1986. Controller based manufacturing system management—
How close to reality? The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology. 
1(5): 61-74. 
 
Winsor, D.A. 1988. Communication Failures Contributing to the Challenger Accident: An 
Example for Technical Communicators. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication.  
3(3). 
 

 
39 
 
Tables and Figures: 
 
Figure 2.1. Latency-cost trade-off 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2 Time till failure, τ, of a trading strategy. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.3. Market manipulation breakdown 
 

 
40 
 
 
 
STAGES 
Trader 
Computer 
Engineers 
Quants 
R&D 
1. Design 
Trading Strategy 
Development 
Prototype Testing 
Research, 
Prototyping 
2. Test 
Performance 
Assessment 
Regression Testing 
Data Cleaning, 
Optimization 
3. Implement 
Acceptance 
Testing 
Technology Development 
Quality Assurance 
Testing 
O&C 
4. Manage 
Real-Time 
Monitoring 
Technology Control and 
Refactoring 
Performance Control 
 
Figure 4.1. Four-stage R&D and O&C process 
 
 
Sources of 
Competitive 
Advantage 
Trader 
Quants 
Computer 
Programmers 
Professional 
Strategic Creativity 
Quantitative Improvement, 
Data Cleaning and 
Optimization  
Order Execution Speed 
Organizational 
Rapid Model Deployment, Cost Minimization, Portfolio Management, Defect 
Minimization 
 
Figure 4.2. Contributions to competitive advantage 
 
 
 
Figure 5.1. Ethics in automated trading 
