 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874 
1 
 
Ethics of High Frequency Trading: Insider information 
Daphne Sobolev 
 
Abstract 
Aim. High Frequency Trading poses a large number of ethical questions. The purpose of this study is 
to examine the ethical perceptions of those who work inside the HFT industry. 
Method. The research consisted of a case study. Participants (N=30) were high frequency traders, 
algorithm developers, consultants, quant analysts, quantitative strategists, ultra low-latency data 
scientists, or managers of HFT companies. Participation involved an interview (N=27) or a 
completion of a questionnaire (N=3). HFT actors were asked to report what ethical considerations 
are involved in their work. 
Results. Participants’ answers showed that many HFT actors considered legal and regulatory issues a 
central component of their ethical conduct. However, a proportion of the participants was 
concerned with the social contribution of their practice and with the public image of HFT. In 
particular, perceiving HFT as having neutral or negative effect on the market was related with sense 
of meaninglessness.  
Conclusions. Ethics perceptions of HFT actors are characterised by a personal nature.  Beyond the 
overlap between the notions of ethics and legality, they reflect the human tendency to search for 
meaning and the need to have a positive image. 
 
 
Introduction 
The practice of High frequency trading (HFT) is often described as ethically controversial (Harris, 
2013). In particular, Davis, Kumiega, and Vliet (2013) asserted that ethical issues arise from the 
interdisciplinary nature of HFT. They claimed that, as HFT involves traders, quantitative analysts, and 
programmers, ethical conflicts may occur. Analysing HFT ethics using procedural and distributive 
fairness measures, Angel and McCabe (2013) concluded that certain HFT practices are unfair. 
Following Zelizer (2012), MacKenzie (2014) maintained that HFT actors perform ‘boundary work’, 
distinguishing between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ practices. MacKenzie emphasised that, unlike marketmaking, trading techniques which reduce the market’s liquidity are considered unethical, though in 
some cases the difference between them is unclear. 
To a certain extent, the decomposition of ethics to different disciplines (Davis, Kumiega, and Vliet, 
2013), different measures (Angel and McCabe, 2013), or different techniques (MacKenzie, 2014) is 
artificial. This is because in many HFT companies, computer programmers (code writers) work also 
as trades and as quantitative analysts. The notions of procedural and distributive fairness are not 
independent (Cropanzano and Ambrose, 2001). And, as shown below for the case of market making, 
‘boundary work’ did not yield ethical perceptions which are agreed on all market participants. 
The purpose of this study is to examine the way people who work inside the HFT industry perceive 
their practice’s ethics.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874 
2 
 
Hypotheses 
Many aspects of HFT have been regulated (Chung and Lee, 2016). For instance, in some countries, 
traders with high order-to trade ratio are taxed. Algorithmic traders are required to report their 
strategies and risk controls. Banks often define ethics rules and codes of conduct (Fetiniuc and 
Luchian, 2014) and employees are required to learn them (Milic-Czerniak, 2012). In addition, there is 
a considerable overlap between ethics and legality in Finance (Erhard, Jensen, and Zaffron, 2016). 
Therefore, I hypothesise that ethics perceptions of HFT actors are tightly related to legality and 
regulatory considerations (H1). 
However, I suggest that HFT actors extend the notion of ethics beyond the narrow interpretation of 
the legal-regulatory aspect. Many times, ethics is associated with social contribution. For example, in 
the financial context, socially responsible firms, which are involved in screening, shareholder 
advocacy and community investment, are considered ethical (Peifer, 2014). In addition, social 
contribution is one of the social well-being factors (Keyes, 1998), and is correlated with sense of 
happiness (Oarga, Stavrova, and Fetchenhauer, 2015), just as is the sense of meaningfulness, or 
purpose (Baumeister, Vohs, Aaker, and Garbinsky, 2013; Kashdan, 2004; King and Napa, 1998). As 
the notion of ethics is associated strongly with social contribution, which is central to people’s 
happiness and sense of meaningfulness, I hypothesise that ethics perceptions of HFT actors reflect 
their concerns about the social implications of their practice (H2).   
HFT-related ethical issues have been discussed frequently on the media, including popular books 
(e.g. Lewis, 2015), newspapers, magazines, journal articles (Kessler, 2014; Patterson, 2012) and TV 
shows (e.g. CBS’s “60 minutes” about high frequency trading, 2014). The media covers HFT especially 
after failures such as the Flash Crash (Chung and Lee, 2016). HFT was even criticised for posing 
challenges to democracy due to the power and wealth it encapsulates (Golumbia, 2013). Therefore, I 
hypothesise that many HFT actors are concerned with the public image of HFT (H3). 
 
To examine these hypotheses, a qualitative and subjective research approach was utilised.  
 
Method 
Participants 
Davis, Kumiega, and Vliet (2013) asserted that the interdisciplinary nature of HFT elicits ethics 
problems. Therefore, to obtain a wide range of insights into the ethics of HFT, recruitment process 
was inclusive, rather than exclusive. 
Recruitment was performed through Linkedin (https://www.linkedin.com/). HFT actors were 
identified using the key words: High Frequency Trader, High Frequency C++, Low Latency Trader and 
Low Latency C++ (C++ was chosen as a key word for the search as a large number of HFT code 
writers mention programming in C++ as one of their skills on their personal Linkedin Web page). 
More than 1,000 Linkedin connection invitations were sent individually to people who were working 
or who had worked at the HFT industry. Participation invitations were sent individually to nearly 400 
people who accepted the connection request. Thirty people (29 mean and one woman), who 
described themselves as high frequency or low latency traders, programmers, consultants, or 
company managers on their Linkedin website, and who accepted the invitation, participated in the 
study. Participants’ professions included high frequency traders, algorithm developers, consultants, 
quant analysts, quantitative strategists, ultra low-latency data scientists, and managers of HFT 
companies (CEO, director and vice presidents).  Most participants (N=16) worked in London. The rest 
of the participants worked in Oxford, San Francisco, New York, Sydney, Hong Kong, and China. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

3 
 
The low participation rate could be explained by the secrecy surrounding the HFT industry (Lewis, 
2014). For example, many employment contracts of HFT actors include clauses which prevent them 
from working at any competing company one to four years after they stop working at their firm. An 
HFT trader who did not want to participate in this study explained that his boss did not allow him to 
be interviewed. MacKenzie (2014) described similar difficulties in recruiting participants for his 
study. The low participation rate may result in a self-selection bias.  
 
Procedure 
Participants were interviewed in a face-to-face meeting (N=13) or a Skype meeting (N=14), or were 
asked to fill in a questionnaire (N=3), according to their request or location. All interviews were 
recorded, apart from three cases, in which the participant asked to not to be recorded. In these 
three cases, the contents of the interviews were summarised. 
Interviews were partially structured. Given the secretive nature of the HFT industry, great care was 
taken to avoid questions which could be interpreted as threatening. Therefore, an informal 
formulation was chosen, and all participants were asked the question:  
Q: “I am absolutely sure that everything that you do is legal, and I am not asking you about it. 
However, does your work involve ethical considerations?”  
Participants who asked for clarification about the intention of the question were instructed to 
interpret the question in any way they chose to interpret it. Interviewees were asked additional 
questions about their daily work routine and other psychological aspects (Sobolev, in preparation).  
At the end of interviews number 4-30, participants were offered the option to hear about the results 
of the interviews of the HFT actors who had participated before them (all participants were offered 
the option to obtain the results when published). Hearing the answers given by other HFT actors 
encouraged participants to elaborate more on certain issues and provided in many cases further 
insights into their ethical perceptions.  
Due to the low participation rate, no claims on generality can be made, and this research should be 
considered a case study.   
The study was anonymous. Throughout the paper, each participant is referred to by two randomly 
chosen letters.  
 
Results 
Regulatory and legality considerations 
A large number of traders answered question Q by referring to the way they incorporated legal or 
regulatory considerations in their work. For instance, SG, the head of technology of an HFT provider 
firm suggested that regulations had a profound effect on HFT practices. 
SG:  “About ethics, before regulation, HFT was really, you know, especially in the US, where 
there are 14 different exchanges, all trading the same stocks, so that’s the best playing field 
for HFT, that’s why it started in the US actually. It was the Wild West. Those guys, they were 
really, you know, I said, what is happening now in Asia used to happen in America […] It used 
to be, like, if you can scam the guy, if you can slow the guy, if you can spoof the guy, you will 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

4 
 
do it. As long as you’re making more money than he does. It used to be the Wild West. So, at 
that time, of course they were very “close door” business. You could not know what was going 
on in an HFT firm. You would not even know who was in an HFT firm. Now that there are 
regulations and so on […] it’s like any other business. We basically do what finance has been 
doing for years, ah… openly.”   
 EO, a senior HFT software engineer, described a working environment which rejected illegal and 
unethical practices:  
EO: “You know, I used to work for [bank name], and, as you know, the company has been on 
the news for […] financial crisis issues […] So, seeing first hand these people being disciplined 
and fired and some of them going to jail, etc.etc., am, I would say, gives […] a hint, and that’s 
pretty much the culture that was there where I worked, and here as well. If there is a hint 
that things are shady – we just don’t do it, it’s not worthy for us. It’s as simple as that. So I, 
from that perspective, I never really question myself. In fact, if you want to do something […] 
if you have some idea that even remotely seems questionable [you don’t do it]. And also the 
exchanges these days are pretty good at policing people about, you know, spoofing […] At 
least – let me put it this way – if there is something going on – it’s not anything that I am 
aware of, and in this respect, you know, because I am ignorant about it, it just does not 
bother me.”  
 
OS, an algo trading developer, criticised the regulators. In addition, OS describes a highly limiting 
environment.  
OS: “No, not at all. Ahhh, since I work at a bank, we are heavily regulated, and we need to 
follow all the rules, even when we think they are stupid, and they are, a lot of them are, the 
regulators actually don’t know everything. But we follow them and I know that all of my 
conversations are recorded, every email is saved for ten years, so there is all of the track 
record, you can always go back and look what we have done, so we have no possibility to do 
anything outside the framework of the regulators […] everyone at the bank […] will say that 
regulators have good intentions but they miss their target because they don’t know 
business.  With that said, I think that a lot of the regulations are good […] We are very 
cautious about ethics.”  
BJ, an HFT C++ developer reported that his company (a major bank) requires the employees to be 
aware of their ethical standards. BJ described also a conflict between ethics requirements and 
profitability, and the pressure caused by the demand to comply with ethics demands while retaining 
high returns.  
BJ: “Yea, definitely, yea... The wider organisation pushes that […] For me, internally, the 
trade nowadays is so locked down and repeating the mantra all the time about ethics, about 
doing the right thing by the client, you know, the best execution, and drilling that into 
people. It’s not acceptable to do anything other than the right thing […] by the organisation, 
and if you see anything at all that you suspect, it needs to be reported, and you are 
accountable if it goes wrong. And so, these pressures are there, and they are very apparent 
today, and I think that the system is now evolving to close those gaps, because, years ago, 
am, the wider organisations seemed not to ask the questions. It was like: there is a tidy desk 
over there, they are making so many millions per year now, no one is complaining, you 
know, don’t ask questions – let me get on with it. And now – you know, things are becoming, 
I mean, what has happened in the press recently, in the media, there are books about HFT, 
it’s all about press, and the big organisations are suffering future reputation damage as a 
consequence, am, and so they are moving to defend themselves against that, and that is also 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

5 
 
interesting to see, because there is this playoff internally. As I said, at some level, you need 
to be making money, you need to be competitive, you need to make change, you need to 
have that, kind of trader, am, mentality […] and make money as that, at the end of the day, 
they wouldn’t, they wouldn’t employ me if the traders would not make a profit, so, you 
know, I depend on them to make a profit, and I can’t make a profit if the organisation is too 
overly-restrictive. A new regulation is coming in, and it would be interesting to see what will 
happen, how can we still remain competitive against […] the hedge funds and the small 
organisations, how can we put the controls, the ethical controls as well as the risk controls in 
place, and operate effectively within these constraints, but still be competitive. It’s really 
kind of interesting to see how would that play out. […].   
The traders themselves, they would be competing even against other desks internally, right? 
Yea, yea […] That’s why a lot of the time they do not want to share… because on an FX desk 
[…] the key component is what they call ‘the alpha’, which is their price prediction, where 
would the market go within the next 2-3 seconds. That’s kind of the time horizon they are 
talking about. Now, if that was a common knowledge, if everyone knew it, then they have no 
value to add […] even against other desks. So, you have got to remember that a desk is 
basically putting a business plan forward at the beginning of the year, saying, if the bigger 
organisation invests in me and my desk, I would make you this much profit. Obviously, [you 
have to] abide the rules and regulations and ethics of the organisation […] so they are 
operating like a small business, yea? If they don’t make the money, if they don’t give the 
internal investment by the end of the year, then, you know, the business, the wider 
organisation will say: ethics is not profitable, get rid of them, sack them, and that does 
happen all of the time, so, many, many times I have been on the trading floor, and one day I 
would come in, and an entire desk is no longer there – they have just been sacked because 
they were not making the profit. And that is kind of hard… they, they kind of accept that, but 
it is very much a reality of how cut-throat it’s like. And I respect that, I am not that kind of 
person […] I do understand the pressure that they are under.”   
       
OM, who was a director of an HFT firm, asserted that his company complied with the regulations 
and explained how clients who did not conform with them were dealt with. 
OM:  “Coming from an investment banking background, where we used to have a real-time 
risk platform, monitoring trading clients, and… and kind of being involved a lot with  - so, for 
example, an exchange may phone us and say: we can see one of your clients is trading on a 
stock that has been highlighted today as a point of interest, and it looks like […] price 
manipulation. So we would go away, have a look at that client, trading that stock, and, kind 
of see whether we think that he is doing the same thing. So we would get some guys in, and 
have a look at it, and kind of go, eeeee, it’s not great, that looks a bit wrong. It doesn’t look 
quite right. So, then, from a senior level we would talk to the client, very delicately, and the 
guy would go: “oh, yea, oh oops, my mistake. Yea, that’s going a bit funny today. Sorry about 
that.” And then he sorts it out. 99% of the times, when we have had these issues, that’s 
what we did. And I have been very conscience of making sure that we always worked within 
the boundaries of market impact. You know – market manipulation, price manipulation  - all 
of these things, to make sure that we [were] tightly within the boundary […] we are tighter, 
making sure, from an ethical standpoint I’m always making sure that we are always legal, 
within regulation, within compliance, you know, and no way being destructive in our 
behaviour.  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

6 
 
VX, an HFT quant analyst at an investment bank interpreted question Q in legal terms. He mentioned 
that illegal practices occur in other companies. 
VX: “No, hardly ever. [It] may depend on the company: in the companies I worked for, they 
didn’t do anything illegal or unethical. But it happens in other companies […] The orders I 
place, I am happy to take position of.” 
The interpretation of NP, a quantitative researcher, was similar to that of VX: 
NP: “I do things legally. There are spoofing – misleading others to trade. This behaviour is 
illegal in different countries and exchanges. We do not touch these boundaries.”  
Though many of the interviewees shared the feeling that they worked according to the regulations, 
not all of them agreed on the ethical value of certain HFT techniques. For instance, AD, a senior HFT 
consultant and software developer considered market making ethical: 
AD: “[…] I prefer market making. I regard market making as a public good. Like, if you would 
like to buy or sell something, it’s nice that there is someone out there who would buy or sell 
for me. You know, you can always find someone to trade with. And so, it keeps the price 
stable. But what we were doing was, we would detect that we thought that the market was 
going up, and our engine would buy. And then it would sell when it got up […] it would sell 
as it turned to go down again. That was one signal. Another one, we would look for order 
book imbalance […] so if there were more buyers than sellers, we would go, ok, well the 
market is going to go down, because there are more people selling, and we would look for 
that one, but everyone was looking for that, am” 
Author: “And did you consider it ethical or unethical?” 
AD: “I mean – it’s banking”.  
However, when RT was informed that other participants in the study considered market making 
more ethical than practices which reduce the markets’ liquidity, he disagreed.  
RT: “Than liquidity taking? - Because I perceive liquidity taking as a very constructive thing 
for the market. There is demand there, and you are helping the demand to be answered, 
right? There is a seller out there and you go and hit his offer. That means that you are 
actively participating. I guess I understand why, you probably spoke with many high 
frequency traders […] Market making is making two sides of the book. If it’s the FX market 
and it’s unregulated and it’s a client that you did the analysis about him and you know that 
every time that you trade with him you are losing money, then suddenly you are creating 
such a wide spread that it is not worth trading with you. And suddenly there is another client 
that you did the analysis and you know that [you] are always making money […] on him, you 
simply make a tiny little spread. So, you know, market making – I don’t, as a concept thing – I 
would perceive it as not the honest way of trading. But liquidity taking – yea, definitely. 
Actively participating in the market […] So, the cash traders, they are high-touch, they are 
low frequency, […] they are the ones being mainly screwed by high frequency traders. 
[…] well, you read the Michael Lewis book. The difference is that some people read the 
Michael Lewis book, and some people, like me, used to have access directly into those dark 
books […] and I can tell you that the market makers are making all sorts of dishonest things. I 
mean, within our organisation we were smart enough to identify it very early on and get rid 
of them, cleaning our dark books, making sure we don’t have any of these toxic positions 
lying around. Obviously [bank name] weren’t as smart and they paid 3 billion dollars or so 
because they did not do it. But, in general, if you think about the vanilla high-touch cash 
trader, getting an order on his form and executing it on behalf of the client, there is nothing 
more pure to me and innocent than that activity, actually participating on behalf of an 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

7 
 
investor, hopefully believing in a company, or has some alpha, and wants to participate in 
the market. But what a high frequency market makes does, he sees the statistical 
differences and dissimilarities and correlations within the market, and taking advantages of 
those, he is not there to buy and sell stocks because he strongly believes in one company or 
another, he is there to make money on the fact that the cash-trader is locked. That’s what 
he is there for. Simple. 
Obviously the other guys will say that, look, with market makes providing liquidity on both 
sides of the book, you narrow the spread, and therefore a cash-trader then has a narrower 
spread and he is getting a better, good quality price. He is getting a better price, but at what 
expense, because at the moment he trades, he is getting screwed by the market maker 
straight away, because the market maker pre-positions himself everywhere on the book and 
the market maker will make some statistical analysis, identify that it is a stupid client, and 
making money on top of it […] Everyone has an opinion, I have my own opinion, someone 
else will tell you the exact opposite of everything I have just said, this is just the way it is, 
right?” 
 
YR, a senior HFT software expert, pointed out that regulations can be interpreted in different ways. 
YR also emphasised that actors from different disciplines attempt to help each other understand the 
regulations. 
 
YR: “I think that there are always areas where exchange rules are interpretable […] You read 
the […] exchange rules and unless you are literally a lawyer, am, you don’t know really exactly 
what they mean […] If I had such a concern I would always try and speaks with somebody, in 
terms of: I don’t understand this, tell me what to do. It’s not my job to interpret this, it’s 
somebody’s job to tell me what I am meant to do. Because, like you say, you know, if you do it 
wrong, that can end you up in jail. And it’s a jail in America as well, and that’s not very nice. 
So, you know, you always have to be careful and consider it”.  
Author: “So did you actually work with lawyers in order to prevent such problems?” 
YR: […] Generally, you would ask a trader, and the trader would already have a trading 
qualification, which meant that they understood these sorts of things. But sometimes there 
were cases where you would have to get an interpretation and we [would] always [be] on the 
side of legal compliance. Clearly, I mean, if there was the opportunity to get something wrong 
[…], we wouldn’t do it. Simply because, I mean […] ignore the ethics, because none of us 
wanted to be in jail, but even in terms of the business, it does not make sense to do it. You 
know, that tiny little benefit that you get from doing something that is, is, is not right, you 
know – churning is a classic way in high frequency trading, when you are trading for no 
particular economic advantage […] and, you know, that’s the sort of thing that you see that 
people do it. But, you know, it’s ridiculous, because, you know, you will end up in jail […] You 
used to see it, not so much now, but once upon a time […] So, for instance […] they would put 
a very large order on the other side of the book, to make the price move that way, and then 
they pull in all of a sudden and put an order on the other side. That’s called ‘flipping’. And, 
and, you know – it was around for years. And it took a long time for the regulatory authorities 
to catch up with it […] In the company I worked for, it was, you know, one of the largest hedge 
funds […] they were using 30 billion dollars, you are not going to muck around when you [are 
working with] 30 billion dollars. Everything is by the book, you know. And I would be instantly 
sacked if I had done anything wrong”. 
                    
 
It is important to note that, in line with Davis, Kumiega, and Vliet (2013), not all HFT actors are aware 
of all the legal aspects of their work. For example, SK, the only woman who participated in the study, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

8 
 
who works as a senior software engineer, said that she was unaware of the ethical aspects of the 
code that she was writing: 
 
SK: “yes, but I am not aware of them. So we do have [a colleague] that would be working on 
our relationship with the exchanges. Am, I mean there are ethics involved. For example, the 
exchanges have to make sure that all of their clients, including us, are receiving data at the 
same amount of time, so that nobody has an unfair advantage because they are receiving 
information faster […] there is a behaviour, so you can trade in a way, I don’t understand it 
fully, but you can trade in a way that you are just testing the water and you want to see how 
other people, other traders would react. Am… they have a name for it […] We have to make 
sure our algorithms don’t behave like that way, because if they did, you could get a slap on 
the wrist and I believe you could even be barred from an exchange, if your behaviour is kind 
of, is being reckless if you like, at the exchange. So we do have to consider that, and that 
gets written into our algorithms and our strategy. So when I am writing a strategy in code, 
that’s already included in the strategy and I would probably not be aware of this. You know, 
I’m just writing the logical steps in and I would not fully understand the reason it is doing 
everything that it is doing. I have to make sure it works the way they ask me to make it 
work.” 
 
Similarly, DW, a senior software engineer (and one of the participants who filled in a questionnaire) 
answered question Q by referring to responsibilities of other people: 
 
DW: “No. It's the end user who can use the system anyway they want.” 
 
These interviews support Hypothesis H1: ethics perceptions of HFT actors are tightly related to 
legality and regulatory considerations. 
 
 
Social contribution of HFT 
Many interviewees chose to refer to the social contribution of HFT when answering the ethics 
question. For example, OM described the work of a lobby group explaining the positive contribution 
of HFT:  
OM: “It’s an interesting one […] There is the Modern Markets Initiative, I don’t know if you 
have seen, so, there is a lobby group called the Modern Market Initiative, that produces 
independent research and papers about the ethical […], how high frequency trading provides 
more liquidity and tighter spreads in the market, so [the market becomes] better […] So it’s a 
lobby group made out of a number of a high frequency firms, that have commission 
independent studies on the benefits of high frequency trading.  
TF, a CEO at an HFT firm, considered the intellectual challenge of HFT a determinant of an 
advantageous social order. 
TF: “Well, we have a code of ethics here and we have business ethics to our customers. So if 
you are an HFT trader, you have to do your job […] and what you do, you are making money 
for someone […] I think that it is ethical to be bright and to be better than other traders. 
That’s absolutely ethical in every society, and I have no shame and I have no… excuses for 
people who just try to be better than everybody else. And if they spend lots of, tens of years in 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

9 
 
university programmes, courses, trainings, I don’t know, reading books, it’s ethical to be 
better than others and, of course, to make money. And in fact, that’s kind of […] economy of 
brains, when you don’t make money just bidding and selling, you make money by your 
intellect. And that’s a huge advantage for every society. You have more people like that, so 
you have better people, and you make them kind of heroes, because I really like these people 
[…], and I think that they are the heroes of our time.   
AD considered tax payment his positive social contribution: 
AD: “Ah… I mean, I liked the [company name], the market making system I wrote for them. 
They paid me very poorly in the first year […] but the trader think, well, ok, we have just paid 
enough tax to pay for a nurse’s salary for a year. That’s why the government, the previous 
government, anyway, likes the City, because it gives them a lot of income tax from all of 
those traders.”  
Author: “So, do you consider it some kind of social contribution?” 
AD: “We are certainly not robbing from the poor”.  
 
However, a proportion of participants expressed a strong sense of meaninglessness, resulting from 
lack of social contribution. For instance, XM, a senior operations analyst, maintained that paying tax 
was his only positive social contribution. XM expressed a deep regret for not contributing more than 
that. 
XM: “So, when I was an undergrad I always wanted to go into research. And, in some way, this 
dream of wanting to contribute to society… Ever since I have started working at, so I used to 
work at [University name] as a research assistant. And with the exception of that, I did 
absolutely nothing to benefit society directly, and I always used to feel terrible about that […] 
Am, for example, I wanted to work at research, I wanted to do something for society, but ever 
since I started working in Finance, am, this isn’t necessarily limited to just HFT […] I found that 
I simply don’t contribute to society in any meaningful way. And the only thing that makes me 
feel better about myself is the fact that I pay my taxes. That’s all that I do to help society. I feel 
terrible about it […] The question of the meaninglessness, that’s not just limited only to HFT, I 
think, for anybody who wants to benefit society in some way, going into Financial services, in 
general, is not the best thing”.     
 
When RT was told that other participants in the study felt a sense of meaninglessness, he said that 
he experiences similar feelings. 
  
RT: “My parents are really happy that I am working at this kind of area, because I am 
financially stable […] but I can definitely, definitely correlate to that sense of 
meaninglessness […] I enjoy the challenge of playing with the data so much that sometimes I 
forget how useless it all is. It is completely useless. Completely useless. If I were to redesign 
the financial system, I would regulate trading so badly, because trading is just a big casino 
for people to play. I am not a great believer in making massive changes and transformations 
in perceptions of people and society and whatever, I am a very realistic person. This is how 
society works, […] this is why I do what I do. But many, many of the functions of products in 
the market are completely useless. Completely. I see on your face that you are concerned. I 
wish that more people were concerned as your face looks right now. This is my personal 
opinion and I am providing bread and I am paying rent with doing that, but that sense of 
meaninglessness – sometimes, you know, I see a Youtube video about some crazy robots 
people are doing or some crazy engineering solutions that I could have done instead of 
doing that, and I’m thinking to myself many times, why. But then, financially speaking, I got 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

10 
 
used to a certain style of life. If I go to the equivalent engineering job, I’m looking at a 40% 
cut. No joke. 40%. Getting used to a certain lifestyle  - you don’t necessarily want to throw 
down 40%, right?  It’s a big decision to take. But I completely relate to that. Completely. […] 
But on the other hand, I told you how much I enjoy my work. I truly, truly enjoy it, but there 
is a big aspect of meaningless[ness]. With the kind of tools and knowledge that I’m having, 
am, couldn’t I work in a technological company and make the next product? But then what 
[…], I used to work in […] a chipmaker, every single phone or electronic portable device has 
this kind of chip inside, it’s like the brain of those devices […] which was great and fantastic, 
but this is also meaningless in a way – just a little product with some beautiful colours in it, 
then you get into conceptual questions – what is meaningless and what is not meaningless. 
To me by definition, the most productive best job ever to society is a doctor, is a nurse, is a 
fireman, is a policeman, etc. But not everyone is a doctor or a nurse or a fireman or a 
policeman”.    
       
Similarly to XM and RT, when OS was told about a sense of meaninglessness of other traders, he 
expressed similar views. However, unlike XM and RT, OS said that he was not concerned about it. 
OS: “I agree with what they are saying […] Yes, I can understand that, because we don’t 
produce anything, ahhh… we don’t make shovels. If we made shovels, we would probably 
make the best shovels in the world, but […] we don’t produce anything. We just move ones 
and zeros back and forth… [It’s like a] casino. So it’s true that we don’t produce anything. On 
the one hand, I’m in the foreign exchange business. We mitigate transactions between 
companies which are, maybe, producing shovels, or, I don’t know, dynamite, or whatever, 
actually building stuff, so they can do their trades and buy stuff for other parts of work. So, 
in that sense, I do feel that I am contributing to the society […] ” 
Author: “[…] Does it bother you?” 
OS: “Well, it doesn’t really bother me at all. I think that everyone is thinking about what they 
should do with their life […] existential questions I think everyone has.”    
EO emphasised that he works to provide for his family. In particular, EO mentioned that this demand 
made him stop thinking about issues relating to wider-scale contributions. 
EO: “I can tell you one thing: whatever you read in the books - it’s simply not true. In fact, 
first of all, the competition in this business is brutal. That’s number one. Number two, if you 
are  a customer – if you are the small guy, you get the best view, and that is true, and you 
can see that mathematically […] If anything, you know, I mean, the only ethical consideration 
that I can think of, I am going to call it ethical, I am not saving children in Africa. You know, I 
am doing something that makes money. So maybe I am not doing good for the world, so to 
speak, but I stopped thinking about these things a long time ago because, you know, 
whatever profits I make, you know, they are going to support my family, and I don’t care […] 
Other than that, I don’t have any ethical dilemmas at all”.  
 
On the other hand, BJ finds sharing the code that he writes rewarding, as he believes that, doing so, 
he helps the technology developed for HFT be used in other industries. 
BJ:  “I kind of love the low level detail, how computers work at the lowest level […] I have 
always kind of liked doing the most I can with low-capacity devices […] That’s very interesting 
because you are in a very constrained environment […] a good kind of HFT guy would be able 
to exploit that to the max, and do kind of great things with it, and it reminds me, it takes me 
back to when you are a kid […] when you did not have powerful computers, to do something 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

11 
 
impressive you had to know how the machine worked, but in the nineties computers  started 
to get exponentially more powerful […] and generally people said, no, you know, performance 
– we don’t need to worry so much about that, we will just wait for the next generation of 
hardware and that will make our software […] faster. Naturally. So don’t worry about 
performance. But in HFT, even now, it’s all about how to get the max out of the hardware […] 
So many interesting aspects come out when you are talking about nanoseconds and 
microseconds, there are so many interesting angles to the problem […] You can spend days on 
tweaking and optimising and looking at all of the detail […] Here we are always looking for 
optimisations and people come up with fantastic ways. This is the thing, I think, which is 
interesting in HFT. I know it has a very bad reputation, but […] there is a lot of good stuff 
which is going to leak out to the surrounding industry because technologists want to share, 
they are like mathematicians, they believe in peer reviews and openness […] the lessons learnt 
and the techniques we learn will apply elsewhere and we do share them on [web site names] . 
Not the trade’s secrets, not the trading models, but the “how you make system work fast”, 
and that, by itself, for me, is great, because you put yourself in that environment, you learn all 
these interesting things, then you share. So that’s rewarding.  
 
However, when NL, a lead quant infrastructure developer heard that HFT developers used to upload 
parts of their codes on free-share websites, he asserted that this was not a prevalent norm in the 
HFT industry. 
 
NL: “Apart from the thirty screens, there are splitting like, so in my case I have […] two towers 
[desktop computers], one tower is connected to the internet and it has outlook and a browser 
[…] and the other one is not connected to the internet, and it connects to the internal 
systems. They don’t even talk. And if you check out code you cannot […] It’s unheard of, to 
post code from one of these online. In banks – yes, in banks – it’s less, banks don’t do speed in 
the same level […] [In our towers] you can’t even put headphones. You have to ask permission 
so someone will come with a key, plug in the headphone, because the thing is locked[…] If you 
plug USB keys, nothing works […] If you try to email stuff – nothing goes in or out of the 
system. And if it can go in or out, you can be 100% sure that everything is monitored.” 
 
NL’s interview reveals his uncertainty about the nature of the contribution of HFT to the society. In 
particular, he thinks that the HFT industry attracts talented people, who would otherwise work in 
jobs which he perceived to have greater social contribution. The same views were held also by RC, a 
director of a financial firm, and by VR, a code writer working on algorithmic trading and market 
connectivity. 
NL: “In HFT it’s purely, am, it’s very pragmatic and scientific, there is no malice. I don’t know 
whether it’s good or bad […], but there is definitely no intention to harm” [...] 
“I used to ask my boss many, many times: remind me what we do? And he would just go like: 
“we provide liquidity, [NL], we provide liquidity”. OK.  […] 
Usually HFT will play with its own money. I’m from a rather poor family […] [HFT] never takes 
outside money […] There is no retail, there are no pensions, there are no investors […] It’s not 
a hedge fund for investors with outside money, it’s usually their own money […] HFT is not 
directional in general, so it does not care whether the market is going up or down; it just cares 
that there is volume in the market. So it trades on both conditions, it is profitable on both 
conditions. Now, this can be seen as good or bad […] Good: it does not seem to be aligned 
with what you could perceive as intentionally, you know, manipulating the market […]. Having 
said that […] you must understand that I don’t even know sometimes what we are trading 
against. Sometimes it’s just numbers […] We don’t know the participants […] I don’t know 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

12 
 
what is the impact of that in the market. Frankly, I have no clue, not only the one, what my 
group is doing but also what all these groups are doing […]   
I have a colleague, 22 years old, he makes me laugh a lot. And actually I often tell him that I 
feel sorry that all these young people, that I honestly think, that people like him are being 
sucked by this [HFT], because […] it really shows that the world is turned up-side down. So it 
would be nicer if we all worked to do the kind of stuff that the brain power and the computer 
power could be applied. Sometimes you go to the NHS and you see people with CRTs that is, 
these old screens, I’m like: how old is your screen? We have 32 screens and you know, all the 
latest technology. We could have sequenced the genome in weeks, months, it’s just that the 
incentive isn’t there […] the sequence of the genome is actually pattern matching, it’s 
something that probably [could be solved] with high computer power or HFT, probably 
shifting the resources to something else […] My boss would say stuff like: “we provide 
liquidity”, as if that’s the, I don’t know, I don’t know whether that’s good or bad, I have no 
idea, like I said, I am emotionally detached. You know, when I tell my mom: “I provide 
liquidity, mum”, she goes very excited. She does not know what I do. Still. So, God knows. I 
don’t know. 
[…] There is probably an explanation why, I am going to be mean, why when you log in to the 
NHS site, or the UK.Gov site […] the web site is terrible, because all the good people are being 
sucked by all these firms. Paywise and excitementwise, it’s, of course […] so you have free 
food, you have free drinks, you have very relaxed hours, you have all the technology you can 
think of, of course it’s not competitive […] I have no idea what HFT contribute to society, but I 
doubt it whether it’s good. At best I think it’s neutral or irrelevant, but I don’t know if it’s 
good.”            
  
These results support Hypothesise H2:  A proportion of HFT actors are concerned with the social 
implications of their practice.   
 
The public image of HFT 
A large number of participants expressed concern about the way other people perceive HFT. In 
particular, they expressed discontent with the way HFT is presented in the media and in popular 
books such as Flash Boys (Lewis, 2015). A few participants referred to the way their family and 
friends perceived HFT. For example, BJ said that his father would like him to have a different 
position. He maintained that his father perceived his position as unethical as a result of the media.  
 
BJ: “I mean, my, my father, he, you know, he has, kind of, got a very different view on banking 
than I have because he is looking at the main stream press and he has got that impression.” 
 
VR chose to answer the ethics question referring to his friends’ and relatives’ criticism of his work at 
an investment bank.  He also referred to the attempts of the bank to engage in charity activities to 
improve the bank’s image. 
VR: “We don’t ask ourselves whether what we do is good or not, because at the end of the 
day we are just offering a service to clients, right, which is, you know, offering them to be 
faster than the competitor in the market. Whatever they do with our service is their 
business, right, so, in that sense, provided that we don’t do anything illegal on our side, but 
that’s something different, then, ethically speaking, we can find, like, abstract away the 
problem. Myself – I don’t really ask myself ethical questions, because – I wouldn’t be 
working at an investment bank if I were, after, you know, the financial crisis, so – not really. I 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

13 
 
mean, as I said, I am very mathematical and stuff. And if you start asking yourself ethical 
questions, you are going to ask yourself a lot of questions, a lot[…] Some of my friends or 
relatives, they […] are asking me if I am not ashamed to work at an investment bank, so my 
most left-wing friends, right, they are just like, aren’t you ashamed when investment banks 
are doing algorithmic trading […] which is destabilising the markets and it’s not something 
right […] My usual answer is like: you have got a knife in your pocket, right, are you asking 
yourself ethical questions whether it has been, you know, made […] by a poor guy in China 
or not, it’s just, you know, a part of the system, right, I mean everybody has a knife or 
something that has been designed by a poor child, a poor 16 years old child in China […] and 
that’s not good at all, right, and it’s not fair, it’s not the way it should be […] but nobody 
really cares, right, they care once in a year when they see a documentary on TV about it, and 
they just like post Facebook statements saying “Oh, that’s terrible”, but, at the end of the 
day, the day after, they continue going shopping and they don’t do anything about it […] 
Why should I ask myself ethical questions, I mean, I know it’s not ideal, but the entire system 
is not ideal, right, it’s just the best we can do and […] at least I’m forcing myself to think that 
otherwise [..] I wouldn’t be really living. It’s just like someone manufacturing a weapon, like 
a gun or something, it could be [used in] a situation to protect people, for a cop or 
something like that, right, but it could also be sold to a foreign army doing some random war 
in some random country. But I think that the guy that manufactures the gun doesn’t really 
think about it otherwise you just don’t live, right, you can’t. I guess […] I am only asking 
myself ethical questions when I have an impact on what I am doing […] The quick answer is 
like: no, I don’t really ask myself ethical questions. 
[…] There is the whole helping charity stuff. To me – I find it a bit [hypocritical]. So [the bank] 
has this programme where they give money to charity […] That’s kind of good, right.”  
 
SG considered it important to explain that HFT salaries and practices are not as imagined by the 
public.  
“So, regulation is pretty tight in the financial markets, it is not 2008 anymore. And even before 
that […] All of the stories that I see, you know, in the movies and so on – I have never 
experienced them in real life. And the salaries, the bonuses, everything shrank dramatically, I 
mean, I have never met a single trader who was making a million dollar a year. It doesn’t exist 
anymore.  I mean, one very good friend of mine is a seven-year trader in a very large American 
bank […] and during his best year he was making, you know, 250, 260 [thousand] pounds. So 
this is a lot of money, a lot of money, but it’s very far from people’s imagination. The truth is 
that the people who are making really a lot of money are either very, very high, senior persons 
in the banks, which joined so long ago, that they still enjoy their wonderful contract of, you 
know, old age, or hedge fund managers who are making a ton of money not because they are 
in finance, but because they are entrepreneurs. So that’s why…  so, I don’t think, you know, 
that all the glamour and so on, that you see in the movies  - it’s gone, it’s completely gone. If 
you go on a trading floor it’s actually very quiet. It’s not at all like - You don’t have people 
screaming, you know.  I mean, when I started in Finance, I used to be [on] the trading floor, 
there were people screaming, shouting, people going nuts throwing their keyboards across 
the room, it was ten years ago, yea, ten years ago. It was still a bit crazy […] Now, if you go on 
a trading floor it is all silent.” 
Author: “Are you talking about HFT trading floor or…?” 
SG: “No, they are mixed, they are mixed. If you go to a bank […] they are not dissociated 
anymore. And if you go on those floors, you will have the quant, you will have the technologist 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

14 
 
IT quants, you will have the traders, you will have the managers, and it’s quiet. Very quiet. You 
would not believe it. We have 200 people sitting there, and except for the sales sitting there 
with phone calls and so on, it’s silence. Yes, that’s the new finance. People do not imagine that 
at all […] So it’s not at all like in the movies. The only place that you can still see some action is 
the brokers’ office […] they still trade by voice […] but they are slowly dying, they are shrinking 
every year […] 
Two years ago, you know, The Wolf of Wall Street came out and everybody went like, ah-ah, 
finance […] Yes, guys, I would like to remind you, you know, in this movie, this guy is basically 
a crook, so, he could have worked in finance or the automotive industry, or  - I don’t know, in 
education or whatever – he was a crook. So, obviously he made a lot of money, because he 
was scamming people. But that does not exist in the real world […] So people should 
understand that finance has really changed […] A first year trader gets £40,000. Yes. It’s not 
like the amount that people imagine. When I started I was paid £40,000. In London. So, with 
the rent and everything, at the end of the day, you are not so well off. You don’t go out, you 
don’t go on holidays, you don’t party at all, you don’t actually leave the country, you live a 
normal life. It’s not like a glamour life. After 5-7 years you start having a high pay cheque, but 
it will never reach… you might retire with a couple of millions on your bank account after a 
career of 30-40 years, but you will not retire at 30.”   
 
SG also considered it important to improve the image of HFT. His reasons are presented below. 
 
SG: “…And I think that the mistake that HFT has done […] is miscommunication. We didn’t 
communicate at all. And we let people build on fantasies that HFT traders were, you know, 
manipulating the market, and scamming, you know […] people trying to trade on the internet  
- no guys, you lose money because you are not fast enough because the technology is better 
than you, that’s it. It’s not because someone on the opposite side is trying to scam you. It’s 
just, he is doing his job automatically, million times faster than you can even imagine doing it. 
That’s why you are losing money. So you – know, it’s a business. You adapt or die. Any 
business is like that. It’s not just finance. And because of that, there was this misperception, 
especially when you look at the astonishing numbers of thousands of orders per second and 
so on, that HFT does not participate in the economy […] The truth is that they create a better 
price discovery. We do, HFT, do increase volatility […], it’s true, that the one black thing that 
you can push to HFT. But at the end, better price discovery, tighter spread, less friction in the 
market, more counter-party, overall the quality of the market has improved. Would you rather 
have an HFT guy passing an order for you, trying to get the best price over 14 different 
exchanges at one time, and trying to grab the best price for you and fighting to get the best 
price for you, or would you rather pass your order to, ah, John, who is an old bid trader, who is 
drinking Vodka with his friends, you know, at eight o’clock in the morning before the opening 
bell? And who has already fixed the price with his buddy, when the market is not even open?  
Because that was the case […] Now at least it’s fair. Everybody is on the same page […] For 
those old guys, you know […] HFT is pretty bad. So they have been trying to discredit HFT for 
years. And, in response, HFT, because they started a bit rogue, decided not to speak, and just 
shut up, and now there is a big misconception about what is HFT, what it is doing and so on. 
And that’s why I decided to come to you today, because I think that we should communicate 
more, explain, we should educate people what we do.”       
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

15 
 
Finally, BJ perceives the public image of HFT as a possible threat to the future of the industry. 
BJ: “There are many models that work, and I have seen, here suddenly one day they stop 
working, and they don’t know why, they don’t know why it was always a great model, it was 
always making 20K a day, a nice little profit, and suddenly one day it stopped. No one knows 
why, no one can explain it, but, that goes on for a while and then you switch off and develop a 
new one. Because the market itself is obviously evolving, 10 years ago it was so much easier to 
make money than it is now in a kind of HFT environment […] You know, this is like a big AI 
system, right, its learning about itself […] it’s like a conscious being, right, you kind of plug new 
intelligence into the system, and the rest of the system learns and reacts, so […] you have to 
keep changing, you can’t leave it. If you leave it, it will eventually sizzle out because the rest of 
the system will learn about your model […] But personally, my, my personal take on it is that 
we are going to move away from this, it has a limited life time, I don’t believe that HFT is going 
to last. I am kind of in it because I think that there is a value in it […], and I enjoy it, but I’m 
kind of with the view that I should enjoy it while I can […] because I think that this is kind of a 
doomed approach […] There shouldn’t be a competitive advantage to being, am, co-located 
with an exchange with all this, and it should not require such a huge investment,  and building 
a direct line across… from data centres around the world […] HFT itself, I think, is going to be 
dying out, and certainly the big banks are turning their back on it, and in a lot of them now it’s 
kind of, am, its […] a label they don’t want to be known as an HFT shop working that way. It’s 
just, am, it’s too risky […] and there is not enough profit in it.”  
 
The interviews performed support Hypothesis H3: HFT actors are concerned with the public image of 
HFT. 
 
 
 
Additional aspects of ethics 
 
It is important to note that other aspects of ethics were mentioned, as well.  
VW, an HFT trader and code writer, mentioned questions about the value of money, resulting from 
the extent to which values of companies may change in a single day in the market, regardless of 
their true (fundamental) value.   
SK (a woman, senior software developer), mentioned that her male colleagues’ use of language was 
making her feel on the verge of being harassed. Indeed, Hassoun (2005) mentions that traders often 
use strong language on the trading floor. (On the other hand, NL mentioned that the single woman 
who worked at his desk used to curse more than her male colleagues; NL did not refer to SK). 
NP mentioned relationship problems in his firm, which occur in cases when people have good 
strategy and do not want to share it with other people in the company. Such situations result in 
ethical conflicts and tense relationships. NP mentioned also that he disliked the non-competition 
clause in HFT’s employment contracts 
OG, a consultant quantitative analyst, raised the problem that when HFT people leave their jobs, it is 
forbidden for them to take with them any parts of the code that they wrote. However, it is unclear 
whether they can use the knowledge which they accumulated at that position. That could create an 
ethical conflict. 
JC, an HFT software architect stated that he had written liquidity-taking algorithms, though he 
believed that they were less ethical than market-making algorithms. 
Finally, RT, an HFT quantitative strategist working at a bank, related ethics to the accuracy of the 
data he was providing. RT explained that the motivation for his ethical approach is beyond the 
requirements of the law. 
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

16 
 
RT: “I am very, very happy sitting at a quantitative strategist job, because it’s all about the 
ethics. If I were working in sales then, as everyone working in sales knows, that you cannot 
sell a product as it is, you have to repackage it in a nice [package] within the boundaries of 
the law […] But when you are working in a quantitative work, providing solutions to risk 
traders sitting within the bank, there is no bullshit, you have to be real, you have to know 
your numbers, you have to provide the exact, accurate solution. If it’s horrible, […] you work 
on a new solution. You don’t just fudge the numbers and send it through […] All I say is that 
it’s all about integrity in my line of work and I love it […] One of the most important things 
for me is that there is no such a thing as coming up with some numbers and go ahead and 
present them to the client. The way that I ensure that these numbers are accurate is the 
essence of ethics. And I think that another person looking at it and confirming that those 
numbers make sense, that those numbers have been calculated correctly, is a crucial thing 
and I always make sure it happens. It’s not about going to jail and it’s not about being 
prosecuted etc. etc., it’s about doing an honest, realistic job, job that I can be proud of, job 
that is professional and accurate”.               
 
 
 
Conclusions 
 
The results of this research confirmed that legal-regulatory considerations are an important 
component of ethics perceptions of HFT actors (H1). This is in line with Erhard, Jensen, and Zaffron 
(2016), who suggested that there is an overlap between ethics and legal perceptions. The study also 
showed that in some cases, HFT actors are not entirely aware of all ethics aspects of their work, as 
Davis, Kumiega, and Vliet (2013) asserted. On the other hand, it revealed that many HFT actors 
attempt to understand the legal and ethical implications of their practice. Moreover, the results 
showed that, though boundary work is performed by HFT actors as MacKenzie (2014) described, in 
fact, the resultant boundaries and perceptions are subjective and sometimes contradicting. Though 
Angel and McCabe (2013) studied both procedural and distributive aspects of ethics, most HFT 
actors were concerned with procedural fairness issues rather than the distributive ones. 
 
However, the study revealed also that HFT actors are concerned with the social implications of their 
work (H2). Importantly, considering the social effect of HFT negative may lead to a feeling of 
meaninglessness. These findings extend Taffler and Tuckett's (2012) work. Taffler and Tuckett 
performed a large-scale research about the psychology of fund managers. They found that fund 
managers strive to make sense of their environment. In particular, attributing meaning to the 
environment enables fund managers to develop a conviction in their actions and hence make 
decisions. However, people attribute meaning not only to their environment, but also to their 
actions. This study extends the research on meaning from fund managers to HFT actors, and from 
interpretation of the nature of the market to questioning the ethics of one’s behaviour and 
practices. 
  
The research demonstrated the importance that HFT actors attribute to their public image (H3). In 
particular, they consider their public image distorted.  
 
Finally, the study emphasised the personal nature of the ethical perceptions of HFT actors. Though 
all participants were asked the same question (Question Q), each participant chose to interpret it in 
a different way, thus shedding light on a unique aspect of the HFT industry.  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

17 
 
Acknowledgement 
I would like to thank each of the HFT actors who participated in this study. I consider their 
contribution important, and I am grateful that they were so honest and helpful. 
 
References 
Angel, J., & McCabe, D. (2013). Fairness in financial markets: The case of high frequency trading. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 112(4), 585-595. 
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., Aaker, J. L., & Garbinsky, E. N. (2013). Some key differences between a 
happy life and a meaningful life. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 8(6), 505-516. 
Chung, K. H., & Lee, A. J. (2016). High‐frequency trading: Review of the literature and regulatory 
initiatives around the world. Asia‐Pacific Journal of Financial Studies, 45(1), 7-33. 
Cropanzano , R., & Ambrose, M. L. (2001). Procedural and Distributive Justice are more similar than 
what you think: A monistic perspective and a research agenda. In: Greenberg, J., & Cropanzano, R. 
(2001). Advances in organizational justice, Stanford University Press, Stanford, California. 
Davis, M., Kumiega, A. & Vliet, B. (2013). Ethics, finance, and automation: A preliminary survey of 
problems in high frequency trading. Science and Engineering Ethics, 19(3), 851-874. 
Erhard, W., Jensen, M. C., & Zaffron, S. (2016). Integrity: A positive model that incorporates the 
normative phenomenon of morality, Ethics, and legality – abridged. Harvard Business School, NOM 
Unit, Working paper No 10-01.   
Fetiniuc, V., & Luchian, I. (2014). Banking ethics: Main conceptions and problems. Annals of the 
University of Petrosani : Economics, XIV(1), 91-102. 
Fischer, J. (2004). Social Responsibility and Ethics: Clarifying the Concepts. Journal of Business Ethics, 
52(4), 381-390. 
Golumbia, D. (2013). High-frequency trading: networks of wealth and the concentration of power. 
Social Semiotics, 23(2), 278-299. 
Harris, L. (2013). What to do about High-Frequency Trading. Financial Analysts Journal, 69(2), 6-9. 
Hassoun, J., P. (2005). Emotions on the trading floor: Social and symbolic expressions. In Cetina, K. 
K., & Preda, A (Ed.), The sociology of Financial Markets. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.  
Kashdan, T. B. (2004). The assessment of subjective well-being (issues raised by the Oxford 
Happiness Questionnaire). Personality and Individual Differences, 36(5), 1225-1232. 
Kessler, A. (2014). High-Frequency Trading Needs One Quick Fix. Wall Street Journal, Jun 16, A.15. 
Keyes, C. (1998). Social well-being. Social Psychology Quarterly, 61(2), 121-140. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874

18 
 
King, L. A., & Napa, C. K.(1998). What Makes a Life Good? Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology,75(1), 156-216. 
Lewis, M. (2015). Flash boys: Cracking the money code. Penguin books, Randon House, UK. 
MacKenzie, D. (2014) A sociology of algorithms: High-frequency trading and the shaping of markets. 
Preprint. School of Social and Political Science, University of Edinburgh.  
Milic-Czerniak, R. (2012). Business ethics education in banks – Levels and methods of education. 
Management and Business Administration. Central Europe, 3(116), 71-84. 
Oarga, C., Stavrova, O., & Fetchenhauer, D. (2015). When and why is helping others good for 
well‐being? The role of belief in reciprocity and conformity to society's expectations. European 
Journal of Social Psychology, 45(2), 242-254. 
Patterson, S. (2012). Global Finance: CFTC Plans to Examine High-Frequency Trading. Wall Street 
Journal, Jan 31, C.3. 
Pfeifer, J. L. (2014). Fund loyalty among socially responsible investors: The importance of the 
economic and ethical domains. Journal of Business Ethics, 121(4), pp.635-649. 
Sobolev, D. Psychology of high frequency traders. (In preparation). 
Taffler, R. J., & Tuckett, D. (2012). Fund management: an emotional finance perspective. UK: 
Research Foundation of CFA Institute 
Zelizer, V. A. (2012). How I became a relational economic sociologist and what does that mean? 
Politics & Society. 40(2),145-174. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2789874
