Exploring the dynamic impact of transaction taxes on market 
quality in HFT and non-HFT environments: an agent-based 
modeling approach
Liming Wang
Affiliation：School of Management & Engineering, Nanjing University. 
Affiliation address: 22 Hankou Road, Gulou District, Jiangsu Province, China, 210093
Email: lmwang@ujs.edu.cn
Xuchu Sun 
Affiliation：School of Management & Engineering, Nanjing University
Affiliation address: 22 Hankou Road, Gulou District, Jiangsu Province, China, 210093
Email: sunxuchu@nju.edu.cn
Hongliang Zhu* (The corresponding author)
Affiliation：School of Management & Engineering, Nanjing University
Affiliation address: 22 Hankou Road, Gulou District, Jiangsu Province, China, 210093
Email: hlzhu@nju.edu.cn
Tangrong Li 
Affiliation：School of Internal Audit, Nanjing Audit University
Affiliation address: 86 Yushan West Road, Pukou District, Jiangsu Province 211800, 
China
Email: litangrong@nau.edu.cn
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

Exploring the impact of transaction taxes on market quality in HFT 
and non-HFT environments: an agent-based modeling approach
Abstract
This paper investigates the relationship among transaction taxes, high-frequency 
trading (HFT), and market quality. We employ the agent-based modeling (ABM) 
approach and conduct simulations to dynamically assess the impact of transaction taxes 
on market quality in markets with and without high-frequency trading activities. The 
preliminary tests show that high-frequency trading has adverse effects on market 
quality. Imposing a moderate transaction tax rate helps improve market quality in both 
markets with and without HFT. However, when the tax rate further increases, the 
market quality can be impaired. The adverse effect of high tax rate on market quality is 
more pronounced in market with no HFT. The findings reveal that the influence of 
transaction taxes on market quality varies with investor structure and transaction tax 
rates, which helps explain the diversity in transaction tax policies across global stock 
markets.
JEL classification: G10 G14
Keywords: Transaction tax; High-frequency trading; Market quality; Agent-based 
modeling
1. Introduction
Transaction taxes has been a longstanding topic of discussion. Early studies 
provide evidence of the functions of transaction taxes, including funding government 
expenditures, curbing financial market excesses, and improving market fairness 
(Keynes, 1936; Tobin, 1978). In recent years, the prevalence of high-frequency trading 
(HFT) in global stock markets draws attention to transaction taxes again. As the highfrequency trading has aroused increasing concerns about heightened market volatility 
and flash crashes (Boehmer et al., 2012; Kirilenko et al., 2017), the imposition of 
transaction taxes to increase trading costs, seems to become an imperative to curb 
excessively high-frequency trading and thereby improve market quality.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

However, considering the following two concerns, whether transaction taxes can 
necessarily improve market quality remains in doubt and is worth re-exploring. First, 
previous studies in support of the positive impact of transaction taxes on market quality 
(e.g., volatility and liquidity) focus on the role of transaction taxes in restricting highfrequency trading activities. The underlying assumption of these studies is that highfrequency trading impairs market quality, but there is not a consensus of support behind 
the assumption. For example, some studies document the significant role of highfrequency trading in liquidity provision (Pástor and Stambaugh, 2003; Acharya and 
Pedersen, 2005; Chordia et al., 2008; Hendershott et al., 2011) and price discovery 
(Boehmer and Kelley, 2009), while some scholars argue that there is insufficient 
empirical evidence for the role of high-frequency trading in exacerbating market 
volatility (Hendershott and Moulton, 2011; Hasbrouck and Saar, 2013). The 
undefinable influence of high-frequency trading on market quality indicates that even 
if transaction costs do curb high-frequency trading, it is not sufficient to suggest their 
role in improving market quality. 
Second, there has been no academic or practical consensus regarding the role of 
transaction taxes. Despite the large number of supporters of transaction taxes, some 
studies show direct evidence that transaction taxes may impair market quality by 
eroding market liquidity (Veryzhenko et al., 2017; Leal and Napoletano, 2019). 
Meanwhile, some scholars argue that transaction taxes can impact both high-frequency 
and low-frequency traders and they can be imposed in markets where high-frequency 
trading is less prevalent to alleviate noise trading (Pellizzari and Westerhoff, 2009; 
Capelle-Blancard and Havrylchyk, 2016). However, some others find that transaction 
taxes may only serve as a short-term policy signal rather than a long-term solution to 
noise trading (Veryzhenko et al., 2017). The global practice of implementing 
transaction taxes does not neither yield definitive indications of their role. In the United 
Sates, where the high-frequency trading is widely adopted, the transaction tax was 
abolished in 1981. By contrast, in United Kingdom and France, where HFT is also 
prevalent, the transaction tax rate remains as high as 0.5% and 0.3%, respectively. In 
the Chinese A-share market, where the adoption of high-frequency trading is limited, 
the transaction tax rate of 0.1% is also imposed. The diversity of the transaction tax 
implementations implies that the impact of transaction taxes on the market may vary 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

with investor structures, and the role of transaction taxes in the interplay between highfrequency trading and market quality requires further exploration.
This paper employs the agent-based modeling (ABM) framework to investigate 
the role of transaction taxes in affecting market quality by fully considering the impact 
of high frequency trading. Unlike traditional, regression-based models, the ABM 
approach is not limited to observed data and allows for modelling complex systems 
with non-independent individuals and feedback loops in causal mechanisms. As 
Veryzhenko et al. (2017) note, “… the poor quality of data plaguing work on the impact 
of FTTs on market quality”. The limited availability of micro-individual behavior data 
could hamper the research and the artificial stock market simulations have been 
gradually given attention and utilized widely (Chiarella et al., 2009; Leal and 
Napoletano, 2019).
The analysis starts with constructing the trading and adaptive rules for lowfrequency and high-frequency traders to examine the impact of high-frequency trading 
on market quality and explore the potential mechanisms. This helps address the first 
concern mentioned above. We simulate and compare two scenarios, one with both types 
of traders (high-frequency traders and low-frequency traders) and one with only lowfrequency traders, to investigate the impact of high-frequency trading on four aspects 
of market quality, including volatility, liquidity, mispricing, and welfare. Based on 
findings from the simulations, we further explore the role of transaction taxes in 
improving the four aspects of market quality under the two different scenarios. 
Additionally, we investigate how traders react differently to different tax levels and 
examine the influence of their reaction on market quality, which can be related to the 
trading practices in global stock markets.    
This paper contributes to the existing literature in several aspects. Firstly, this 
paper expands the research on transaction taxes, high-frequency trading, and market 
quality by employing the ABM approach. Given the complexity of the research 
question and model construction, few studies have clarified the relationship among 
them and the logic behind it. Secondly, this paper differs from previous research that 
employs the ABM approach to examine the impact of transaction taxes on market 
quality in that we take into account the diversity in investor structures of global trading 
markets. For example, a closely related study by Veryzhenko et al. (2017) focuses on 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

the cancel order tax in the French stock market, but their findings may not be applied 
in other stock markets with different investor structures. By contrast, this paper takes 
makes horizontal comparisons to highlight variations in the impact of transaction taxes 
on market quality across different market contexts. Thirdly, previous theoretical and 
empirical studies often imply a simple and monotonic relationship between transaction 
taxes and market quality (e.g., transaction taxes can mitigate market volatility or 
jeopardize market liquidity). However, this study reveals that the impact of transaction 
taxes on market quality is not monotonic and may depend on the investor structure and 
transaction tax rates. Specifically, we observe that raising the tax rate from 0 to 0.1% 
helps enhance market quality, while a further increase in the rate will negatively affect 
market quality, and the adverse effect is more pronounced in markets without highfrequency traders.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the 
model settings. Section 3 describes the simulation process, presents main results and 
provides corresponding analyses. Section 4 concludes this paper.
2. Model
In this model, we assume a market with two agent categories and one traded asset. 
Specifically, we classify all agents into low-frequency traders (LFT) and highfrequency traders (HFT). Both categories of agents possess knowledge regarding 
historical prices, fundamental information, and other noises.
We divide the entire trading period into T consecutive trading sessions. For each 
session, agents (LFT and HFT) engage in trading activities by submitting orders to the 
market. Unexecuted orders are subsequently retained in the limit order book (LOB), 
awaiting the commencement of the next trading session. According to the trading rules 
of the order-driven market, the market price is decided by the order price of the last 
executed transaction in a trading session. If no new transaction occurs, we approximate 
the market price by using the mid-price, which is given by the average price of the best 
bid and ask quotes on the limit order book.
As noted above, this paper creatively divides agents into low-frequency and highfrequency traders to explore how their trading behavior can be affected by transaction 
taxes and the corresponding impact on market quality under the agent-based modeling 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

framework. Next, we will introduce the model specifications of the three core objects: 
low-frequency traders, high-frequency traders, and transaction taxes.
2.1 Low-frequency traders
We assume that 𝑁𝐿 agents in the market are low-frequency traders. Among them, 
active participants that engage in continuous trading activities hold a certain proportion, 
which is subjected to a uniform distribution within a specific interval (𝑙𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥), 
denoted as 𝐴𝑃𝑙~𝑈(𝑙𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥). The interval may be adjusted at the beginning of each 
trading session based on the profitability of low-frequency traders in the previous 
session. 
Following Chiarella et al. (2009), we assume that each low-frequency trader i can 
act as a fundamentalism investor, a chartism investor, or a noise trader. A typical LF 
trader makes trade-offs among these three strategies based on its own judgment and 
expectations. Accordingly, at any time t, the expected return of agent i is
𝑟𝑖
𝑡,𝑡+𝜏𝑖=
1
𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑓+ 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑐+ 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑛[
𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑓
𝜏𝑖ln(
𝑝𝑡,𝑓
𝑝𝑡) + 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑐𝑟𝑖
𝑡+ 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑛𝜀𝑡],         
(1)
where 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑓, 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑐, and 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑛 represent the weights given to the fundamentalist, chartist, 
and noise trading components, respectively. We use the out-of-bracket term in Eq. (1) 
to normalize the impact of different strategies. Considering that all LF traders make 
trade-offs among the three trading strategies independently, we model the weights (𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑓, 
𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑐, and 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑛) as random variables independently chosen from a normal distribution. 
Thus, we have 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑓~𝑁(0,𝜎𝑓), 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑐~𝑁(0,𝜎𝑐), and 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑛~𝑁(0,𝜎𝑛).
The term within the square brackets in Eq. (1) describes the expected return on 
trading off the three strategies. Specifically, 𝑝𝑡 and 𝑝𝑡,𝑓 denote the stock price and 
fundamental value of the asset at time t, respectively. 𝑟𝑖
𝑡 represents the return of the 
chartist component and is calculated based on the observations of the spot returns over 
the last 𝜏𝑖 sessions (see Chiarella et al., 2009):
𝑟𝑖
𝑡=
1
𝜏𝑖∑𝜏𝑖
𝑗=1 𝑟𝑡―𝑗=
1
𝜏𝑖∑𝜏𝑖
𝑗=1 𝑙𝑛𝑝𝑡―𝑗
𝑝𝑡―𝑗―1.                
(2)
Then, 𝜀𝑡, with zero mean and variance 𝜎𝜀, represents the return of pure noise 
traders.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

Note that the parameter 𝜏𝑖 implies the time horizon of agent i, which mainly 
depends on its own preference and investment style. Specifically, traders relying on 
fundamental investing tend to have longer time horizons than those relying on technical 
analysis. Hence, the time horizon of agent i, a typical low-frequency trader, can be 
given by:
𝜏𝑖= [𝜏𝐿1 + 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑓
1 + 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑐],                          
(3)
where 𝜏𝐿 is a reference horizon of low-frequency traders. As shown in Eq. (3), if a 
low-frequency trader puts more weight on fundamental analysis, the investment 
horizon will be longer. On the contrary, a greater weight on chartist rules implies a 
shorter investment horizon. 
At time 𝑡+ 𝜏𝑖, the expected asset price is:
𝑝𝑖
𝑡+𝜏𝑖= 𝑝𝑡exp (𝑟𝑖
𝑡,𝑡+𝜏𝑖𝜏𝑖).                    
(4)
By substituting Eq. (1) and Eq. (3) into Eq. (4), we can get the expected price. 
Then, we discuss the model specification of low-frequency traders’ order 
submission and adaptation to the market. Following Shen et al. (2021), we define that 
the price movement induced by low-frequency traders’ transactions is subjected to a 
uniform distribution, denoted as 𝜅𝐿~𝑈(𝜅𝐿𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝜅𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥). Then, the transaction price (buy 
and sell) of low-frequency traders at time t can be given by:
𝑝𝐿𝑏𝑢𝑦,𝑡= 𝑝𝑏𝑖𝑑
𝑡―1(1 + 𝜅𝐿),                     
(5)
𝑝𝐿𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑙,𝑡= 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑘
𝑡―1(1 ― 𝜅𝐿),                     
(6)
where 𝑝𝑏𝑖𝑑
𝑡―1 and 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑘
𝑡―1 are the best bid and ask prices in the previous trading session. 
Eq. (5) and Eq. (6) show that the current bid and ask prices are affected by the 
fluctuations resulted from LF traders’ order submissions vying for execution. Then, if 
the current best bid price is lower than the expected price calculated from Eq. (4), the 
agent will submit a buy order at 𝑝𝐿𝑏𝑢𝑦,𝑡. Similarly, if the best ask price is higher than its 
expected price, the agent will submit a sell order at 𝑝𝐿𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑙,𝑡. Here, we define a valid 
period of submitted orders (𝛾L) as the time span from submission to the market until 
removal from the limit order book, which means that if the orders are not fully executed 
within the valid period 𝛾L, the rest of them will be removed from the limit order book. 
The size of the submitted orders is formed as:
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

𝑞𝐿𝑡= 𝑟𝑖
𝑡,𝑡+𝜏𝑖𝜂𝐿,                          
(7)
where 𝜂𝐿 represents the fluctuated order size of low-frequency traders, which is 
subject to a uniform distribution, i.e., 𝜂𝐿~𝑈(𝜂𝐿𝑚𝑖𝑛,  𝜂𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥). Eq. (7) illustrates that the 
agents may adjust their transaction sizes according to their own profits in the previous 
trading session. 
It is worth noting that the agents’ order submission strategies are adaptive, 
reflecting in not only their willingness to participate in trading, but also the size of 
submitted orders and their investment styles. Specifically, within the investment 
horizon 𝜏𝐿: (1) if the agents’ profits are positive in the last session (𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡𝐿𝑡―1 > 0), 
their willingness of participation may be enhanced at time t (i.e., 𝐴𝑃𝐿𝑡~𝑈(𝐴𝑃𝐿𝑡―1, 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥)), 
and they may increase their order sizes (i.e., 𝜂𝐿𝑡~𝑈(𝜂𝐿𝑡―1, 𝜂𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥)); (2) if the agents’ 
profits are negative in the last session (𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡𝐿𝑡―1 < 0), their willingness of participation 
at time t may be hampered to 𝐴𝑃𝐿𝑡~𝑈(𝑙𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝐴𝑃𝐿𝑡―1), and the order sizes may decrease to 
𝜂𝐿𝑡~𝑈(𝜂𝐿𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝜂𝐿𝑡―1). More importantly, they may adjust the weights assigned to the three 
different trading strategies (𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑓, 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑐, and 𝑤𝑖𝑡,𝑛).
2.2 High-frequency traders
Unlike low-frequency traders who switch among different strategies according to 
their profits in the previous trading session, high-frequency traders only adopt trend 
trading strategies in each session (Chiarella et al., 2009). We assume that 𝑁𝐻 agents 
in the market are high-frequency traders who decide whether to participate in trading 
based on a threshold Δ𝑥 (see e.g., Chiarella et al., 2009, Paddrik et al., 2012):
|
𝑝𝑡―1 ― 𝑝𝑡―2
𝑝𝑡―2
| > Δ𝑥,                        
(8)
where 𝑝𝑡―1 and 𝑝𝑡―2 are the prices of the stock in the previous two trading sessions. 
Eq. (8) illustrates that the market participation of high-frequency traders depends on 
asset returns during the last session. As high-frequency traders can profit from either 
the buy or sell side, the threshold Δx is positive and subjected to a uniform distribution 
Δ𝑥~𝑈(ℎ𝑚𝑖𝑛, ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥). High-frequency traders will submit orders on either side with equal 
probabilities (Farmer et al, 2004), and the order prices are near the mid-price, as shown 
in Eq. (9) and Eq. (10):
𝑝𝐻𝑏𝑢𝑦,𝑡= 𝑝𝑏𝑖𝑑
𝑡―1(1 ― 𝜅𝐻),                      
(9)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

𝑝𝐻𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑙,𝑡= 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑘
𝑡―1(1 + 𝜅𝐻),                     
(10)
where 𝜅𝐻 denotes the price movement induced by high-frequency trading and follows 
a uniform distribution, i.,e., 𝜅𝐻~𝑈(𝜅𝐻𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝜅𝐻𝑚𝑎𝑥). It is notable that Eq. (9) and Eq. (10) 
differ from Eq. (5) and Eq. (6). This is because high-frequency traders, aiming to profit 
from frequent trading activities, are only willing to buy at a price lower than the best 
bid price and sell at a price higher than the best ask price submitted to the market. 
Consequently, they may frequently cancel their submitted orders, and accordingly, we 
assume that their order is valid for a shorter period (𝛾𝐻) than that of low-frequency 
traders (𝛾𝐻<𝛾L).
Regarding the order size, given that high-frequency traders may submit orders on 
either side with equal probabilities (see details in Farmer et al., 2004), we have
𝑞𝐻𝑡=
1
2(𝑞𝑏𝑖𝑑
𝑡
+ 𝑞𝑎𝑠𝑘
𝑡
)𝜑𝐻,                    
(11)
where 𝑞𝑏𝑖𝑑
𝑡
 and 𝑞𝑎𝑠𝑘
𝑡
 are best bid size and best ask size in the limit order book, 
respectively. Considering that the high-frequency traders may not be willing to execute 
all the submitted orders at the best bid and ask prices on the limit order book, we include 
an order absorption rate 𝜑𝐻 in Eq. (11), which is subject to the uniform distribution 
𝑈(𝜑𝐻𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝜑𝐻𝑚𝑎𝑥).1
Turning to the adaptation of high-frequency traders, it can be argued that highfrequency traders adjust both the threshold to participate in the market (Δ𝑥) and the 
order absorption rate (𝜑𝐻) according to their profits in the last trading session. 
Specifically, within the investment horizon 𝜏𝐻: (1) if the agents’ profits are positive in 
the last session (𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡H𝑡―1 > 0), they may increase their action threshold at time t to 
Δ𝑥𝑡~𝑈(Δ𝑥𝑡―1, ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥), and adjust the distribution of absorption rate to 𝜑𝐻𝑡~𝑈(𝜑𝐻𝑡―1, 
𝜑𝐻𝑚𝑎𝑥); (2) if the agents’ profits are negative during the last session (𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡𝐻𝑡―1 < 0), 
they may decrease the threshold at time t to Δ𝑥𝑡~𝑈(𝑙𝑚𝑖𝑛, Δ𝑥𝑡―1), and adjust their 
distribution of absorption rate to 𝜑𝐻𝑡~𝑈(𝜑𝐻𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝜑𝐻𝑡―1).
1 We assume that the high-frequency traders keep low net inventory to respond quickly market 
conditions, while there is no limit on the inventory of low-frequency traders (see also in Kirilenko 
et al.,2017; Korajczyk and Murphy, 2019; Brogaard et al., 2018).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

2.3 Transaction Tax
We incorporate the transaction tax (TT) into the model. The transaction tax is 
decided by the value of executed orders and the transaction tax rate:
𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑡= 𝑞𝑖𝑡𝑝𝑖𝑡𝜃,                          
(12)
where 𝑞𝑖𝑡 and 𝑝𝑖𝑡 are the size and transaction price of orders executed by agent i at time 
t, respectively. 𝜃 is the transaction tax rate which remains unchanged in the short term 
due to the stability of trading policies, regardless of the progression of trading sessions. 
Then, the profit of agent i after session 𝜏𝑖 is:
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡,𝑡+𝜏𝑖= 𝑟𝑖𝑡,𝑡+𝜏𝑖― ∑𝜏𝑖
𝑡=1 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑡.               
(13)
3. Simulation results and analysis
In this section, we explore the implications from the model introduced in Section 
2. We carry out Monte-Carlo iterations (MC=100), establishing 1000 trading sessions 
within each simulated path and a minimum quoting increment of 0.01. The default 
values for parameters of the model are listed in Table 1.
Table 1
Parameter settings
Parameters
Description
Default
T
Number of trading sessions per simulation
1000
tick
Minimum quoting increment
0.01
𝑁𝐿
Number of LFTs
3000
𝑁𝐻
Number of HFTs
30
𝑝0
Initial stock price
120
𝑝0,𝑓
Initial fundamental value of the stock
125
𝜎𝑓𝑣
Standard deviation of fundamental value
0.001
𝜎𝑓
Standard deviation of the weight on fundamentalism trading 
0.3
𝜎𝑐
Standard deviation of the weight on chartism trading
0.6
𝜎𝑛
Standard deviation of the weight on noise trading
0.1
𝜎𝜀
Standard deviation of a noise trader’s expected return
0.001
𝜏𝐿
The time horizon for LFTs to adjust their trading strategies
30
𝜏𝐻 
The time horizon for HFTs to adjust their trading strategies
5
𝛾𝐿
Order validity time of LFTs
10
𝛾𝐻
Order validity time of HFTs
1
𝜃
Transaction tax rate
0
[𝑙𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥]
The range of LFTs’ market participation level
[0.01,0.6]
[ℎ𝑚𝑖𝑛,ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥]
The range of HFTs’ market participation threshold
[0,0.0002]
[𝜅𝐿𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝜅𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥]
The range of price movement induced by LFTs’ trading
[-0.0002,0.001]
[𝜅𝐻𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝜅𝐻𝑚𝑎𝑥]
The range of price movement induced by HFTs’ trading
[0,0.01]
[𝜂𝐿𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝜂𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥]
The range of LFTs’ fluctuated order size
[2000,10000]
[𝜑𝐻𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝜑𝐻𝑚𝑎𝑥] 
The range of HFTs’ order absorption rate
[0.1,0.5]
This table presents the descriptions and default values of main parameters in the model introduced in Section 2. LFT 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

and HFT represent low- and high-frequency traders, respectively.
The default values of parameters for simulations are in line with existing works. 
Specifically, when modeling low-frequency trading strategies (e.g., fundamentalism, 
chartism) and high-frequency trading strategies (e.g., the trend trading strategy), we 
follow the practices in a series of previous literature (De Long et al., 1990; Hommes et 
al., 2005; Chiarella et al., 2009; Franke and Westerhoff, 2012; Bongaerts and Van 
Achter, 2021). Regarding the number, weight, and behavior of the two types of traders, 
we refer to the relevant empirical evidence reported by Kirilenko et al. (2017) and 
Cipriani et al. (2022). With respect to time horizons, order validity time, and ranges of 
the parameters, we follow literature that employs the agent-based modeling framework 
to investigate stock market trading (Chiarella et al., 2009; Gaffeo and Molinari, 2017; 
McGroarty et al., 2019; Leal and Napoletano, 2019). In terms of the transaction tax rate, 
we set it to zero for both buy and sell sides in the baseline simulation.2
Our analysis starts with providing stylized facts and testing the model validation 
(see Section 3.1). Then, based on the validity of our model, we investigate the influence 
of high-frequency trading on market quality in the stock market (see Section 3.2). 
Finally, we focus on the impact of transaction taxes on the willingness of HFT and LFT 
to trade and the impact on market quality.
3.1 Model validation
We adopt an indirect calibration approach to validate our agent-based model.3 
First, we present the simulation results throughout trading sessions. Fig. 1(a) illustrates 
the evolution of stock prices from the interaction and adaptation of high- and lowfrequency traders in the market, while Fig. 1(b) depicts corresponding stock returns for 
each trading session. 
2 Setting the transaction tax as 0 for baseline simulation accords with widespread trading 
practices in global stock markets. From official websites of tax authorities and stock exchanges, we 
can find that many developed stock markets do not impose transaction taxes on buyers or sellers. 
For instance, United States, Japan, and Germany eliminated transaction taxes in 1981, 1999, and 
1991, respectively. Canada, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Australia, etc., also do not levy 
transaction taxes. 
3 For the calibration approach for ABM validation, see details in Windrum et al. (2007), 
Fabretti (2013), and Platt (2020).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

   (a)                                    
(b)
Fig.1. Simulated stock prices and returns
   (a)                                   
(b)
Fig.2.The leptokurtic and fat-tail features of simulated stock returns
Then, we verify whether the features of simulated stock returns accord with the 
stylized facts in real stock markets. We show the leptokurtic and fat-tail features of 
stock returns in Fig. 2. Moreover, as reported in Fig. 3(a), the autocorrelation tests show 
that the time sequence of simulated stock returns follows no autocorrelation. 
Meanwhile, Fig. 3(b) shows that there is autocorrelation in absolute returns, indicating 
the volatility clustering of the simulated stock prices. As the leptokurtic and fat-tail 
features, and the volatility clustering are the most obvious characteristics of the real 
stock market, Fig.1, 2, and 3 provide evidence for the rationale and validity of our 
model. 
  
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

(a)                                    
(b)
Fig.3. Autocorrelation of returns and absolute returns
3.2 The impact of HFT on market quality
Based on the validity of our model, we further examine the impact of highfrequency trading on market quality by simulation. Specifically, we set two scenarios: 
a baseline scenario with both high- and low-frequency traders, and a contrasting 
scenario with only low-frequency traders.4
In prior research exploring stock market quality, volatility and liquidity are 
commonly considered as two main factors (Krishnamurti et al., 2003; Chelley-Steeley, 
2008; Hendershott and Moulton, 2011). However, recent studies suggest that 
mispricing is an observational metric reflecting a different dimension of market quality 
from volatility and liquidity. It can be caused by heterogeneous beliefs in the market 
and the interactions of different types of investors (Chen et al., 2009; Doukas et al., 
2010; Shen et al., 2021). In addition to the three aspects mentioned above, drawing 
inspiration from Angel and McCabe (2013) and Cipriani et al. (2022), this paper also 
identifies investor welfare as another aspect of market quality. The main rationale lies 
in the fact that the welfare of each investor group can influence investors’ decisionmaking progress and trading behavior, thus affecting market quality. 
Based on the above considerations, we consider four aspects of market quality in 
this study, including volatility, liquidity, mispricing, and welfare. For volatility and 
liquidity, we employ the widely-acknowledged metrics and specifically, volatility is 
measured by the standard deviation of stock returns throughout the trading sessions 
while liquidity is assessed by the bid-ask spread. Following Berger and Ofek (1995), 
the mispricing measure is constructed by the absolute difference between actual stock 
prices and fundamental values, divided by the fundamental value (see also in Sadka and 
Scherbina, 2007; Doukas et al., 2010; Stambaugh and Yuan, 2017). For the 
measurement of welfare, inspired by Angel and McCabe (2013) and Cipriani et al. 
(2022), we use aggregate returns of low-frequency traders. 
To examine the impact of high-frequency trading on market quality, we calculate 
4 Here, we set the market with both high- and low- frequency traders as the baseline scenario, 
because it is more prevalent that both types of traders participate in trading activities among global 
markets, while the markets with only low-frequency traders are relatively rare.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

these measures that capture the four different aspects of market quality and compare 
their values under the baseline scenario with both HFT and LFT and the scenario with 
only LFT. The results are reported in Table 2.
Table 2
The impact of high-frequency trading on market quality
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Scenarios
Volatility
Liquidity
Mispricing
Welfare
Baseline
0.924E-03
0.023
0.326
0.025
Non-HFT
0.552E-03
0.027
0.283
0.048
p-value
0.000
0.214
0.325
0.000
This table compares the four measures for market quality under the two scenarios (baseline scenario and non-HFT 
scenario). Take the volatility in Column (1) as an example, for each scenario, we calculate the standard deviation of 
the stock return during each trading session of each simulation and then take the average of standard deviations from 
100 simulations. The reported liquidity, mispricing and welfare values are calculated in the same way, where 
liquidity is proxied by the bid-ask spread, mispricing is proxied by the absolute difference between actual the stock 
prices and its fundamental value, divided by the fundamental value, and welfare is the aggregate returns of lowfrequency traders.5 Due to the non-independence of the two scenarios, we conduct a paired sample t-test under the 
normal distribution assumption to determine the difference of market quality measures between the two scenarios. 
The null hypothesis is that the participation of high-frequency traders does not affect the mean of the model output. 
Table 2 shows that the presence of high-frequency trading (baseline scenario) may 
result in a decline in market quality, especially from the perspective of volatility and 
welfare. For example, in Column (1), the volatility measure (standard deviation) of 
stock returns in the baseline scenario (0.924E-03) is significantly higher than that in the 
non-HFT scenario (0.552E-03). In Column (4), the result shows that the involvement 
of high-frequency trading significantly harms the welfare of low-frequency traders. In 
Column (3), we find that the participation of high-frequency traders may enhance the 
extent of mispricing, although the impact is statistically insignificant under the paired 
sample t-test. However, in Column (2), although the difference is statistically 
insignificant, the market liquidity is higher in the baseline scenario (0.023) than in the 
non-HFT scenario (0.027), indicating that the presence of high-frequency trading helps 
improve market quality from the perspective of liquidity.
The statistical results from Table 2 help derive some preliminary conclusions 
regarding market quality. However, it is evident that conclusions drawing from the 
liquidity aspect diverge from those from the other three aspects. In order to enhance the 
5 In Tables 3 and 4, these measures are computed in a similar manner, and we do not make redundant 
explanations in order to save space.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

understanding about this divergence and the underlying mechanisms, we conduct 
further explorations, as illustrated in Figure 4.
 
 
(a)                                       
(b)
 
 (c)                                      
(d)
Fig.4. Further observations on market quality measures
In the four subplots of Figure 4, we depict stock prices and the bid-ask spreads 
throughout 1000 trading sessions, with the number of high-frequency traders varied 
from 0 to 100 while the number of low-frequency traders is maintained at 3000. 
Specifically, in Figure 4(a), we set the number of high-frequency traders to 0 to simulate 
a stock market composed solely of low-frequency traders. In Figures 4(b), 4(c), and 
4(d), the number of high-frequency traders is set as 10, 30, and 100 (LFT-to-HFT ratios 
of 300:1, 100:1, and 30:1), respectively.6
Figure 4 provides the following insights. Firstly, we take a look at market quality 
from the perspective of volatility. It is evident in Figures 4(b), 4(c), and 4(d) that the 
increased prevalence of high-frequency traders is associated with a more pronounced 
trend in stock price volatility. Moreover, there are notable price jumps in these three 
subplots with high-frequency traders, and the price jumps become more frequent and 
6 Note that the LFT-to-HFT ratio of the baseline scenario mentioned throughout this paper is 100:1. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

display larger magnitudes with the increase in the number of high-frequency traders. 
Next, we examine market quality from the perspective of liquidity. As depicted by Fig. 
4, the frequency of extreme values of the bid-ask spread decreases with the increasing 
participation of high-frequency traders. Simultaneously, when extreme values occur, 
the absolute magnitudes tend to be larger. However, if we take a closer look at the 
distribution of bid-ask spreads in the four plots (note the blue dashed lines), we can find 
that generally, the bid-ask spread tends to be higher in the market exclusively 
dominated by low-frequency traders. This finding helps to provide an explanation for 
the results in Table 2 that both the market volatility and liquidity increase with the 
participation of high-frequency traders. 
The findings above effectively reconcile the divergent conclusions in previous 
research regarding the impact of high-frequency trading on market quality. Most studies 
contend that market makers who engage in high-frequency trading significantly 
contribute to market liquidity (Bondarenko, 2001; Eldor et al., 2006; Kedia and Zhou, 
2011). Conversely, some posit that voluntary market makers have no contribution to 
market liquidity, or even, exacerbate market volatility, particularly in periods of 
insufficient liquidity, leading to a further depletion of liquidity and increased market 
turbulence (Clark-Joseph et al., 2017; Leal and Napoletano, 2019). Consistent with the 
theory of market makers’ inventory risk, our findings suggest that market makers, 
driven by concerns about inventory costs, tend to engage in more frequent trading 
during periods of heightened liquidity. However, in situations of insufficient liquidity, 
they are inclined to mitigate inventory risks, leading to a reduction in market-making 
activities (Hendershott and Seasholes, 2011; Liu and Wang, 2016). Therefore, in 
markets with greater involvement of high-frequency traders, stock prices exhibit higher 
volatility, while the influence on liquidity diverges in the periods with and without price 
jumps. 
To ensure the accuracy and robustness of the above conclusions, we additionally 
display the cumulative distribution of bid-ask spreads under different scenarios in 
Figure 5.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

Fig.5. Cumulative distribution function of bid-ask spread under different scenarios
Figure 5 shows the cumulative distribution of bid-ask spread under baseline 
scenario (3000 low-frequency traders and 30 high-frequency traders) and the 
contrasting scenario (3000 low-frequency traders only). One critical aspect of Figure 5 
is whether there is an intersection between the two curves plotted based on different 
scenarios. On one hand, according to prior literature, high-frequency trading may 
contribute to the occurrence of price jumps (Leal and Napoletano, 2019), and 
accordingly, there would be a higher probability that the bid-ask spread reaches extreme 
high values (e.g., 0.7 or higher) when high-frequency traders participate in the market. 
Hence, at high bid-ask spread values, we would expect that the curve of the baseline 
scenario is lower than that of the scenario without HFT participation. On the other hand, 
if the involvement of high-frequency traders helps improve market liquidity, as 
suggested by Table 2, the bid-ask spread should be clustered in lower bid-ask spread 
values under the baseline scenario. This indicates that at small bid-ask spread values, 
the curve of cumulative probability drawn from the baseline scenario should be higher 
than that of the scenario without HFT participation. Based on the above considerations, 
an intersection between the two curves is expected. And luckily, the curves displayed 
in Figure 5 are consistent with our expectations. We can observe from Figure 5 that 
when the market is solely driven by low-frequency traders, the majority of bid-ask 
spread values fall approximately between 0.05 and 0.1. In contrast, with the 
participation of high-frequency traders, the majority of bid-ask spread values are below 
0.03.
To sum up, we find that the participation of high-frequency traders has a negative 
impact on market quality in general, mainly reflected in exacerbated price volatility, 
reduced welfare for low-frequency traders, and weakened pricing efficiency. While the 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

market-making activities of high-frequency traders contribute to the improvement of 
market liquidity to some extent, the positive effects are primarily observed during 
periods of less volatility. When price jumps occur, high-frequency trading has a limited 
positive impact on liquidity. 
The findings in this subsection lay a foundation for our subsequent exploration. 
Considering the presence of high-frequency trading in most stock markets around the 
world, it is necessary to take into account the impact of transaction taxes on highfrequency trading and the corresponding impact on market quality when delving deeper 
into the role of transaction taxes in stock markets.
3.3 The impact of transaction tax on HFT and market quality
As mentioned in Section 1 of this paper, there is a divergence in the establishment 
of transaction taxes across global stock markets. Although transaction taxes are widely 
considered as a tool to mitigate the impact of high-frequency trading on the market, 
they were abolished in the U.S. where high-frequency trading is quite prevalent while 
imposed in the Chinese market while high-frequency trading is highly regulated. These 
global practices lead us to reconsider the role of transaction taxes in market quality 
under different scenarios with different HFT participation.
We conduct two sets of tests to examine the influence of transaction taxes on 
market quality, which is measured from four aspects (volatility, liquidity, mispricing, 
and welfare) as described in Section 3.2.. First, to investigate whether imposing 
transaction taxes can alleviate the adverse effects of high-frequency trading on market 
quality, we compare market quality measures under the baseline scenario (with both 
HFT and LFT) with no taxes imposed to those under the scenario with a transaction tax 
rate of 0.1% imposed. Second, the fact that transaction taxes are also imposed in some 
stock markets with limited high-frequency trading implies that transaction taxes are 
designed not only to mitigate the adverse effect of HFT on market quality. Accordingly, 
we investigate how transaction taxes on traders would affect market quality in the 
scenario with only low-frequency traders by comparing the quality measures under the 
non-HFT scenario with no taxes imposed to those in the non-HFT scenario with a 
transaction tax rate of 0.1% imposed. The results from paired sample t-tests are shown 
in Table 3.
Table 3
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

The impact of transaction taxes on market quality (transaction tax rate = 0.1%)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Scenarios
Volatility
Liquidity
Mispricing
Welfare
Baseline
0.924E-03
0.023
0.326
0.025
Baseline+TT
0.723E-03
0.027
0.315
0.028
p-value
0.072
0.278
0.628
0.295
Non-HFT
0.552E-03
0.027
0.283
0.048
Non-HFT+TT
0.492E-03
0.027
0.269
0.049
p-value
0.305
0.925
0.442
0.958
This table reports the average of each market quality measure from 100 simulations under the baseline scenario (or 
non-HFT scenario) with no transaction taxes and a transaction tax rate of 0.1% imposed (denoted by “+TT”). The 
p-values from paired sample t-tests are also reported, the null hypothesis of which is that the imposition of transaction 
taxes does not affect the market quality measures. Volatility is measured by the standard deviation of stock returns 
across trading sessions. Liquidity is proxied by bid-ask spread. Mispricing measure is constructed by the absolute 
difference between actual the stock prices and its fundamental value, divided by the fundamental value. Welfare is 
calculated by the aggregate returns of low-frequency traders.  
The results from Table 3 indicate that imposing transaction taxes can enhance 
market quality to some extent, although the improvement is not substantial. Specifically, 
when imposing transaction taxes on the baseline scenario with both HFT and LFT, the 
volatility, measured by standard deviation of stock returns, decreases from 0.924E-03 
to 0.723E-03. The p-value from the paired sample t-test is 0.072, indicating that the 
decrease in volatility is statistically significant. The results show that imposing 
transaction taxes in markets with active HFT participation can effectively alleviate 
market volatility. Regarding the other three aspects of market quality, we find that when 
imposing transaction taxes on the baseline scenario, the market liquidity (shown by 
increased bid-ask spread) and the degree of mispricing decrease, and the welfare of 
low-frequency traders increases. However, these changes are not statistically 
significant. It is worth noting that the involvement of high-frequency trading diminishes 
the welfare of low-frequency traders, as discussed in Section 3.2.. In that case, when 
seeking to enhance the welfare through the imposition of transaction taxes, the results 
are not promising. As Table 3 shows, when imposing transaction taxes on the baseline 
scenario, the welfare slightly increases from 0.025 to 0.028, significantly lower than 
the welfare in the non-HFT scenario (0.048).  
Turning to the non-HFT scenario, when transaction taxes are imposed, the changes 
in market quality measures are similar to those in the baseline scenario. Specifically, a 
decrease, though not statistically significant, can be observed in volatility and 
mispricing, and an increase in welfare is found, while the liquidity measure (bid-ask 
spread) barely changes. The results show that, in stock markets where high-frequency 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

trading is less prevalent, imposing transaction taxes may yield some marginal positive 
impacts on market quality, especially from the perspective of volatility and mispricing. 
This might to some extent explain why in stock markets dominated by low-frequency 
traders (e.g., the Chinese A-share market), regulators still impose transaction taxes. 
In light of the conclusions drawn above, we would like to discuss two issues 
further. First, we seek to understand how, and to what extent, the imposition of 
transaction taxes influences the participation of the two types of traders. Hence, we 
calculate the average number of active high-frequency traders (nHFT) and lowfrequency traders (nLFT) throughout 1000 trading sessions for each scenario. Second, 
we explore the potential outcomes of increasing the transaction tax rate, for instance, to 
0.3%, as imposed on Euronext Paris, or to 0.5%, as implemented on London Stock 
Exchange. Accordingly, we report the number of active traders and market quality 
measures for each scenario with various transaction tax rates (starting from 0, 
increasing to 0.5% with a step size of 0.1%) imposed. Results are reported in Table 4.
Table 4
The impact of transaction taxes on investor participation and market quality 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Scenarios
nHFT
nLFT
Volatility
Liduidity
Mispricing
Welfare
Panel A: imposing transaction tax on the baseline scenario
Baseline(0)
28
2687
0.924E-03
0.023
0.326
0.025
Baseline+TT(0.1%)
23
2569
0.723E-03
0.027
0.315
0.028
p-value
0.128
0.872
0.072
0.278
0.628
0.295
Baseline+TT(0.2%)
22
2456
0.695E-03
0.029
0.309
0.028
p-value
0.089
0.769
0.047
0.156
0.459
0.238
Baseline+TT(0.3%)
21
2209
0.663E-03
0.029
0.298
0.029
p-value
0.077
0.265
0.031
0.159
0.387
0.124
Baseline+TT(0.4%)
20
2067
0.638E-03
0.029
0.302
0.029
p-value
0.050
0.072
0.026
0.151
0.430
0.119
Baseline+TT(0.5%)
20
1792
0.607E-03
0.029
0.311
0.030
p-value
0.027
0.008
0.015
0.147
0.625
0.083
Panel B: imposing transaction tax on the non-HFT scenario
Non-HFT(0)
/
2750
0.552E-03
0.027
0.283
0.048
Non-HFT+TT(0.1%)
/
2629
0.492E-03
0.027
0.269
0.049
p-value
/
0.892
0.305
0.925
0.442
0.958
Non-HFT+TT(0.2%)
/
2514
0.487E-03
0.030
0.289
0.048
p-value
/
0.787
0.289
0.159
0.872
0.982
Non-HFT+TT(0.3%)
/
2261
0.481E-03
0.030
0.301
0.046
p-value
/
0.271
0.288
0.082
0.459
0.752
Non-HFT+TT(0.4%)
/
2115
0.485E-03
0.031
0.314
0.045
p-value
/
0.074
0.288
0.043
0.281
0.710
Non-HFT+TT(0.5%)
/
1834
0.484E-03
0.034
0.343
0.044
p-value
/
0.008
0.288
0.000
0.032
0.628
This table reports the average of each market quality measure from 100 simulations under the baseline scenario (or 
non-HFT scenario) with no transaction taxes, and the transaction tax rate of 0.1%, 0.2%, 0.3%, 0.4% and 0.5% 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

imposed (denoted by “+TT”). The p-values from paired sample t-tests are also reported, the null hypothesis of which 
is that the imposition of transaction taxes at a specific rate does not affect the market quality measures. Volatility is 
measured by the standard deviation of stock returns across trading sessions. Liquidity is proxied by bid-ask spread. 
Mispricing measure is constructed by the absolute difference between actual the stock prices and its fundamental 
value, divided by the fundamental value. Welfare is calculated by the aggregate returns of low-frequency traders.
As shown in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, it is evident that the increase in 
transaction tax rates can affect the market participation of both types of investors. In 
the baseline scenario (see Panel A of Table 4), increasing the transaction tax rate from 
0% to 0.1% results in a sharp decrease in the number of high-frequency traders (nHFT). 
In contrast, the participation of high-frequency traders decreases mildly when the tax 
rate increases from 0.1% to 0.5%. In both scenarios (Panels A and B of Table 4), the 
number of low-frequency traders (nLFT) declines gradually as the transaction tax rate 
increases from 0 to 0.5%. According to results from the paired sample t-tests, the 
decrease in the number of low-frequency traders becomes statistically significant when 
the transaction tax rate reaches 0.4% and above. An additional intriguing observation 
is that, the number of low-frequency traders in the baseline scenario (2687, 2596, 2456, 
2209, 2067, 1792) stays lower than the number of low-frequency traders in the nonHFT scenario (2750, 2629, 2514, 2261, 2115, 1834) under the same transaction tax rate.
Regarding the market quality measures, as presented in Columns (3) to (6), we 
observe distinct changes with the increase of transaction tax rates in both scenarios. In 
Column (3), the results reveal that, for markets with high-frequency traders (Panel A), 
an increase in transaction tax rate significantly reduces market volatility. When the 
transaction tax rate reaches 0.5%, the standard deviation (0.607E-03) approaches the 
level observed in the non-HFT scenario (0.552E-03). However, in markets without 
high-frequency trading (Panel B), the market volatility moderately decreases with the 
transaction tax rate, and the decrease is not statistically significant. Turing to the 
liquidity measure in Column (4), an increase in transaction tax rate moderately 
diminishes market liquidity in baseline scenarios. By contrast, the impact of transaction 
tax on liquidity is more pronounced in non-HFT scenarios, especially when the 
transaction tax rate rises to 0.3%. Regarding mispricing, no obvious trend can be 
observed with the increase in transaction tax rate for baseline scenarios with both HFT 
and LFT. However, in scenarios without HFT, we can find that the increase in 
transaction tax rate amplifies mispricing, and the impact is significant when the 
transaction tax rate rises from 0.4% to 0.5%. The differentiated impact of the 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

transaction tax between different scenarios is also reflected in the welfare of lowfrequency traders, as shown in Column (6). In markets with high-frequency trading, as 
presented in Panel A, an increase in transaction tax rate tends to enhance the welfare of 
low-frequency traders. However, Panel B reveals that in markets without highfrequency trading, a further increase when the transaction rate has reaches 0.1% only 
serves to diminish the welfare of low-frequency traders.
Reviewing Table 3 and Table 4, we observe an intriguing phenomenon: when we 
increase the transaction tax rate from 0 to 0.1%, there appears to be an overall positive 
impact on market quality (Table 3). However, when we further increase the tax rate 
from 0.1% to 0.5%, the influence of transaction tax on market quality is not necessarily 
positive (Table 4). Particularly, in markets without HFT, the imposition of high 
transaction taxes can be highly detrimental to market quality. For example. as shown in 
Panel B of Table 4, in markets without HFT, the contribution of increasing tax rate to 
alleviating volatility is minimal, while the negative impact on liquidity, mispricing, and 
welfare can be substantial.
In order to investigate the underlying mechanisms behind these statistical results 
and check the validity of our findings, we provide further evidence on the impact of 
transaction tax rates on market quality by comparing the price and bid-ask spread 
fluctuations across trading sessions under scenarios with different tax rates (0.1% and 
0.5%). 
 
(a)                                    
(b)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

 (c)                                    
(d)
Fig.6. Comparing the impact of different transaction tax rates on market quality
Figures 6(a) and 6(b) depict stock prices and bid-ask spreads in the baseline 
scenario (with 30 HFT and 3000 LFT) with a transaction tax rate of 0.1% and 0.5%, 
respectively. They show that the imposition of higher transaction tax rate (0.5%) 
appears to alleviate the volatility of stock prices, which can be observed from the 
reduction of both magnitude and frequency of price jumps. Simultaneously, there does 
not appear to be any major change in the overall market liquidity throughout the trading 
sessions. 
Figures 6(c) and 6(d) show stock prices and bid-ask spreads in the non-HFT 
scenario (with 3000 LFT only) with a transaction tax rate of 0.1% and 0.5%, 
respectively. Contrary to the conclusions drawn from the baseline scenario, we find that 
when the transaction tax rate in the non-HFT scenario rises from 0.1% to 0.5%, there 
is no obvious change in the price volatility, while the bid-ask spread notably increases, 
which indicates a decline in liquidity. This simulation results share similarities with the 
empirical conclusions drawn by Deng et al. (2018), suggesting that the impact of 
transaction taxes is not constant but undergoes dynamic changes in response to 
variations in investor structure and market conditions.
The conclusions drawn from Figure 6 align with our findings in Table 4. It is 
implied that for markets without high-frequency trading, the imposition of modest 
transaction taxes can enhance market quality to some extent, but a substantial increase 
in transaction tax rates may not be a favorable policy measure. In contrast, in markets 
with high-frequency trading, adjustments in tax rates would hardly influence market 
quality. This helps explain the phenomenon that in stock markets with limited highfrequency trading (e.g., the Chinese A-share market), low transaction tax rates are 
implemented, while in markets with prevalent high-frequency trading, transaction taxes 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

can either be imposed (e.g., UK and France) or not (e.g., U.S.), and these markets can 
coexist with their own sets of regulations. 
Our findings partially corroborate the argument of previous research that in actual 
markets, the signaling effect of transaction taxes on traders is more pronounced than 
their tangible impact on the market (Hu, 1998; Capelle-Blancard and Havrylchyk, 2016; 
Bratis et al., 2017). However, our conclusions also indicate that in markets with limited 
high-frequency trading activities, excessively high transaction taxes may not just be a 
policy signal but rather have substantial and lasting adverse effects on the market 
quality.
4. Conclusions
This study employs the agent-based modeling approach to address the underexplored issue concerning the relationship among transaction taxes, high frequency 
trading and market quality. The main simulation results are as follows. First, highfrequency trading does have adverse effects on market quality, mainly reflected in 
exacerbating price volatility and diminishing the welfare of low-frequency traders, 
while the impact on liquidity and mispricing is relatively small. Second, the influence 
of transaction taxes on market quality varies with investor structures and transaction 
tax rates. Specifically, when the transaction tax rate increases from 0 to 0.1%, the 
quality of the market, either with or without high frequency trading, may improve 
mildly. When the tax rate further increases from 0.1% to 0.5%, the impact of transaction 
taxes on market quality becomes adverse and is more pronounced in markets without 
high-frequency trading while less significant in markets with high-frequency trading. 
Our study may help inform ongoing debate on transaction tax policies and offer 
insightful perspectives on the design of tax systems in different countries.
Funding
This work is supported by the Humanities and Social Science Fund of the Ministry of Education of 
China (No. 17YJA790101) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2023M731617).
References
[1]
Acharya, V. V., & Pedersen, L. H. (2005). Asset pricing with liquidity risk. Journal of Financial 
Economics, 77(2), 375-410.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

[2]
Anagnostidis, P., & Fontaine, P. (2020). Liquidity commonality and high frequency trading: Evidence from 
the French stock market. International Review of Financial Analysis, 69, 101428.
[3]
Angel, J. J., & McCabe, D. (2013). Fairness in financial markets: The case of high frequency trading. Journal 
of Business Ethics, 112, 585-595.
[4]
Berger, P. G., & Ofek, E. (1995). Diversification’s effect on firm value. Journal of Financial Economics, 37(1), 
39-65.
[5]
Boehmer, E., & Kelley, E. K. (2009). Institutional investors and the informational efficiency of prices. The 
Review of Financial Studies, 22(9), 3563-3594.
[6]
Boehmer, E., Fong, K., & Wu, J. (2012, March). International evidence on algorithmic trading. In AFA 2013 
San Diego Meetings Paper.
[7]
Bondarenko, O. (2001). Competing market makers, liquidity provision, and bid–ask spreads. Journal of 
Financial Markets, 4(3), 269-308.
[8]
Bongaerts, D., & Van Achter, M. (2021). Competition among liquidity providers with access to highfrequency trading technology. Journal of Financial Economics, 140(1), 220-249.
[9]
Bratis, T., Laopodis, N. T., & Kouretas, G. P. (2017). Assessing the impact of an EU financial transactions tax 
on asset volatility: An event study. International Review of Financial Analysis, 53, 12-24.
[10] Brogaard, J., Carrion, A., Moyaert, T., Riordan, R., Shkilko, A., & Sokolov, K. (2018). High frequency trading 
and extreme price movements. Journal of Financial Economics, 128(2), 253-265.
[11] Capelle-Blancard, G., & Havrylchyk, O. (2016). The impact of the French securities transaction tax on market 
liquidity and volatility. International Review of Financial Analysis, 47, 166-178.
[12] Chelley-Steeley, P. L. (2008). Market quality changes in the London Stock Market. Journal of Banking & 
Finance, 32(10), 2248-2253.
[13] Chen, C. R., Lung, P. P., & Wang, F. A. (2009). Stock market mispricing: money illusion or resale 
option?. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 44(5), 1125-1147.
[14] Chiarella, C., Iori, G., & Perelló, J. (2009). The impact of heterogeneous trading rules on the limit order book 
and order flows. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 33(3), 525-537.
[15] Chordia, T., Roll, R., & Subrahmanyam, A. (2008). Liquidity and market efficiency. Journal of Financial 
Economics, 87(2), 249-268.
[16] Cipriani, M., Guarino, A., & Uthemann, A. (2022). Financial transaction taxes and the informational efficiency 
of financial markets: a structural estimation. Journal of Financial Economics, 146(3), 1044-1072.
[17] Clark-Joseph, A. D., Ye, M., & Zi, C. (2017). Designated market makers still matter: Evidence from two 
natural experiments. Journal of Financial Economics, 126(3), 652-667.
[18] Colliard, J. E., & Hoffmann, P. (2017). Financial transaction taxes, market composition, and liquidity. The 
Journal of Finance, 72(6), 2685-2716.
[19] De Long, J. B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. H., & Waldmann, R. J. (1990). Noise trader risk in financial 
markets. Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), 703-738.
[20] Deng, Y., Liu, X., & Wei, S. J. (2018). One fundamental and two taxes: When does a Tobin tax reduce financial 
price volatility?. Journal of Financial Economics, 130(3), 663-692.
[21] Doukas, J. A., Kim, C. F., & Pantzalis, C. (2010). Arbitrage risk and stock mispricing. Journal of Financial 
and Quantitative Analysis, 45(4), 907-934.
[22] Eldor, R., Hauser, S., Pilo, B., & Shurki, I. (2006). The contribution of market makers to liquidity and 
efficiency of options trading in electronic markets. Journal of Banking & Finance, 30(7), 2025-2040.
[23] Fabretti, A. (2013). On the problem of calibrating an agent based model for financial markets. Journal of 
Economic Interaction and Coordination, 8, 277-293.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

[24] Farmer, D. J., Gillemot, L., Lillo, F., Mike, S., & Sen, A. (2004). What really causes large price 
changes?. Quantitative Finance, 4(4), 383-397.
[25] Franke, R., & Westerhoff, F. (2012). Structural stochastic volatility in asset pricing dynamics: Estimation and 
model contest. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(8), 1193-1211.
[26] Gaffeo, E., & Molinari, M. (2017). Taxing financial transactions in fundamentally heterogeneous 
markets. Economic Modelling, 64, 322-333.
[27] Hagströmer, B., & Nordén, L. (2013). The diversity of high-frequency traders. Journal of Financial 
Markets, 16(4), 741-770.
[28] Hasbrouck, J., & Saar, G. (2013). Low-latency trading. Journal of Financial Markets, 16(4), 646-679.
[29] Hendershott, T., & Moulton, P. C. (2011). Automation, speed, and stock market quality: The NYSE’s 
hybrid. Journal of Financial Markets, 14(4), 568-604.
[30] Hendershott, T., & Seasholes, M. S. (2007). Market maker inventories and stock prices. American Economic 
Review, 97(2), 210-214.
[31] Hendershott, T., Jones, C. M., & Menkveld, A. J. (2011). Does algorithmic trading improve liquidity?. The 
Journal of Finance, 66(1), 1-33.
[32] Hommes, C., Huang, H., & Wang, D. (2005). A robust rational route to randomness in a simple asset pricing 
model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 29(6), 1043-1072.
[33] Hu, S. Y. (1998). The effects of the stock transaction tax on the stock market–experiences from Asian 
markets. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 6(3-4), 347-364.
[34] Hvozdyk, L., & Rustanov, S. (2016). The effect of financial transaction tax on market liquidity and volatility: 
An Italian perspective. International Review of Financial Analysis, 45, 62-78.
[35] Kedia, S., & Zhou, X. (2011). Local market makers, liquidity and market quality. Journal of Financial 
Markets, 14(4), 540-567.
[36] Keynes, J. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. New York Harcourt Brace, New 
York.
[37] Kirilenko, A., Kyle, A. S., Samadi, M., & Tuzun, T. (2017). The flash crash: High‐frequency trading in an 
electronic market. The Journal of Finance, 72(3), 967-998.
[38] Korajczyk, R. A., & Murphy, D. (2019). High-frequency market making to large institutional trades. The 
Review of Financial Studies, 32(3), 1034-1067.
[39] Krishnamurti, C., Sequeira, J. M., & Fangjian, F. (2003). Stock exchange governance and market 
quality. Journal of Banking & Finance, 27(9), 1859-1878.
[40] Leal, S. J., & Napoletano, M. (2019). Market stability vs. market resilience: Regulatory policies experiments 
in an agent-based model with low-and high-frequency trading. Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization, 157, 15-41.
[41] Liu, H., & Wang, Y. (2016). Market making with asymmetric information and inventory risk. Journal of 
Economic Theory, 163, 73-109.
[42] McGroarty, F., Booth, A., Gerding, E., & Chinthalapati, V. R. (2019). High frequency trading strategies, 
market fragility and price spikes: an agent based model perspective. Annals of Operations Research, 282, 217244.
[43] Paddrik, M., Hayes, R., Todd, A., Yang, S., Beling, P., & Scherer, W. (2012, March). An agent based model 
of the E-Mini S&P 500 applied to Flash Crash analysis. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Computational 
Intelligence for Financial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr) (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
[44] Pástor, Ľ., & Stambaugh, R. F. (2003). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political 
Economy, 111(3), 642-685.
[45] Pellizzari, P., & Westerhoff, F. (2009). Some effects of transaction taxes under different 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed

microstructures. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 72(3), 850-863.
[46] Platt, D. (2020). A comparison of economic agent-based model calibration methods. Journal of Economic 
Dynamics and Control, 113, 103859.
[47] Pomeranets, A., & Weaver, D. G. (2018). Securities transaction taxes and market quality. Journal of Financial 
and Quantitative Analysis, 53(1), 455-484.
[48] Sadka, R., & Scherbina, A. (2007). Analyst disagreement, mispricing, and liquidity. The Journal of 
Finance, 62(5), 2367-2403.
[49] Shen, H., Zheng, S., Xiong, H., Tang, W., Dou, J., & Silverman, H. (2021). Stock market mispricing and firm 
innovation based on path analysis. Economic Modelling, 95, 330-343.
[50] Stambaugh, R. F., & Yuan, Y. (2017). Mispricing factors. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(4), 1270-1315.
[51] Tobin, J. (1978). A proposal for international monetary reform. Eastern Economic Journal, 4(3/4), 153-159.
[52] Veryzhenko, I., Harb, E., Louhichi, W., & Oriol, N. (2017). The impact of the French financial transaction tax 
on HFT activities and market quality. Economic Modelling, 67, 307-315.
[53] Windrum, P., Fagiolo, G., & Moneta, A. (2007). Empirical validation of agent-based models: Alternatives and 
prospects. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 10(2), 8.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4830893
Preprint not peer reviewed
