Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101
From Implied Volatility Surface To Quantitative
Options Relative Value Trading ∗
Daniel Bloch †
Working Paper
7th of September 2012
Abstract
The only thing one can say about ﬁnancial markets is that parsimonious information on option prices
is available in time and space, and that we can only use the No-Dominance law (or stronger version of NoArbitrage) to account for it. Thus, one requires a consistent model to assess relative value between them.
We describe a single parametric model for the entire volatility surface with interpolation and extrapolation
technique generating a smooth and robust implied volatility surface without arbitrage in space and time.
Prices can now be generated such that the No-Dominance principle is preserved, and one can safely
assess relative value between them. In order to perform statistical analysis of the relationships between
points on the implied volatility surface (IVS), we are left with ﬁnding a way of modeling dynamically the
agents rational anticipations. We assume that the volatility surface is dynamically modiﬁed according
to the stock price realisations. Having related the stock price level to the implied volatility surface, we
use their respective historic evolution to characterise the transition probabilities, that is, the conditional
densities. A statistical technique is used to regress the observed implied smile against the realised stock
level. Therefore, the current stock evolution directly inﬂuences its future increment which means that,
given the stock price at a future time, the conditional density is known.
Implied Volatility Surface, Calibration, Options Relative Value, Quantitative Strategies, Statistical Dynamics Of The Smile
1
Introduction
The Black-Scholes model
[1973] for pricing European options assumes a continuous-time economy where
trading can take place continuously with no diﬀerences between lending and borrowing rates, no taxes and
short-sale constraints. Investors require no compensation for taking risk, and can construct a self-ﬁnancing
riskless hedge which must be continuously adjusted as the asset price changes over time. In that model,
the volatility is a parameter quantifying the risk associated to the returns of the underlying asset, and it is
the only unknown variable. However, since the market crash of October 1987, options with diﬀerent strikes
and expirations exhibit diﬀerent Black-Scholes implied volatilities (IV). Hence, the Black-Scholes formula
can be used as a mapping device from the space of option prices to a single real number called the implied
volatilities.
The out-of-the-money (OTM) put prices have been viewed as an insurance product against
substantial downward movements of the stock price and have been overpriced relative to OTM calls that will
∗We are gratefull to Nicole El Karoui, Monique Jeanblanc, Mark Davis, the GRO and the GRM for their useful comments
and suggestions. All mistakes are ours.
†Universit´e Paris VI Pierre et Marie Curie, France, dan.bloch@yahoo.fr
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101
pay oﬀonly if the market rises substantially. As a result, the implicit distribution inferred from option prices
is substantially negatively skewed compared to the lognormal distribution inferred from the Black-Scholes
model. That is, given the Black-Scholes assumptions of lognormally distributed returns, the market assumes
a higher return than the risk-free rate in the tails of the distributions.
In principle, one should use the future volatility in the Black-Scholes formula, but its value is not known
and needs to be estimated. As a result, practitioners use the implied volatility when managing their books,
assuming that the IV bears valuable information on the asset price process and its dynamics. Hence, acknowledging the limitations of the Black-Scholes model, traders keep having to change the volatility assumption in
order to match market prices. Therefore, as explained by Fengler [2005], the information content of the IV
and its capability of being a predictor for future asset price volatility is of particular importance on trading
markets. It is assumed that the IV bears valuable information on the asset price process and its dynamics
which can be exploited in models for the pricing and hedging of other complex derivatives. One of the reason
being the existence of highly liquid option and futures markets dated back from the early nineteen-nineties.
In an eﬃcient market, options instantaneously adjust to new information such that the IV predictions do
not depend on the historical price or volatility series. The overall consensus of the literature is that IV based
predictors do contain a substantial amount of information on future volatility and are better than only time
series based methods. Nonetheless most authors conclude that IV is a biased predictor.
As opposed to traditional ﬁelds of Applied Mathematics where fundamental laws exist, ﬁnancial markets
only obey the No-Dominance principle (monotonicity rule), so that modeling is based upon comparison
between assets (information driven). For instance the Black-Scholes model derives the price of an option by
comparison to the underlying asset price. Hence, we need to incorporate the relevant information in the model
(objective driven). Information being diﬀerent from one market to another, the relevant criterion depends
on the objective for which the model is built, such as prediction, hedging, risk management etc. Therefore,
the nature of the model depends on the corresponding market and its ﬁnal objective. In the same spirit as
Blyth [2004], we want to establish a consistent framework for relative-value volatility trading that enables
identiﬁcation of value within the universe of equity, FX, or commodity liquid option products. The logicist
approach is concerned with reasoning and more speciﬁcally with what we can say about the derivatives
markets (see Dempster
[1998]).
It requires choices, necessarily subjective, driven by the judgement of
the investigator, about which objective features to include or omit in the modeling formulation. Careful
assessment is required.
This is to oppose to the pragmatic approach which is usually adopted whereby
the simplest model that gives a price for the relevant instrument is used for pricing and risk management.
Following the logicist approach, the only thing we can say about ﬁnancial markets is that parsimonious
information on option prices is available in time and space, and that we can only use the No-Dominance
law (or stronger version of No-Arbitrage) to account for it. Further, options on a single stock with diﬀerent
strikes and maturities are functions of the same IV surface and depend in non-trivial ways on the same
underlying dynamics. As a result, when analysing volatility surfaces, it makes little sense to consider an
option with maturity T and strike K as an independent instrument with its own volatility. Thus, one requires
a consistent model to assess relative value between them.
To perfectly know the future expected dynamics of the underlying stock price requires the knowledge
of call prices for all strikes and maturities, but since in practise we can only observe a few market prices
from standard strikes and maturities, the market is therefore incomplete and there are more than one acceptable price (volatility) surfaces satisfying the no-arbitrage conditions. As a result, proper option portfolio
management requires suitably chosen interpolation and extrapolation techniques of the IV surface, forcing
practitioners to use a fully speciﬁed model. The standard approach is to interpolate and extrapolate market prices or volatilities to complete the market. Practitioners use the Black-Scholes implied volatility and
smooth the prices in a parabolic way to generate the missing prices. Due to the diﬃculty of deﬁning a single
parametric function for the entire volatility surface, a typical solution is to estimate each smile independently
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

with some nonlinear function. Then, the IV surface is reconstructed by interpolating total variances along
the forward moneyness. One way forward is to interpolate the smile within the region of observed prices with
a polynomial as was done by Malz [1997] and to cut the volatility outside that region. Similarly, Daglish,
Hull and Suo [2006] performed a Taylor expansion up to the second order of the implied volatility surface
around the money forward level. Alternatively, one can ﬁt with little control a parametric form for the
implied volatility derived from a model which is usually the result of an asymptotic expansion of a stochastic
volatility model, see for examples Hagan et al.
[2002] or Gatheral [2006]. However, direct interpolation
and extrapolation of implied volatility surfaces does not guarantee a resulting smooth risk-neutral density,
hence a proper local volatility surface.
In a market with a limited number of prices, a model of interpolation and extrapolation of the volatility
surface should have few parameters with the ability of mapping a large family of surfaces.
Among the
diﬀerent techniques proposed for obtaining a smooth volatility surface from market prices, Rebonato et
al.
[2004] argued that modeling directly the density was the most desirable approach. They extended the
mixture of normals approach proposed by Alexander [2001], obtaining a density with non-zero skew and
satisfying the risk-neutral forward condition while retaining an unconstrained numerical search. However, in
markets with long maturity products and discrete dividends such as the Japanese market, it is important for
model pricing to obtain a reliable volatility surface satisfying the no-arbitrage constraint not only in space
but also in time. So, we intend to generate a surface without arbitrage in time and in space as closely as
possible from the market data.
Interpolation techniques to recover a globally arbitrage-free call price function have been proposed by
Kahal´e [2004] where he considered a piecewise convex polynomials, and by Wang et al. [2004] who suggested
the use of a cubic B-spline interpolation. Later, Fengler
[2009] considered smoothing call prices with a
natural cubic splines by choosing to minimise a penalised sum of squares resulting in an iterative quadratic
minimisation problem under constraints. Similarly, we propose in Section (5.2) to impose smoothness and
value constraints directly on the market prices and their resulting implied volatility surface. We impose the
market prices to satisfy the no-arbitrage conditions and we smooth the implied volatility surface by ﬁtting a
special functional form to the observed market prices. We consider in Section (5) a parametric representation
of the market call prices under constraints in order to smooth the data and get nice probability distribution
function (pdf). We use the Diﬀerential Evolution algorithm described by Bloch et al. [2011] to calibrate the
model’s parameters to a ﬁnite set of option prices. Using the properties of our parametric model, in Section
(5.3) we compute analytically the Greeks of the model. Similarly to Ingersoll [1998], we let the Digital Bond
be the value at time t of receiving one dollar at the maturity T if and only if a probabilist event occurs, while
the Digital Share is the value at time t of receiving one share of the stock at the maturity T if and only if a
probabilist event occurs. In Section (5.4), we obtain analytical solution to the Digital Bond and the Digital
Share in the special case where the instantaneous volatility of the stock price is a deterministic function
of time and the stock price. In Section (5.5), using closed-form solutions for European options and Digital
options, we infer analytically the skew and curvature of the parametric model for all strikes and maturities.
Deﬁning in Section (2) option relative value, its principle which consists in taking advantage of price
diﬀerences between related ﬁnancial instruments by simultaneously buying and selling the diﬀerent instruments, can be seen as a directional bet on the expected future dynamics of the underlying stock price. Hence,
one need to provide traders with tools capable of properly quantifying market arbitrages to option prices,
together with tools modeling dynamically the agents rational anticipations. Since parsimonious information
is available in time and space, and since we can only use the No-Dominance law to account for it, our parametric model reaches its objectives by ﬁtting globally the market prices such that the no-arbitrage in time
and space is satisﬁed. We are left with ﬁnding a way of modeling dynamically the agents belief of future
evolution of the stock price returns. Bloch et al. [2002] showed that there exists a link between the implied
volatility surface and the spot level over time. In Section (6) we take the spot level as driving factor, and
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

assume that the volatility surface is dynamically modiﬁed according to the realisation of stock prices. Having
related the stock price level to the volatility surface, we use the historic evolution of the implied volatility
surface to characterise the transition probabilities, that is, the conditional densities. Then from the implied
marginal distributions observed on the market, we infer the joint distributions which are consistent with the
relationship between implied volatility and stock price level over time and satisfy the absence of arbitrage
(AOA) constraint. This hypothesis implies that European call prices are not time-dependent, that is, do not
depend on current time but are stock dependent. Therefore, the current stock evolution directly inﬂuences
its future increment which means that, given the stock price at a future time, the conditional density is
known.
2
Deﬁning option relative value
Relative value is the attractiveness of one instrument relative to another measured in terms of risk, liquidity, and return. Given that options are a derivative instrument, meaning they derive their value from an
underlying security, options themselves have value relative to other options. Hence, when comparing two
options, one option’s value can be deduced from or deﬁned relative to another option’s value. In practise,
even though options are quoted on the basis of price, option traders assess relative value on the basis of
volatility. That is, knowing the price of the option, one can solve for the IV of the underlying stock by
inverting the Black-Scholes formula.
2.1
From pair trading to skew trading
2.1.1
Pair trading
One of the simplest relative-value arbitrage called pair trading is an investment strategy that seeks to take
advantage of price diﬀerences between related ﬁnancial instruments by simultaneously buying and selling
the diﬀerent instruments, thereby allowing investors to potentially proﬁt from the relative value of the two
products. The simultaneous purchase and sale of two similar products whose prices are not in synchrony
with what the trader believes to be ”true value” is called an arbitrage in the hedge funds world. For example,
acting on the assumption that option prices will revert to their true value over time, traders will sell short
the overpriced security and buy the underpriced one. Once prices revert to their true value, the trade can
be liquidated at a proﬁt. It is clear from this example that what hedge funds call an arbitrage is simply the
fact that their views about the future performance of the underlying asset diﬀer from the market’s view. It
is a purely directional bet on the expected future dynamics of the underlying stock price. However, in the
classical option pricing theory, arbitrages are quite diﬀerent (see Shreve [2004]). One can reconcile the two
approaches by providing the traders with tools capable of properly quantifying market arbitrages to option
prices, together with tools modeling dynamically the agents rational anticipations.
2.1.2
Skew trading
The IV being a biased predictor of the future volatility, it bears valuable information on the asset price
process and its dynamics. That is, the options market provides a remarkable outlook on future expectations
of the value or performance of an underlying asset, allowing traders to compare various strike prices over
diﬀerent maturities. Since supply and demand ultimately drive prices, traders can learn which options are
cheap or expensive relative to others, as measured by the implied volatility of each option. This relative
value is deﬁned as options skewness, or skew, and can be used to identify trading opportunities. Trading
”with” the skew is deﬁned as buying higher valuation options and selling lower valuation options, while
trading ”against” the skew is deﬁned as buying lower valuation options and selling higher valuation options.
Traders can then use quantitative tools and decide to either trade ”with” or ”against” the skew or smile.
Even though there are diﬀerent explanations for the skew, one of the most straightforward is leverage. Skew
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

is priced to reﬂect the market’s assessment of future risk, which takes into account an asset’s current price,
pricing trends, and the potential for a sudden price jump in either direction. The basis of skew is that
even though options are founded on a risk-neutral concept, market participants have risk proﬁles that aﬀect
the supply-demand relationship of the options market. For example, many equity option traders tend to
sell upside calls and purchase downside puts (termed options collar) to reduce their overall risk exposure.
Given that many participants have predetermined preferences, options with lower strikes tend to have higher
implied volatilities relative to options with higher strikes. Consequently, if you believe that the skew is
wrongly priced, then the market is either underestimating or overestimating the probability of a large upside
or downside move in the underlying instrument. Hence, one can look at the volatility skews of an index or
a single stock over diﬀerent maturities and compare their relative predicting power for the movement of the
underlying index or stock. For example, in the case where the short term months have very low implied
volatilities relative to intermediate term options, it is usually the case that the options market is expecting
news likely to move the index or stock in a dramatic way in a few months’ time, but not in the shorter term.
The trading strategies should be based on the trader’s prediction for market movements, or lack thereof,
relative to market expectations (in the time period selected). However, one must recognise the conditions
where a strategy might fail.
2.1.3
Taking a view on the Skew
When trading ”with” the skew, the market is willing to overpay for a certain strike price or time frame. A
trader can purchase the higher implied volatility and sell a diﬀerent strike price or month at a lower implied
volatility. He chooses to purchase higher-valued options and sell lower-valued options because his market
forecast could mirror the options market (more demand relative to supply creates the skew) where he gives
away theoretical edge. Alternatively, he can trade ”against” the skew, assuming he forecasted a symmetric
event and wanted to gain theoretical edge by selling higher-valued options and buying lower-valued options.
Trading against the skew is a ”reversion to the mean” strategy, meaning that we are implementing an options
strategy that beneﬁts from a more normalised trading scenario (think of symmetrical rather than asymmetric
underlying moves).
Recall, ”cheap” or ”expensive” attributions are based on a symmetric mathematical
options model, such as the Black-Scholes formula. For example, if the trader believes the market will remain
calm in the near-term but that, in the coming months, it’s going to become more volatile, he can implement
a long calendar position. This is considered trading ”with” the skew if the shorter-dated options are priced
much cheaper than the longer-dated options. There are many variations of trading ”with” the skew. The
only requirement is that the option you sold has a lower implied volatility than the option you purchased.
To conclude, since the IV is an indicator of potential outcomes for an underlying asset, with insight into
market expectations, traders can choose to trade ”with” the skew (smile) or ”against” it.
2.2
Accounting for the dynamics of the IV surface
The main idea behind relative value is that the goodness of the model is not so important as long as it
is applied consistently across all option prices. That is, one focus on the price of options relative to each
other. In general, many traders believe that to take advantage of skew opportunities they should plan to
buy undervalued options and sell overvalued options. That is, whether the individual options in a speciﬁc
market are out of line relative to each other, and not whether the market is out of line with the model.
But, what does it mean to say that an option is undervalued or overvalued? The valuation of most assets is
normally approached on a relative basis. In practise, most hedge funds assume stock prices are lognormally
distributed, but the actual price distributions in all markets tend to have fatter tails than suggested by the
lognormal distribution. As a result, in the real world extreme price movements occur far more frequently
than implied by the standard Black-Scholes assumptions. Hence, in reality it makes more sense to be a
buyer of deep OTM options than might be suggested by the model. Consequently, if you blindly believe
the lognormal assumption, you would be selling more OTM options than you should, leading to potential
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

big losses. Hence, traders should be wary of making blind assumptions about options being undervalued or
overvalued.
2.3
Relating long-dated options to short-dated options
2.3.1
A mean-reverting volatility process
Central to trading options is some understanding of the fundamental forces that aﬀect market volatility.
Volatility in ﬁnancial markets tends to be a mean reverting process. One of the reason for volatility to be
mean-reverting is that it can not be explosive, and implied volatilities can not deviate too far from their
central tendency. As a result, the further away volatility gets from its long term average or normal level, the
greater the likelihood that it will move back towards its mean. This property violates the constant volatility
assumption of some major options valuation models, such as the BS model. Thus, an understanding of the
mean reverting nature of the volatility process enables someone taking an option’s position to recover the
market’s implicit beliefs about the dynamics of volatility as the option moves through time. If volatility is
a mean-reverting process, then clearly buying or selling it at extreme levels should be a proﬁtable trading
strategy. However, an options position has both a spot directional and a volatility component, making the
strategy less trivial than expected. While volatility drops, as it should in a mean reverting process, the move
in the spot price may rendered the position unproﬁtable. In addition, implied volatilities have to drop faster
than the forward volatility curve anticipates for the position to make money.
2.3.2
Modeling the term-structure of volatility
Options at diﬀerent dates or tenors Ti for i = 1, .., n reveal a term structure of implied volatilities that is
a useful tool in relative value analysis. Long dated options are priced relative to the value of short dated
options. The eﬀect is similar to that observed in ﬁxed income yield curves. In general, long dated implied
volatilities do not fully respond to transitory movements in short-dated implied volatility because of the mean
reverting nature of the series. That is, a shock to short-dated volatility is likely to dissipate over a longer
time interval as the market reverts to its normal or average level. Finally, greater volatility of short-dated
volatility reduces the value of short dated volatility as a benchmark for valuing long dated volatility. As
a result, it tends to lower long-dated implied volatilities. Using this intuition, practitioners (see Simpson
[2003]) have devised statistical models where the term-structure of the IV is a function of two factors, the
short-dated volatility and the volatility of short-dated volatility
σl(t) = α + β1σs(t) + β2σ2
s(t) + ϵ
where σl(t) is the volatility of the long-dated options and σs(t) is that of the short-dated option.
The
parameters of the model are α and βi for i = 1, 2 and ϵ is a white noise. Deviations from the expected
values from this econometric model suggest a useful approach to determining whether implied volatilities in
a speciﬁc portion of the yield curve are expensive or cheap.
2.4
Some trading strategies
We saw in the Section (2.1) that having insight into market expectations of the future dynamics of the
underlying price returns enables traders to deﬁne trading strategies. It requires skills originating from risk
management and leveraged to systematic speculation, such as single surface risk management as well as delta
and gamma trading. Other examples include vega trading, dispersion and correlation trading. As explained
by Hutchinson [2011], there exists a large number of option value strategies among which the most famous
one are
1. Volatility Surface Relative Value. It optimises a portfolio of long and short option positions, on the
same underlying security, to harvest gains from changes in the shape of the volatility surface.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

2. Implied Correlation / Dispersion. It trades the relative value relationship between the implied volatility
of an Index option and the implied volatilities of the Component Stocks that comprise the Index.
3. Capital Structure Arbitrage.
It trades the relative value relationship between options on various
segments of the capital structure of an individual company, or the options embedded in the same.
4. Generic Volatility Long/Short. It trades the relative value relationship between options on a full array
of securities, and is not limited to one underlying security or issuer of securities.
5. Directional Volatility. It creates an option portfolio that exhibits a continuous short or long exposure
to changes in implied volatility.
Options on single stocks or indices with diﬀerent strikes and maturities being functions of the same IV
surface and depending in non-trivial ways on the same underlying dynamics, one requires a consistent model
to assess relative value between them. Since parsimonious information is available in time and space, and
since we can only use the No-Dominance law to account for it, our model must ﬁt globally the market
prices such that the no-arbitrage in time and space is satisﬁed. We are left with ﬁnding a way of modeling
dynamically the agents rational anticipations in order to infer relative value between option prices and take
advantage of their diﬀerences over time.
2.5
Some fundamental analysis
2.5.1
Volatility surface relative value
As discussed previously in Section (2.4) many relative value strategies exist, and we are going to concentrate
on volatility surface relative value. Note, as the IV surface is a three-dimensional array obtained by plotting
the inverted option prices along two axes, the time to maturity and the strike prices, one must rely on tools
quantifying the relative value of option prices not only on space but also on time. Since the IV surface
changes shape as investors change their expectation of risk to come, and thus the price they are willing to
pay for options on the surface, one can evaluates the IV surface and optimises a portfolio of long and short
option positions. For example, point pairs on the surface may be initiated when the pair relationship is at
statistical extreme, or it reﬂects misplaced expectations. In that setting the investment strategy relies on
some fundamental analysis consisting of
• examination of the IVS
• analysis of option market values relative to model values
• statistical analysis of relationships between points on the IVS
• objective consideration of factors aﬀecting expectations of risk (IVS dynamics)
Then the trades are implemented and executed based on some targeted opportunities. Notes, trades can
also be identiﬁed for risk management purposes by oﬀsetting aggregated portfolio sensitivities (Greeks). In
general the market volatility surface is analysed relative to a model volatility surface and an electronic eye
is used to identify and display trade opportunities. Using quantitative tools, traders should be able to assess
opportunities, identify hedges and execute orders. Therefore, one can identify potential opportunities by
proﬁling a smile of IV generated by proprietary modeling against the IV of options actually observed in the
market place. For instance, one can consider cheap IV versus model as well as the expensive one against
model. For that relation to exist the model must be arbitrage-free, not just in space but also in time. In
addition, the market surface can also be described statistically by looking at the relationship between each
point. For example, one can look at the ratios and spreads of 10% OTM puts for various maturities, placed
in one-year historical context via a percentile calculation. A pair with a Vol Ratio Percentile of less than
15% would be coloured blue or green, while high ratios would be coloured red.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

2.5.2
Dispersion relative value
Assuming that we know the IV of a portfolio (or index) together with the weights and IV of the individual
stocks in the portfolio, we can solve for the expected correlation also called the implied correlation (IC). The
IC is traded via positions in single stock options oﬀset by index option positions. As the relationship between
index volatilities and their component stock volatilities change quite a lot over time, so does the implied
correlation. The IC is usually viewed by practitioners as one of the option market’s expectation of systematic
risk. In principle it is increasing when investors sell stocks, and decrease as more benign expectations ﬁlter
in.
The growth of the variance swap (VS) market and the success of the VIX raised the proﬁle of volatility
trading as an asset being negatively correlated to the underlying equity market. Rather than solving the
diﬃcult questions of knowing which volatility to own, and how to mitigate the expense of decay, the VS
is a liquid, non-strike dependent hedge. One strategy consists in owning a basket of single stock volatility,
assuming that volatilities would increase when the underlying shares sell oﬀ, and then take advantage of the
elevated implied correlation. Rather than selling the basket of single volatility, the relatively more elevated
index volatility is sold against the basket of single stock volatilities. Based on empirical studies, it is assumed
that a basket of higher beta single stock volatilities may have a larger absolute move up than index volatility
during a sell-oﬀ. However, single stock volatility having wider bid/oﬀer spreads, exhibit a greater expected
cost over the course of a year, and potentially unmanageable bid/oﬀer spreads. In addition, the relationship
between single stock volatilities and index volatility may not perform as historically expected, leading to
basis risk. Nonetheless, some opportunities each year to sell elevated index volatility present the possibility
of signiﬁcantly mitigating the expense.
3
Understanding the mechanisms behind option relative value
Given the deﬁnition of option relative value in Section (2), one must be able to evaluate risk, liquidity, and
returns from the ﬁnancial instruments to infer their attractiveness.
3.1
The inconsistencies of the BS model
The Black-Scholes model
[1973] for pricing European options assumes a continuous-time economy where
trading can take place continuously with no diﬀerences between lending and borrowing rates, no taxes and
short-sale constraints. Investors require no compensation for taking risk, and can construct a self-ﬁnancing
riskless hedge which must be continuously adjusted as the asset price changes over time. To the extent
that the world deviates from the BS assumptions of constant volatility and a lognormal distribution to price
changes, the BS model will be biased in certain, often predictable ways (see Hull and White
[1987]). In
reality, since the volatility is not constant it has a major impact on the values of certain options, especially
those options that are away from the money, because the dynamics of the volatility process rapidly change
the probability that a given out-of-the-money (OTM) option can reach the exercise price. Hence, the BS
model consistently underestimates the value of an option to the extent that volatility is stochastic rather
than constant as assumed. It is well known in the literature that both the crash fears and the volatility
evolution are explanatory factors for the negatively skewed implicit distribution and that each of them implies
a diﬀerent relationship between the option maturity and the implicit skewness. Stochastic diﬀusion models
imply a direct relationship between the option maturity and the magnitude of the implicit skew while that
relationship is inversed in a ﬁnite variation jump model. This is because jump components address moneyness
biases while having stochastic latent variables allows distributions to evolve stochastically over time. A second
major assumption of the BS model is that the underlying returns are normally distributed with a variance
proportional to the length of time over which the asset trades. However, a number of academic studies
show that the underlying price movements are neither normally nor lognormally distributed. Many ﬁnancial
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

assets exhibit more skewness and kurtosis than it is consistent with the Geometric Brownian Motion model of
Black-Scholes. According to Bakshi et al. [1997] only a combination of jump and stochastic volatility models
is capable of capturing the IVS. Similarly, Bates [2000] studied empirically the impact of each explanatory
factors on the shifted distribution and concluded that one need a combination of both to recover a good ﬁt
to the market distribution. Again, the problem with the distributional assumption of the BS model means
that it generally underestimates equity or FX option values because the likelihood of having an extreme
price movement is greater than the model expects.
3.2
Accounting for the market price of risk
When in incomplete market, we can not perfectly hedge an equity derivative, but we can divide the asset
into two pieces, one which is hedgeable and the other being totally unhedgeable where the hedgeable portion
can be priced using arbitrage-free arguments. However, market practise consists in using the Black-Scholes
formula as a tool for representing market risk via the implied volatility surface and then devise hedging
strategies based on the ﬁrst component of the option value. Even though most if not all the assumptions in
the Black-Scholes model do not correspond to market realities, it gives a robust representation of market’s
behaviour and should be used to guide us toward the correct market value (see El Karoui et al. [1998]). In
that model, volatility is the only unknown variable when pricing options and as such it is the only parameter
quantifying the risk associated to the returns of the underlying asset. In the Black-Scholes formula, the
option price is equivalent to the cost of continuously hedging the option, but in practise dynamic hedging is
not a risk-free proposition. Moreover, additional risks must be taken into consideration such as changes in
volatility, changes in interest rates, changes in dividends, trading costs and liquidity. As a results, all these
risks are incorporated into the implied volatility in such a way that the skew can be seen as the view from
the market that options with diﬀerent strikes and diﬀerent expiries have diﬀerent risks and should be valued
accordingly. That is, one expect a normal behaviour of the stock prices near ATM options which can be
reasonably hedged, but when the stock prices exhibit large downward movements, the fear of non-headgeable
jumps dominate. For example, in the case of short maturity options where OTM put prices should have a
zero market value, they actually exhibit positive values representing exclusively a market risk premium. As
discussed by Figlewski [1989] the IV is a free parameter containing expected volatility and everything else
that aﬀects option demand and supply but it is not the model, making it very diﬃcult to disentangle the
diﬀerent factors. Once the market price of risk has been implicitly entered into the pricing equation, the
traders are left to deﬁne their hedging strategies. For example, when delta hedging, the traders make the
derivative of the portfolio with respect to the stock price zero at a point, but the portfolio still change in
value if the asset moves a short distance from that point. However, if the distance is small, the change in
value will be proportional to its square, whereas for a non delta hedged portfolio the change will be linear in
the distance (see Fengler [2005]). Fortunately, one simpliﬁcation to the trader’s position arises from the fact
that he will have bought and sold many diﬀerent options on the same underlying. Each of these options has
a delta and since in a complete market the model is linear, the traders can hedge them all by simply adding
their deltas together. As the deltas of long and short positions have opposite signs, and if the portfolio is a
mixture of such positions, the deltas will at least partially cancel each other.
3.3
Modeling the asset returns
Alternative explanations, from jump-diﬀusion process for the dynamics of the underlying stock, for the
divergence between the risk-neutral distributions and observed returns include peso problems, risk premia
(see Lettau et al.
[2003] and Novales et al.
[2003]) and option mispricing but no consensus has yet been
reached. The notion that equity returns exhibit stochastic volatility is well documented in the literature,
and evidence indicates the existence of a negative volatility risk premium in the options market (see Bakshi
et al.
[2003]). CAPM suggests that the only common risk factor relevant to the pricing of any asset is
its covariance with the market portfolio, making beta the right measure of risk. However, excess returns
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

on the traded index options and on the market portfolio explain this variation, implying that options are
non-redundant securities. As a result, Detemple et al.
[1991] argued that there is a general interaction
between the returns of risky assets and the returns of options, implying that option returns should help
explain stock returns. That is, option returns should appear as factors in explaining the cross section of
asset returns. For example, Bekaert et al.
[2000] investigated the leverage eﬀect and the time-varying risk
premium explanations of the asymmetric volatility phenomenon at both the market and ﬁrm level. They
found covariance asymmetry to be the main mechanism behind the asymmetry for the high and medium
leverage portfolios. Negative shocks increase conditional covariances substantially, whereas positive shocks
have a mixed impact on conditional covariances. While the above evidence indicates that volatility risk is
priced in options market, Arisoy et al. [2006] used straddle returns (volatility trade) on the S&P 500 index
and showed that it is also priced in securities markets. As a result, one can assume the existence of arbitrage
over short maturity option prices by assuming a non-null market risk premium. Similarly to the commodity
markets where the holder of the spot is compensated for holding one unit of inventory in case of shortage,
we can compensate the holder of the spot in the equity market for the risk of a large downward jumps.
4
The equity setup
We consider the probability space (Ω, F, P) where Ft is a right continuous ﬁltration including all P negligible
sets in F. For simplicity, we let the market be complete and assume that there exists an equivalent martingale
measure Q as deﬁned in a mixed diﬀusion model by Bellamy and Jeanblanc [2000]. We let the underlying
process (St)t≥0 be a one-dimensional Ito process valued in the open subset D with dynamics under the
risk-neutral measure Q being
dSt
St
= µ(t, St)dt + σ(t, St)dWS(t)
(4.1)
where the drift µ : D →R as well as the diﬀusion σ : D →R are regular enough to have a unique strong
solution valued in D. There are various ways of modeling discrete dividends, all resulting in diﬀerent prices
for path dependent options (see Bos et al.
[2003]). We are going to introduce some notations on discrete
dividends, and introduce the pure stock process with its corresponding pure implied volatility.
4.1
Discrete dividends
We are now introducing discrete dividends to the stock price and describe our framework. Given t0 = 0 and
µt = (r(t)−q(t)) where r(t) and q(t) are deterministic functions of time, we let C(t0, t) = Re(t0,t)
P (t0,t) = e
R t
t0 µsds
be the capitalisation factor from time zero until time t and Dt be the dividends paid till time t given by
Dt =
∞
X
i=0
H(t −tdi)diC(tdi, t)
with dynamics given by
dDt = µtDtdt + D
′
tdt
where D
′
t = P∞
i=0 δ(t −tdi)diC(tdi, t). Similarly, the dividends paid from time t till time T and capitalised
at maturity T are given by
D(t, T) = DT −C(t, T)Dt
Discounting these dividends to time t, we get the present value DP V (t; t, T) of the dividends paid between
t and T
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

DP V (t; t, T) = D(t, T)
C(t, T) =
DT
C(t, T) −Dt
Having made an assumtion on discrete dividends, for simplicity of exposition, we are going to consider the
dynamics of the stock price in the Spot model.
4.2
The Spot model
We can always rewrite the spot price with discrete dividends in terms of a pure process Z with no discrete
dividends and no rates with the transformation
St = a(t)Zt + b(t)
(4.2)
where a(t) and b(t) are deterministic function of time (see Overhaus et al.
[2002]). We assume that the
dynamics of the stock price (St)0≤t≤T in the Spot model and under the risk-neutral measure are given by
St
=
Zt −Dt
dZt
Zt
=
µ(t)dt + σZ(t, Z)dWZ(t)
Zt0
=
St0
In that setting the price of a European call option with strike K and maturity T is
CS(t0; K, T) = P(t0, T)Et0[(ZT −K
′)+]
where K
′ = K + DT . This model is popular mainly due to the fact that when adding the already paid
dividends to the strike and considering the special case where the volatility σZ is a consant, one can use the
Black-Scoles formula to compute the call option price.
4.3
Pricing simple products : Digital contracts
Similarly to Ingersoll [1998], we let D(S, t, T; ξ) be the value at time t of receiving $1 at the maturity T if
and only if the event ξ occurs. Such a contract is called a binary option or a cash-or-nothing option and
we will call it a Digital Bond. We also let S(S, t, T; ξ) be the value at time t of receiving one share of the
stock at the maturity T (excluding any intervening dividends) if and only if the event ξ occurs. Such a
contract is called a all-or-nothing share and we will call it a Digital Stock. Given the process (St)t≥0 and
the appropriate measure, the price of a call option can be expressed in terms of those quantities as
C(t, St, T, K)
=
P(t, T)Et[(ST −K)+] = P(t, T)Et[(ST −K)IST >K]
=
P(t, T)
 Et[ST IST >K] −KEt[IST >K]

and
P(t, T)Et[ST IST >K] = C(t, St, T, K) + KP(t, T)Et[IST >K]
Now from the deﬁnition of a digital option we have Et[IST >K] = −
1
P (t,T )∂KC(t, St, T, K) which is approximated with call-spread option, and the Digital Stock becomes
S(S, t, T; ST > K) = P(t, T)Et[ST IST >K] = C(t, St, T, K) −K∂KC(t, St, T, K)
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

and can be statically replicated with a call option and a call-spread. Therefore, the pricing of other European
derivatives with piecewise linear and path-independent payoﬀs only requires valuing Digital Bond and Share
with event ξ = {L < ST < H} for some constants L and H. For example, the call option price is
C(t, T, K) = S(S, t, T; ST > K) −KD(S, t, T; ST > K)
(4.3)
while the put option price is
P(t, T, K) = KD(S, t, T; ST < K) −S(S, t, T; ST < K)
In the special case where the rate, repo and volatility are constants, Cox and Ross [1976] showed that the
Digital Bond and Digital Share with event ξ = {ST > K} where K is the strike price could be valued under
the risk-neutral measure with the Black-Scholes formula, that is
D(S, t, T; ξ)
=
EQ[e−
R T
t rsdsIST >K|Ft] = e−r(T −t)N(d2(T −t, Ste(r−q)(T −t), K))
S(S, t, T; ξ)
=
EQ[e−
R T
t rsdsST IST >K|Ft] = Ste−q(T −t)N(d1(T −t, Ste(r−q)(T −t), K))
where
d2(t, x, y) =
1
σ
√
t log x
y −1
2σ
√
t and d1(t, x, y) = d2(t, x, y) + σ
√
t
However, when the volatility of the stock price is stochastic, and more generally when the instantaneous
volatility of the stock price, the spot rate and repo rate are stochastic, one can no-longer use the BlackSholes formula. Under general Markov processes for the model parameters, the conditional probabilities of
the Digital Bond and Digital Share are diﬃcult to solve analytically under any probability measure, and
numerical tools must be used. We are going to show that in the special case where the instantaneous volatility
of the stock price is a deterministic function of time and the stock price, one can obtain analytical solution
to the Digital Bond and the Digital Share.
5
The choice of a volatility model
Since in practise we can only observe a few market prices from standard strikes and maturities with wide or
narrow spreads depending on the liquidity on the market and the volume traded, the market is incomplete
and there are more than one acceptable price (volatility) surface satisfying the no-arbitrage conditions.
Hence, multiple risk-neutral distributions can ﬁt the option prices so that one needs some additional criteria
to generate a unique probability distribution function (pdf). To do so, one can either impose a functional
form to the probability distribution and estimate its parameters using option data, or one can choose nonparametric methods obtaining perfect ﬁt to market data. However, non-parametric methods are less adapted
to the extrapolation problem than the parametric ones, and they tolerate less control over the generated
volatility surface. We are therefore going to concentrate on parametric methods.
5.1
The standard approach
The standard approach is to interpolate and extrapolate market prices or volatilities to complete the market.
Practitioners use the Black-Scholes implied volatility and smooth the prices in a parabolic way to generate
the missing prices. However, direct interpolation and extrapolation of implied volatility surfaces does not
guarantee a resulting smooth risk-neutral density, hence a proper local volatility surface. As described by
Daglish et al.
[2006], a natural choice would be to perform a Taylor expansion up to the second order of
the implied volatility surface around the money forward level. In general, the implied volatility is modeled
with a functional form of the smile around the money forward as
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

Σ(t, St; K, T −t) = f
 t, T −t, XT −t
t
, Y T −t
t
, ZT −t
t
; K

where the processes XT −t
t
, Y T −t
t
and ZT −t
t
represent respectively the at-the-money volatility, the skew and
the curvature of the smile at time t for call options with maturity T i.e. time to maturity T −t. Using
historical data, some authors studied the dynamics of these process. For instance, assuming an OrnsteinUhlenbeck dynamic for the processes Cont et al. [2002] explained the deformation of the volatility surface.
Alternatively, Bloch et al.
[2002] assumed the parameters to be led by the spot process holding the whole
market risk. When it comes to generating a volatility surface, the evaluation time t is ﬁxed and practitioners
estimate one set of parameters X, Y and Z per trading maturities. Then they rely on some interpolation
and extrapolation of parameters in time with no guarantee of satisfying the calendar spread. In the presence
of discrete dividends, it is not an easy task to satisfy the time constraint given by the calendar spread. For
example, we consider the functional form
f(t, T −t, X, Y, Z; K) = X −Y ln
KP(t, T)
St

+ Z

ln
KP(t, T)
St
2
(5.4)
with P(t, T) = e−r(T −t) and X = Σ(t, KP(t, T); KP(t, T), T−t), Y = ∂Σ(t,St;K,T −t)
∂K
and Z = ∂2Σ(t,St;K,T −t)
∂K2
.
Note, whatever the shape we take, the smile needs to be caped and ﬂoored in the lowest and highest strikes
in order to avoid any arbitrage opportunity. If the slope of the smile is to high the implicit pdf can be
negative. Quantitatively speaking, the implied risk-neutral probability density is given by
φ(ST , T, St, t) =
1
ST Σ
p
2π(T −t)
e−1
2 d2
1
 
1 + ST d1
√
T −t ∂Σ
∂K
2
+ S2
T (T −t)Σ
 
∂2Σ
∂K2 −d1
 ∂Σ
∂K
2 √
T −t
!!
with d1 = ln(St/ST )+(r+ 1
2 Σ2)(T −t)
Σ√T −t
. Therefore, if the quantity
∂2Σ
∂K2 −d1
 ∂Σ
∂K
2 √
T −t
is too negative, which happens when the slope of the smile
∂Σ
∂K is to high, the pdf can be negative. This
means that the European call prices are not the result of the expectancy under the risk-neutral measure of
future pay-oﬀand therefore allow for arbitrage opportunities 1.
5.2
The parametric model
We are going to use a parametric representation of the market call prices in order to smooth the data and get
nice probability distribution function (pdf). In order to get a model with a varying number of parameters
to control the level of accuracy, we consider a weighted sum of interpolation functions taken in a parametric
family. We want each function to satisfy the no-free lunch constraints in such way that they are preserved
in the weighted sum.
Several families can satisfy the No-Free-Lunch constraints, for instance a sum of
lognormal distribution, but in order to match a wide variety of volatility surfaces the model has to produce
prices that lead to risk-neutral pdf of the asset prices with a pronounced skew. Since we can always convert
a density into call prices, we can then convert a mixture of normal densities into a linear combination of
Black-Scholes formula, see Brigo et al. [2000]. Therefore, to obtain a pronounced skew we consider a sum of
shifted log-normal distributions, that is, using the Black-Scholes formula with shifted strike (modiﬁed by the
parameters µi(t)) as an interpolation function. In our parametric model, the market option price CM(K, t)
of strike K and maturity t is estimated at time t0 = 0 by the weighted sum
1In reality the slope of the smile can be higher than the one calculated using the risk-neutral measure as the market is
incomplete. However we restrict ourselves to the complete market assumption.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) =
n
X
i=1
ai(t)CallBS(t0, S0, Rt, Pt, K(K, t), t, Σi(t))
(5.5)
where ai(t) for i = 1, .., n are the weights, and K(K, t) = K
′(K, t)(1+µi(t)) with K
′(K, t) = K +Dt. In that
setting Rt = Re(0, t) is the repo factor in the range [0, t], Pt = P(0, t) = e−rt is the zero-coupon bond price,
Ct = C(0, t) = Rt
Pt is the cost of carry and Dt = D(0, t) is the compounded sum of discrete dividends between
[0, t] deﬁned in Section (4.1). The no-arbitrage theory imposes time and space constraints on market prices.
Introducing the time dependent parameters ai(t) and µi(t), the simplest way of ensuring these constraints
is to take the same time dependency for each µ, that is, µi(t) = µif(t, βi). As the pdf of the equity price
should tend toward a single Dirac when t →0, to get control on µi(t) we choose to let the function f(t, x)
tend to 1 when t →+∞, getting
f(t, x) = 1 −
2
1 + (1 + t
x)2
with f
′(t, x) = [1 −f(t, x)]2 1
x(1 + t
x). Moreover, to keep manageable the no-free lunch constraints, we make
the weight ai(t) proportional to
a0
i
f(t,βi) for some constant a0
i > 0 getting the representation
µi(t) = µ0
i f(t, βi) and ai(t) =
a0
i
f(t, βi) × norm
where norm = Pn
i=1
a0
i
f(t,βi). As a result, with seperable functions of time, the no-free lunch constraints
simplify to
a0
i
≥
0
(5.6)
n
X
i=1
a0
i µ0
i
=
0
µ0
i
≥
−1
At last, the no-arbitrage condition with respect to time holds if and only if the total variance ν(K, t) =
Σ2
imp(K, t)t is an increasing function of time t. Since we chose to model directly the square-root of the
average variance, to guarantee the positivity of the local volatility we must verify
Σ2
i (t) + 2Σi(t)t∂tΣi(t) ≥0
In the special case where the user has no information on the term-structure of the implied volatility surface,
we set Σi(t) = di where di > 0. On all the other cases, the user can choose among diﬀerent term-structures
based on his information of the implied volatility surface. To get a general volatility function capable of
generating both an upward hump or a downward one, we consider the function
Σi(t) =
 ai + bi ln (1 + eit)

e−cit + di
where ci > 0, di > 0 and ai ∈R, bi ∈R and ei ∈] −1
t , ∞[. The derivative of the function with respect to
time t is
Σ
′
i(t) =
 −aici + bi
ei
1 + eit −bici ln (1 + eit)

e−cit
and the no-arbitrage constraint must satisfy
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

e−cit
(1 −2tci)
 ai + bi ln (1 + eit)

+ 2tbi
ei
1 + eit

+ di ≥0
Since ai ∈R, at time t = 0 the left hand side of the inequality can becomes negative. Consequently, we must
impose the constraint
ai + di > 0
to get the constraint satisﬁed at t = 0. Further, when t >
1
ci then for ci suﬃciently large the constant di
will dominates
 ai + bi ln (1 + eit)

ensuring positivity of the left hand side. Hence, at time t = 1
ci we must
impose
di ≥
 ai −2bi
ci
ei
1 + ei
ci
+ bi ln (1 + ei
ci
)

e−1
5.3
Computing the Greeks analytically for European options
Market risk management of an option portfolio requires simultaneous real-time transparency of the several
diﬀerent elements that can inﬂuence an option price. Option prices have sensitivities or Greeks to movements
in market data such as the underlying security, the expected volatility of the underlying security, dividends,
the passage of time, and interest rates. Assuming that the dynamics of the spot price with discrete dividends
follow the Spot model described in Section (4.2) with a(t, T) = 1 and b(t, T) = −D(t, T), then our parametric
model in Equation (5.9) corresponds to a weighted sum of Black-Scholes formulas in the Z-space. In that
setting, we can compute analytically the Greeks of the parametric model. The derivative of a call option
price with respect to the spot is
∂
∂S0
CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) =
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t) ∂
∂S0
CallBS(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))
where ˜K(K, t) = P(t0, t)K(K, t) and K(K, t) = K
′(K, t)(1 + µi(t)) and ai(t) =
a0
i
f(t,βi). Diﬀerentiating one
more time the call price with respect to the spot, we get
∂2
∂S2
0
CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) =
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t) ∂2
∂S2
0
CallBS(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))
Diﬀerentiating the call price with respect to the strike, we get
∂
∂K CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) =
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t) ∂
∂˜K
CallBS(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))∂˜K
∂K
(5.7)
where ∂˜
K
∂K = P(t0, t)(1 + µi(t)). Given the derivative of the Black-Scholes formula with respect to the strike
K, that derivative simpliﬁes to
∂
∂K CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) = −
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)P(t0, t)(1 + µi(t))N(di
2(t −t0, x, ˜K(K, t)))
Diﬀerentiating one more time the call price with respect to the strike, we get
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

∂2
∂K2 CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) =
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)
∂2
∂( ˜K)2 CallBS(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))(∂˜K
∂K )2
(5.8)
which we can write in terms of the vega Black-Scholes as
∂2
∂K2 CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) =
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)

P(t0, t)(1+µi(t))
2
1
˜K2(K, t)Σi(t)(t −t0)
V ega( ˜K(K, t), t; Σi(t))
Diﬀerentiating the call price with respect to time t0, we get
∂
∂t0
CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) =
d
dt0
 1
norm

CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t)norm
+
1
norm
 n
X
i=1
d
dt0
ai(t)CallBS(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))
+
n
X
i=1
ai(t) d
dt0
˜K(K, t)∂CallBS
∂˜K
(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))
+
n
X
i=1
ai(t) d
dt0
Σi(t)∂CallBS
∂Σi
(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))
+
n
X
i=1
ai(t)∂CallBS
∂t0
(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))

where
d
dt0
˜K(K, t) =
d
dt0
D(t0, t)P(t0, t)(1 + µi(t)) + rt0 ˜K(K, t) + P(t0, t)(K + D(t0, t)) d
dt0
(1 + µi(t))
with
d
dt0 µi(t) = µ0
i
d
dt0 f(t, βi). Note, when there is no dividends between t0 and t0 + ϵ then the cumulative
dividends term D(t0, t) = Dt does not depend on t0 and the derivative becomes
d
dt0 K(K, t) = rt0 ˜K(K, t) +
P(t0, t)(K + D(t0, t)) d
dt0 (1 + µi(t)). Note, replacing the Greeks of our model in Dupire’s forward Equation
(see Dupire [1994]), we obtain a smooth and robust deterministic local volatility.
5.4
Digital contracts in the parametric model
Given our discrete dividends assumption on the dynamics of the underlying stock in Section (4.1), we should
always consider the modiﬁed strike K
′(K, t) = K + Dt with event ξ = {Zt > K
′} when pricing a Digital
contracts. We are now going to obtain analytical solution to the Digital Bond and the Digital Share in
the special case where the instantaneous volatility of the stock price is a deterministic function of time and
the stock price. Setting the interest rate to zero and multiplying the strike with the discount factor, the
parametric model for a call option price of maturity t becomes
CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) =
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)CallBS(t0, S0, Rt, 1, ˜K(K, t), t, Σi(t))
(5.9)
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

where ˜K(K, t) = P(t0, t)K(K, t) and K(K, t) = K
′(K, t)(1 + µi(t)) and ai(t) =
a0
i
f(t,βi) for i = 1, .., n. As
a result, to each modiﬁed Black-Scholes formula (see Annexe (A.2)) corresponds the event ξi = {Zt > K}.
Given the deﬁnition of the Black-Scholes formula, we can always rewrite the model call price as
CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t)
=
xRe(t0, t)
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)N(di
1(t −t0, x, ˜K(K, t))
−
K
′(K, t)
1
norm
n
X
i=1
aiP(t0, t)(1 + µi(t))N(di
2(t −t0, x, ˜K(K, t)))
Given the derivative of the parametric model with respect to the strike estimated in Equation (5.7), and
combining terms together, the parametric model for a call option becomes
CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) = xRe(t0, t)
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)N(di
1(t−t0, x, ˜K(K, t))+K
′(K, t) ∂
∂K CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t)
Since the Digital Bond can be expressed in terms of a digital option as D(S, t0, t; ξ) = −∂KC(t0, St0, t, K),
its value in the parametric model is
DM(S, t0, t; ξ) =
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)P(t0, t)(1 + µi(t))N(di
2(t −t0, x, ˜K(K, t)))
(5.10)
which we can write as a shifted weighted sum of digital options on a shifted strike
DM(S, t0, t; ξ) =
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)(1 + µi(t))D(S, t0, t; ξi)
Similarly, by analogy to the call price in Equation (4.3), the Digital Share is
SM(S, t0, t; ξ) = xRe(t0, t)
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)N(di
1(t −t0, x, ˜K(K, t))
so that the call option becomes
CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) = SM(S, t0, t; Zt > K
′) −K
′(K, t)DM(S, t0, t; Zt > K
′)
Given
∂
∂d2 N(d2) = xRe(t0,t)
KP (t0,t)
∂
∂d1 N(d1) and dd2
dx =
1
xσ√t−t0 the delta of a Digital option is
∂
∂KS CM(t0, S0, Pt, Rt, Dt; K, t) = −
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)P(t0, t)(1 + µi(t))n(di
2(t −t0, x, ˜K(K, t)))
1
xΣi(t)√t −t0
5.5
Computing the Skew and Curvature analytically
For every model that one can deﬁne, we need to estimate the vector Ψ of model parameters from either
the market prices or their implied volatility quotes. When the parametric model is calibrated to the market
quotes and the optimum vector Ψ∗is obtained, the model call and put prices must equate the market ones.
Since our model can retrieve analytically European prices as well as Digital price we show how to infer
analytically the skew and curvature of the IV surface for all strikes and maturities.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

5.5.1
Computing the Skew
When the parametric model is calibrated to the market quotes and the optimum vector Ψ∗is obtained, the
model Digital Bond in Equation (5.10) must equate the market digital price in Equation (C.16). As a result,
we can infer analytically the skew of the parametric model for the strike K and the maturity t
Skew(K, t) =
1
V ega(K, t; ΣBS(K, t))

−∂
∂K CBS(K, t; ΣBS) −DM(S, t0, t; ξ)

Given the deﬁnition of the Black-Scholes digital option, we get
Skew(K, t) =
1
V ega(K, t; ΣBS(K, t))

DBS(S, t0, t; ξ) −DM(S, t0, t; ξ)

which gives
Skew(K, t) =
1
V ega(K, t; ΣBS(K, t))

DBS(S, t0, t; ξ) −
1
norm
n
X
i=1
ai(t)(1 + µi(t))D(S, t0, t; ξi; Σi))

When the shift terms are set to zero, µi(t) = 0 for i = 1, .., n, the Digital Bond simpliﬁes to
1
norm
Pn
i=1 ai(t)D(S, t0, t; ξ; Σi)
which is a weighted sum of digital option on a GBM. Note, it still has a skew but much less prononced.
5.5.2
Computing the Curvature
When the parametric model is calibrated to the market quotes, the parametric density in Equation (5.8)
must equate the market density in Equation (C.17). From the formula of the convexity of the smile expressed
in prices in Equation (B.15), we can infer analytically the curvature of the parametric model for the strike
K and the maturity t
∂KKΣ(K, t) =
∂KKCM(t0, S0; K, t)
V ega(K, t; ΣBS(K, t)) −
1
K2Σ(K, t)(t −t0)
h
1 + 2Kd1
√t −t0Skew(K, t) + K2d1d2(t −t0)(Skew(K, t))2i
Given the optimum vector Ψ∗of model parameters, we can compute analytically the European call and put
prices for all maturity t and strike K. Inverting the Black-Scholes formula, we recover the implied volatility
surface Σ(K, t). We can then use that surface to compute exactly the skew and curvature of the parametric
IV surface. Alternatively, one can approximate the skew and curvature of the IV surface around the money
by considering the ATM volatility ˆσ = ˆΣ(t) =
1
norm
Pn
i=1 ai(t)Σi(t). As a result, given a volatility function
Σ(K, t) obtained with a parametric function such as a SVI or SABR, one can directly ﬁt our parametric
model to volatilities without inverting the Black-Scoles formula.
6
Modeling statistically the IV surface
Even though the implied volatility surface (IVS) characterises agents belief of future evolution of the stock
price returns, it is evident that today’s market prices do not provide us with the right future anticipations
of the stock price process. This is because the implied volatility surface is neither stationary nor Markovian
but stochastic. We saw earlier that changes of the implied volatility surface have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the value of the option position. For instance, an incorrect estimate of the IV surface and its expected
shifts could lead to a signiﬁcant miss pricing of the options. Further, model based quantitative forecasts can
provide ﬁnancial institutions with a valuable estimate of a future market trend. Hence, in order to perform
statistical analysis of the relationships between points on the IVS, we are left with ﬁnding a way of modeling
dynamically the agents rational anticipations.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

6.1
Existing models of the IVS and their dynamics
We brieﬂy present the work done by Ladokhin [2009] who described a number of representations of the IV
surface and performed a comparison analysis of their dynamics. He discussed and compared several models
of the approximation of the surfaces, as well as several approaches to the dynamics of these surfaces including
diﬀerent types of polynomial ﬁtting as well as a stochastic volatility model. Among the polynomial models
describing the whole volatility surface with one equation are the Cubic model and the Spline model. In the
former the IV is a cubic function of moneyness X = ln K
S (or the time adjusted moneyness X =
1
√τ ln K
S )
and a quadratic function of time to expiry τ
Σ(K, T) = a0 + a1X + a2X2 + a3X3 + a4τ + a5τ 2
where ai for i = 0, .., 5 are parameters to be estimated. Similarly, one can build a Spline model of the
volatility surface as
Σ(K, T) = a0 + a1X + a2X2 + a3τ + a4τ 2 + D
 a5 + a6X + a7X2 + a8τ + a9τ 2
with
D =
 0 if X < 0
1 if X ≥0
together with the constraints
a5 + a6.0 + a7.02 + a8τ + a9τ 2 = 0 , Da6 = 0
for the volatility function to be continuous and diﬀerentiable. Contrary to the polynomial models, stochastic
volatility models such as the SABR model (see Hagan et al. [2002]) or the SVI model (see Gatheral [2006]),
assume some behaviour of the underlying asset and connections with the values of the implied volatility. In
those models the shape of the volatility skew is derived analytically from these assumptions. In the case of
the SABR model, it can either be used as a model for a whole volatility surface or for the skew. Under the
ﬁrst approach, the parameters α, β, ρ and ν are calibrated for all given times to expiration τi for i = 1, 2, ...
In the second approach, one ﬁt a SABR skew for each observed time to expiration, and then interpolate the
values of implied volatility for any arbitrary τ. The piecewise SABR (PSABR) parameters αi, βi, ρi and νi
are calculated separately for each time to expiration τi, and the IV surface is built as a linear approximation
of separate skews.
While a model with a large number of parameters may calibrate well the volatility surface on a given day,
the same model parameters may give poor results on the next day. On the other hand, any risk management
system tries to estimate the future (short term forecast) behaviour of the volatility surface. As a result, one
need a model that accurately ﬁt market prices with stable and robust parameters. Ladokhin [2009] focused
on two diﬀerent approaches to model the dynamics of the IV surfaces, one applicable to the Cubic and the
Spline model and the other used for SABR models. In the ﬁrst approach, the dynamics of the surface is
treated as dynamics of these parameters. To reduce the dimensionality of the problem, he applied Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) to the values of the parameters ai for i = 0, .., n. This is to switch to another
space of the no-correlated factors, that fully describe the dynamic of the implied volatility surface. Since the
ﬁrst few principal components explain most of the variance of the calibrated parameters, the dynamics of
the volatility surface over time is explained by the dynamics of the ﬁrst two principal components modeled
with an Autoregressive moving average model (ARMA). In the second approach, the SABR model already
assumes certain dynamics of the volatility and the underlying asset expressed by a system of stochastic
diﬀerential equations. Consequently, given the calibrated parameters, the spot price can be simulated with
the Monte Carlo method, and for each path, the IV surface generated. The forecast of the implied volatility
surface is an average surface over the simulated paths.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

Strong of these dynamics, Ladokhin
[2009] used the rolling horizon technique to build a 1 and 5 day
forecasts of the volatility skews. Setting N = 100, he used observations from days t−N till t−1 to calibrate
the dynamic models in order to build a forecast of the skew for day t. Then, at time t+1 the horizon is rolled
so that days t −N + 1 till t are used for calibration. An equivalent technique is used for the ﬁve days ahead
forecast. He then tested how the models can hold the volatility skew pattern by performing a static test.
Calibrating the models to observed IV surface at date t −1 or t −5 he calculated the weighted mean square
error (WMSE) between the model results and the IV surface on day t. Cubic and Spline models approximate
the implied volatility surface with the function of a certain form. The Spline model is perhaps, the most
eﬀective to minimise the ﬁtting error. Good performance of the dynamic version of the Spline model is an
empirical evidence of the dependence of the dynamics of the surface of two principal components. Both of
these models use much less parameters, than the PSABR model. Even though the SABR and the PSABR
assume a certain model for the joint dynamics of the volatility and the underlying asset, their ﬁtting results
have a higher error than the polynomial models. Nonetheless, the PSABR tends to model the skew rather
eﬀectively in case of insuﬃcient or bad data. Because these models assume some shape of the IV surface,
they are predisposed to give a more theoretical shape of the skew resulting in lower relative forecasting
error. As a result, models relating prices in time and space perform better on an incomplete market or with
missing data. To conclude, no single method exhibits superior accuracy in the analysis of every data set.
Some methods perform better for certain underlying assets, while other methods are more suitable for the
other.
6.2
Evolving the IV surface
Having deﬁned in Section (5.2) a consistent model with a global ﬁt to prices under constraints, prices can
now be generated such that the No-Dominance principle is preserved, and one can safely assess relative value
between them. Bloch [2010] showed that the dynamics implied by the single parametric model for the entire
volatility surface in Equation (5.9) were those of a mixture diﬀusion process associated to an uncertainvolatility model. That is, similarly to the SABR models, our model already assumes some dynamics of
the volatility and the underlying asset expressed by a system of stochastic diﬀerential equations. In that
model, the instantaneous volatility being a deterministic function of the spot price and time, we can simulate
the underlying process with a local volatility model. However, the implied volatility surface being neither
stationary nor Markovian but stochastic, we are going to combine the two diﬀerent approaches to model
the dynamics of the IV surfaces described in Section (6.1) by providing memory to the parameters of our
model. Hence, we now consider the implied volatility surface to be a stochastic process driving the option
prices and choose to model its dynamics in its full term and strike structure. Option prices deriving their
values from an underlying security, it is natural to use mathematical tools to infer their dynamics from that
of the underlying stock process. One approach is to model the implied volatility with dynamics based on
a statistical analysis of its behaviour through time. It naturally leads us to model the stock price process
discreetly with Markov chains. We impose that future smile surfaces should be compatible with today’s prices
of calls and puts. Formalising the Kolmogorov-Compatibility condition, we impose that the future density
is actually a conditional density. Knowing that when the number of ﬁxing dates in a model is ﬁnite there is
an inﬁnity of conditional densities, we choose to satisfy this inﬁnity of solution by giving the forward smile
a shape consistent with its historical evolution. Following Bloch et al. [2003], we assume that the volatility
surface is dynamically modiﬁed according to the stock price realisations. Having related the stock price
level to the implied volatility surface, we use their respective historic evolution to characterise the transition
probabilities, that is, the conditional densities. A statistical technique is used to regress the observed implied
smile against the realised stock level. Then from the implied marginal distributions observed on the market,
we infer the joint distributions which are consistent with the relationship between implied volatility and
stock price level over time and satisfy the AOA constraint. It implies that European call prices are not
time-dependent, that is, do not depend on current time but are stock dependent. Therefore, the current
stock evolution directly inﬂuences its future increment which means that, given the stock price St1 at time
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

t1, the conditional density φ(., T, St1, t1) is known.
6.3
The forward IV surface
In order to satisfy the Kolmogorov probability, that is, assure that the forward smile implies a compatible
conditional pdf, the model must ﬁt European call prices observed at evaluation time t0. In continuous time
models with volatility a deterministic function of time and stock price such as the Dupire model, the volatility
surface is assumed Markovian and stationary, giving a unique solution to the forward volatility. However the
prices of forward start call options given by Dupire’s model are lower than the ones observed in the market.
In view of getting higher forward smile, practitioners either add a stochastic process into the local volatility
or combine the local volatility with a jump process. It means that there is a risk attached to such products
which is not taken into account in today’s information. Bloch et al. [2003] showed that this risk translated
into a forward volatility being higher than the spot volatility. Consequently, in order to price correctly a
forward start option, a model must be calibrated to some kind of evolution of the implied volatility surface
in such a way that the forward volatility that we get is higher than today’s volatility. Knowing that when
the number of ﬁxing dates in a model is ﬁnite there is an inﬁnity of conditional densities, we choose to satisfy
this inﬁnity of solution by giving the forward smile a shape consistent with its historical evolution. That is,
the past evolution of the implied smile regressed against its stock price level would help explaining its future
dynamics. Therefore, we are going to deﬁne a shape for the volatility surface together with its dynamics by
using a statistical method, such that we can price vanilla options and then deduce a proper forward smile
for the pricing of forward start options.
6.4
Statistical Dynamics
6.4.1
Computing the smile parameters
In this section, we are going to model the implied volatility Σ with dynamics based on a statistical analysis
of its behaviour through time. We ﬁrst need to infer a shape of the volatility surface in accordance with
market observable data. For the sake of clarity we will deal with the polynomial deﬁned in Equation (5.4)
which is a special case of the Spline model presented in Section (6.1). Obviously the factor XT −t
t
is set equal
to the observed at-the-money volatility i.e.
XT −t
t
= Σ(t, St; St, T −t)
Then, there exists several methods to ﬁt the skew factor Y T −t
t
and the curvature factor ZT −t
t
. The simplest
method, based on ﬁnite diﬀerences, leads to computing Y T −t
t
and ZT −t
t
such that
Y T −t
t
=
−Σ(t, St; K+, T −t) −Σ(t, St; K−, T −t)
K+ −K−
ZT −t
t
=
Σ(t, St; K+, T −t) + Σ(t, St; K−, T −t) −2Σ(t, St; St, T −t)

K+−K−
2
2
for some strikes K−and K+ close enough to the money and such that K−< St < K+. One possible
setting would be to take K−= 0.8St and K+ = 1.2St. A much better approach, satisfying the no-arbitrage
principle, consists in considering the properties of our parametric model, and directly use the analytical skew
and curvature deﬁned in Section (5.5). That is, we project the complexity of the single parametric model in
Equation (5.9) into a simpliﬁed version of the Spline model.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

6.4.2
Providing some dynamics
We are now going to provide these parameters with some dynamics. The fundamental idea (c.f. Bloch et al.
[2002]) is to assume that these three parameters are driven by the spot process St, for the spot process holds
the whole market risk. That is, the parameters of our model have memory given by the realised trajectory
of the spot price. As such, they are now factors expressed as
XT −t
t
≡
XT −t
t
(St)
Y T −t
t
≡
Y T −t
t
(St)
ZT −t
t
≡
ZT −t
t
(St)
and we need to infer a shape for the spot functions XT −t
t
(St), Y T −t
t
(St) and ZT −t
t
(St). Assuming a continuum
of maturities, we consider that the maturity eﬀect, as traders are used to specify it, is proportional to
1
(T −t)θ
for some parameter θ. Plotting XT −t
t
, Y T −t
t
and ZT −t
t
against St on a window of historical data, we consider
the following shape
XT −t
t
=
exp(ax+bxSt+εx
t )
(T −t)θx
,
Y T −t
t
=
exp(ay+bySt+εy
t )
(T −t)θy
,
ZT −t
t
=
exp(az+bzSt+εz
t )
(T −t)θz
.
which we rewrite as
log(XT −t
t
)
=
ax + bxSt −θx log(T −t) + εx
t ,
log(Y T −t
t
)
=
ay + bySt −θy log(T −t) + εy
t ,
log(ZT −t
t
)
=
az + bzSt −θz log(T −t) + εz
t .
At this point we need to estimate the model parameters. A ﬁrst and common method would consist in
computing the ordinary least squares (OLS) i.e. minimising the L2(R) norm of residuals. Note, when using
the OLS method it implicitly means that we suppose that the processes εx
t , εy
t and εz
t are white noises and
then that an hexogen perturbation of the stock has no consequence on the future option values. One need to
perform the generalized Durbin-Watson tests on the data to see if the hypothesis for white noise is accepted
or reject. In the case where it is rejected, it is not desirable to use ordinary regression analysis for the data
we are dealing with since the assumptions on which the classical linear regression model is based will be
obviously violated.
Violation of the independent errors assumption has three important consequences for ordinary regression.
First, statistical tests of the signiﬁcance of the parameters and the conﬁdence limits for the predicted values
are not correct. Second, the estimates of the regression coeﬃcients are not as eﬃcient as they would be if the
autocorrelation were taken into account. Third, since the ordinary regression residuals are not independent,
they contain information that can be used to improve the prediction of future values. One way forward is
to introduce some dynamics on the errors in order to capture this eﬀect.
We now have a consistent and relevant model to explain the dynamics of the volatility surface over
time. Tests need to be performed to measure the capability of the model to forecast the volatility ATM, the
skew and the curve of the volatility smile. To do so, we can reproduce the tests presented in Section (6.1).
For instance, one can perform a daily forecast moving test also called rolling horizon technique. Starting
from an initial historical table of 300 observations (out of 368), we use the model calibrated to these 300
observations to forecast the volatility parameters (ATM, skew, curve) over the next ﬁve days. We then
compare these forecasted values to the market data by computing the mean over the ﬁve days of the relative
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

errors 2 expressed in percentage. Then we add one day to the historical data and start again. We repeat
the operation ten times (till we have an historical basis with 309 observations) and give the results for the
ten iterations. We can also show how the model forecast the volatility ATM on a window of time given that
it was calibrated to market data on a previous window of time. If the model is stable over time it will not
need to be recalibrated too often.
One application of our statistical deterministic implied volatility model is to run a computer program
generating theoretical value to option prices within a range of stock prices. Any time an option pair is out
of line with the theoretical model, one can buy or sell it to realise a proﬁt.
7
Conclusion
Our goal was to devise a consistent volatility model to assess relative value between option prices, and to
provide the implied volatility surface with general dynamics. We described a single parametric model for
the entire volatility surface with interpolation and extrapolation technique generating a smooth and robust
implied volatility surface without arbitrage in space and time. Marking option prices on indices and single
stocks, one can safely use the model to devise relative value trading strategies. Greeks and stress scenarios
are calculated analytically in the parametric model without recalibration of the model parameters. Further,
getting analytical solutions to Digital options we can use them to recover analytically the Skew and Curvature
of the IV surface for all strikes and maturities. To perform statistical analysis of the relationships between
points on the IV surface we modeled dynamically the agents belief of future evolution of the stock price
returns. Using the Skew and Curvature inferred from our model, we introduced a possible shape for the
volatility surface by linking its future evolution to an observable stochastic process and by adding noises.
Based on empirical results showing the existence of a strong link between the implied volatility surface and
the spot level over time, we took the spot level as driving factor. It implied that the volatility surface was
dynamically modiﬁed according to the realisation of stock prices which is a way of modeling dynamically
the agents rational anticipations. Having related the stock price level to the volatility surface, we used the
historic evolution of the implied volatility surface to characterise the transition probabilities, that is, the
conditional densities. This hypothesis implies that European call prices are not time-dependent, that is,
do not depend on current time but are stock dependent. Therefore, the current stock evolution directly
inﬂuences its future increment which means that, given the stock price at a future time, the conditional
density is known.
2100 ∗forecasted value-realised value
realised value
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

Annexes
A
The Black-Scholes formula
A.1
Some Greeks
We describe a few Greeks in the Black-Scholes formula that will be used later on to devise our parametric
model. The option in the Black-Scholes model is hedged with a portfolio containing
∆(t, St) = ∂xCBS(t, St, K, T) = e−q(T −t)N(d1(T −t, Ste(r−q)(T −t), K))
(A.11)
stocks. Similarly, the price of a put option is given by
PBS(t, x, K, T)
=
−xe−q(T −t)N(−d1(T −t, xe(r−q)(T −t), K)) + Ke−r(T −t)N(−d2(T −t, xe(r−q)(T −t), K))
=
Ke−r(T −t)N(d1(T −t, K, xe(r−q)(T −t))) −xe−q(T −t)N(d2(T −t, K, xe(r−q)(T −t)))
with delta
∆(t, St)
=
∂xPBS(t, St, K, T) = −e−q(T −t)N(−d1(T −t, Ste(r−q)(T −t), K))
=
−e−q(T −t)N(d2(T −t, K, Ste(r−q)(T −t)))
since
d2(t, x, y, σ2) = −d2(t, y, x, σ2)
The vega in the Black-Scholes model is
V ega = xRe(t, T)
√
T −tn(d1)
where n(x) =
∂
∂xN(x) and N
′′(x) = −xn(x).
Also, we have the limit cases lim(T −t)→0 V ega = 0 and
lim(T −t)→∞V ega = 0. Diﬀerentiating one more time the Vega with respect to volatility which is called the
Volga, and using the relations dd1
dσ = −1
σd2 or dd2
dσ = −1
σd1, we get
∂
∂σ V ega = V olga = xRe(t, T)
√
T −t 1
σ d1d2n(d1) = 1
σ d1d2V ega
(A.12)
Again, diﬀerentiating the Volga with respect to volatility, we get
∂
∂σ V olga =
 −d1d2 −d2
2 −d2
1 + d2
1d2
2
 1
σ2 V ega
Now we diﬀerentiate the Vega with respect to the strike K, getting
∂
∂K V ega =
d1
Kσ
√
T −tV ega
which we diﬀerentiate one more time with respect to the strike, getting
∂2
∂K2 V ega =
d1d2
K2σ2(T −t)V ega −
1
K2σ2(T −t)V ega =
(d1d2 −1)
K2σ2(T −t)V ega
To conclude, we need to diﬀerentiate the Vega with respect to maturity T, getting
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

∂
∂T V ega = −q(T)V ega +
1
2(T −t)V ega + d1
 1
2(T −t)d2 −(r(T) −q(T))
σ
√
T −t

V ega
We now diﬀerentiate the call price with respect to the stike
∂
∂K CBS(t, x, K, T) = −P(t, T)N(d2(T −t, x, K))
Diﬀerentiating the call price twice with respect to the strike we get
∂2
∂K2 CBS(t, x, K, T) =
P(t, T)
Kσ
√
T −tn(d2(T −t, x, k))
which we rewrite as
∂2
∂K2 CBS(t, x, K, T) =
xRe(t, T)
K2σ
√
T −tn(d1(T −t, x, k)) =
1
K2σ(T −t)V ega(K, T; σ)
Setting x = St, we diﬀerentiate the call price with respect to maturity T getting
∂
∂T CBS(t, St, K, T) =
σ
2(T −t)V ega + rT KP(t, T)N(d2) −qT xRe(t, T)N(d1)
We deﬁne XBS(t, St, K, T) as
XBS(t, St, K, T) =
σ
2(T −t)V ega + rT KP(t, T)N(d2)
which is always positive, and rewrite the above derivative as
∂
∂T CBS(t, St, K, T) = XBS(t, St, K, T) −qT xRe(t, T)N(d1)
Similarly, the derivative of the put price with respect to maturity T is
∂
∂T PBS(t, St, K, T) = −
σ
2(T −t)V ega + rT KP(t, T)N(d1) −qT xRe(t, T)N(d2)
Since dτ
dt = −1 where τ = T −t, the derivative of the price with respect to time t is given by ∂CBS(t,St,K,T )
∂τ
dτ
dt .
From the relation
rtSt∆(t, St) −rtCBS(t, St, K, T) = rtKP(t, T)N(d2)
the Theta becomes
∂
∂tCBS(t, St, K, T) = −
σ
2(T −t)V ega −rtx∆(t, St) + rtCBS(t, St, K, T) + qtxRe(t, T)N(d1)
A.2
Pricing the modiﬁed Black-Scholes call option
Given the stock price (St)t∈[0,T ], the price of the modiﬁed Black-Scholes call option with strike K, maturity
T and shift µT under the risk-neutral probability measure Q is
Ct0
=
EQ[e−
R T
t0 rsds(ST −K(1 + µT ))+|Ft0]
=
EQ[e−
R T
t0 rsdsST I{ST >K}|Ft0] −KEQ[e−
R T
t0 rsdsI{ST >K}|Ft0]
(A.13)
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

where K = K(1 + µT ). Assuming a deterministic convenience yield, we let Xt = StD(t, T) be the present
value of the stock price ST seen at time t, where D(t, T) = γ(t)
γ(T ) and such that when t = T we get XT = ST .
Hence, in the ﬁrst expectation of the call price, we can take the process Xt as Numeraire with the density
ZX(t, T) = XT β(t)
β(T )Xt , and since XT = ST we can re-express the ﬁrst expectation term as
EQ[β(t0)
β(T) XT I{XT >K}|Ft0] = Xt0EQ[ZX(T)I{XT >K}|Ft0]
while in the second expectation we take the bond as Numeraire with density ZP (t) =
P (t,T )
β(t)P (t0,T ). Hence, we
can re-write the call price as
Ct0(K, T)
=
X0EQ[ZX(T)Iξ|Ft0] −KP(t0, T)EQ[ZP (T)Iξ|Ft0]
=
X0P X(XT > K) −KP(t0, T)P T (XT > K)
where
ξ = {XT > K}
Since XT = F(T, T) where F(t, T) =
Xt
P (t,T ) and since F(t, T) is a martingale under PT and
1
F (t,T ) is a
martingale under PX, the call price becomes
C(t0; K, T)
=
Xt0P X(F(T, T) > K) −KP(t0, T)P T (F(T, T) > K)
=
Xt0P X(
1
F(T, T) < 1
K ) −KP(t0, T)P T (F(T, T) > K)
Expanding the solution of the forward price, we get
C(t0; K, T)
=
Xt0P X(−1
2σ2
F (T −t0) + σF
p
(T −t0)y < log F(t0, T)
K
)
−
KP(t0, T)P T (−1
2σ2
F (T −t0) + σF
p
(T −t0)y > log
K
F(t0, T))
=
St0D(t0, T)N(d1) −KP(t0, T)N(d2)
where
d1 =
1
σF
p
(T −t0)
log F(t0, T)
K
+ 1
2σF
p
(T −t0) and d2 = d1 −σF
p
(T −t0)
from symmetry of the Brownian motion. Similarly to the displaced diﬀusion model, the present model is
capable of generating asymmetric distribution to recover the market implied skew by using the standard
Black-Scholes formula with appropriate input parameters.
Assumption A.1 We assume that we can approximate the modiﬁed Black-Scholes price by
Y = Y (0) + Z + H
(A.14)
where Y (0) = CBS(t, x, K, T; σ) with σ = I0(t, T), and such that Z and H account respectively for the skew
and the curvature.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

To do, so we must express the modiﬁed Black-Scholes price in term of the Black-Scholes price plus some
extra terms
C(t0; K, T) = St0D(0, T)N(d1) −KP(t0, T)N(d2) −KµT P(t0, T)N(d2)
Expanding the d1 term, we get
d1 = d1 −
1
σF
p
(T −t0)
log (1 + µT )
so that the modiﬁed Black-Scholes price becomes
C(t0; K, T)
=
St0D(0, T)N
 d1 −
1
σF
p
(T −t0)
log (1 + µT )

−KP(t0, T)N
 d2 −
1
σF
p
(T −t0)
log (1 + µT )

−
KµT P(t0, T)N(d2)
B
Expressing the convexity of the smile in prices
The implied volatility being a function of the strike K and the maturity T, we use the chain rule to express
the derivatives of the market prices in terms of the Black-Scholes Greeks
∂T C(t, St, K, T) = ∂T CBS(t, St, K, T) + ∂ΣCBS(t, St, K, T)∂T Σ(T, K)
∂KC(t, St, K, T) = ∂KCBS(t, St, K, T) + ∂ΣCBS(t, St, K, T)∂KΣ(T, K)
∂KKC(t, St, K, T) = ∂KKCBS(t, St, K, T) + 2∂ΣKCBS(t, St, K, T)∂KΣ(T, K) + ∂ΣCBS(t, St, K, T)∂KKΣ(T, K)
+
∂ΣΣCBS(t, St, K, T)(∂KΣ(T, K))2
Concentrating on the density, we get
∂KKC(t, St, T, K) =
1
K2Σ(T, K)(T −t)V ega(K, T) + 2∂ΣKCBS(t, St, K, T)∂KΣ(T, K)
+
∂ΣCBS(t, St, K, T)∂KKΣ(T, K) + ∂ΣΣCBS(t, St, K, T)(∂KΣ(T, K))2
where V ega(K, T) is the BS vega with volatility Σ(K, T).
Using the Black-Scholes Greeks, the density
becomes
∂KKC(t, St, T, K) =
1
K2Σ(T, K)(T −t)V ega(K, T) +
2d1
KΣ(T, K)
√
T −tV ega(K, T)∂KΣ(T, K)
+
∂ΣCBS(t, St, K, T)∂KKΣ(T, K) +
1
Σ(T, K)d1d2V ega(K, T)(∂KΣ(T, K))2
We multiply by K2
2
and factorise, getting
K2
2 ∂KKC(t, St, T, K) = V ega(K, T)
2

1
Σ(T, K)(T −t) + K
2d1
Σ(T, K)
√
T −t∂KΣ(T, K)
+
K2∂KKΣ(T, K) + K2
d1d2
Σ(T, K)(∂KΣ(T, K))2
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

which we can write as
V ega(K, T)
2Σ(T, K)(T −t)
h
1+Σ(T, K)(T−t)K2
2d1
KΣ(T, K)
√
T −t∂KΣ(T, K)+∂KKΣ(T, K)+
d1d2
Σ(T, K)(∂KΣ(T, K))2i
or
K2
2 ∂KKC(t, St, T, K) =
V ega(K, T)
2Σ(T, K)(T −t)
h
1 + 2Kd1
√
T −t∂KΣ(K, T) + K2d1d2(T −t)(∂KΣ(K, T))2 + K2Σ(K, T)(T −t)∂KKΣ(K, T)
i
Rearranging, we get the convexity of the smile expressed in prices as
∂KKΣ(K, T) =
(B.15)
∂KKC(t, St, T, K)
V ega(K, T)
−
1
K2Σ(T, K)(T −t)
h
1 + 2Kd1
√
T −t∂KΣ(K, T) + K2d1d2(T −t)(∂KΣ(K, T))2i
C
Pricing exotic options
C.1
The density
For all positive or bounded function h we have
E[h(Sx
t )] =
Z
h(y)φ(t, x, y)dy
where φ(t, x, y) is the density function of St. In the special case where St follow a GBM we get
φµ,σ2(t, x, y)
=
1
σy
√
2πte−1
2 d2(t,xeµt,y)2
d2(t, x, y)
=
1
σ
√
t log x
y −1
2σ
√
t
where ν2t = σ2t is the total variance.
C.2
The digital option
Given the stock price (St)t≥0, a Digital option D(K, T) for strike K and maturity T pays $1 when the stock
price ST is greater than the strike K, and zero otherwise. The price of the Digital option is
D(K, T) =
lim
∆K→0
C(K, T) −C(K + ∆K, T)
∆K
= −∂
∂K C(K, T)
Given C(K, T) = CBS(K, T; ΣBS(K, T)) where ΣBS(K, T) is the BS implied volatility for strike K and
maturity T, and using the chain rule, the Digital option becomes
D(K, T) = −∂
∂K CBS(K, T; ΣBS(K, T)) = −∂
∂K CBS(K, T; ΣBS) −∂
∂ΣCBS(K, T; Σ(K, T)) ∂
∂K Σ(K, T)
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

We can express the Digital option in terms of the Vega and the Skew as
D(K, T) = −∂
∂K CBS(K, T; ΣBS) −V ega(K, T)Skew(K, T)
(C.16)
where V ega(K, T; ΣBS(K, T)) is the Black-Scholes vega for the strike K and maturity T, and ∂KCBS(K, T; ΣBS)
is the BS digital price for the volatility ΣBS(K, T).
In the special case where r = q = 0, T = 1 and
for S0 = 100 and K = 100, given a skew of 2.5% per 10% change in the strike and an ATM volatility
ΣAT M = 25% we get
D(100, 1)
=
N[−ΣAT M
2
] −S0n[ΣAT M
2
]−0.025
0.1S0
≈
0.45 + 0.25 × 4 = 0.55
Ignoring the skew, the price is 45% of notional which is signiﬁcantly lower than 55% of notional when the
skew is included.
C.3
The Butterﬂy option
Assuming that the volatility surface has been constructed from European option prices, we consider a
butterﬂy strategy centered at K where we are long a call option with strike K −∆K, long a call option
with strike K + ∆K, and short two call options with strike K. The value of the butterﬂy for strike K and
maturity T is
B(t0, K, T) = C(K −∆K, T) −2C(K, T) + C(K + ∆K, T) ≈P(t0, T)φ(t0; K, T)(∆K)2
where φ(t0; K, T) is the probability density function (PDF) of ST evaluated at strike K. As a result, we
have
φ(t0; K, T) ≈
1
P(t0, T)
C(K −∆K, T) −2C(K, T) + C(K + ∆K, T)
(∆K)2
and letting ∆K →0, the density becomes
φ(t0; T, K) =
1
P(t0, T)
∂2
∂K2 C(K, T)
(C.17)
Hence, for any time T one can recover the marginal risk-neutral distribution of the stock price from the
volatility surface. However, it tells us nothing about the joint distribution of the stock price at multiple
times T1, .., Tn. This is because the volatility surface is constructed from European options prices which only
depend on the marginal distribution of ST .
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

References
[2001]
Alexander C., Market models - a guide to ﬁnancial data analysis, John Wiley and Sons, New York.
[2006]
Arisoy Y.E.,
Altay-Salih A. and
Akdeniz L., Is volatility risk priced in the securities market?
Evidence from S&P 500 index options. Working Paper, Bilkent University, Faculty of Business Administration.
[1997] Bakshi G., Cao C. and Chen Z., Empirical performance of alternative option pricing models, Journal
of Finance, 52 (5), pp 2003–2049.
[2003]
Bakshi G., and Kapadia N., Delta-hedged gains and the negative market volatility risk premium.
Review of Financial Studies, 16, pp 527–566.
[2000]
Bates D., Post-87 crash fears in the S & P 500 futures option market. Journal of Econometrics, 94,
181-238.
[2000] Bekaert G., Wu G., Asymmetric volatility and risk in equity markets. The Review of Financial Studies,
13, No. 1: 1–42.
[2000]
Bellamy N.,
Jeanblanc M., Incompleteness of markets driven by a mixed diﬀusion. Finance and
Stochastics, 4, Number 2.
[2001] Beneder R., Vorst T., Options on dividends paying stocks. International Conference on Mathematical
Finance, Shanghai.
[2004]
Bergenthum J. and Ruschendorf L., Comparison of option prices in semimartingale models, University of Freiburg, Eckerstr.
[1973]
Black F., and Scholes M., The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of Political Economics, 81, 637–659.
[2002]
Bloch D., Miralles P., Statistical dynamics of the smile. Technical Report, DrKW.
[2003]
Bloch D., Aube JD., A statistical deterministic implied volatility model. Technical Report, Credit
Lyonnais.
[2010]
Bloch D., A practical guide to implied and local volatility. Working Paper, Mizuho Securities.
[2011] Bloch D., and Coello Coello C.A., Smiling at evolution. Applied Soft Computing, 11 (8), pp. 5724–5734.
[2004]
Blyth S., Practical relative-value volatility trading. Risk, 5, pp. 91–96.
[2003]
Bos R., Gairat A. and Shepeleva A., Dealing with discrete dividends. Risk, January, pp 109–112.
[1988]
Brenner M.,
Subrahmanyan M.G., A simple formula to compute the implied standard deviation.
Financial Analysts Journal, 44, No. 5, 80–83
[2000]
Brigo V, Mercurio F., A mixed-up smile, Risk, September, pp 123–126.
[2008] Buehler H., Volatility and dividends: Volatility modelling with cash dividends and simple credit risk.
Working Paper, Institut fur Mathematik, MA 7-4, 10623 Berlin, Germany.
[2011]
Coleman T.F., Li Y. and Wang c., Stable local volatility function calibration using spline kernel.
Working Paper, University of Waterloo, May.
[2002]
Cont R., da Fonseca J., Dynamics of implied volatility surfaces. Quantitative Finance, 2, 45–60.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

[2002]
Cont R., Tankov P., Calibration of jump-diﬀusion option-pricing models : a robust non-parametric
approach. CMAP, 42, September.
[2005]
Cont R., Model uncertainty and its impact on the pricing of derivative instruments. CMAP, Ecole
Polytechnique, F-91128 Palaiseau, France.
[1996]
Corrado C.J., Miller,Jr. T.W., A note on a simple, accurate formula to compute implied standard
deviations. Journal of Banking and Finance, 20, p 595–603.
[1976]
Cox J.C. and
Ross S.A., The valuation of options for alternative stochastic processes, Journal of
Financial Economics, 3 (January-March), 145-166.
[2006] Daglish T., Hull J. and Suo W., Volatility surfaces: Theory, rules of thumb and empirical evidence.
Working Paper, August.
[1998]
Dempster A., Logicist statistics I. Models and modelling. Statistical Science, 13, pp. 248–276.
[1999]
Derman E., Regimes of volatility. Risk, 7 (2).
[1991]
Detemple J., and Selden L., A general equilibrium analysis of option and stock market interactions.
International Economic Review, 32, pp 279–303.
[1994]
Dupire B., Pricing with a smile. Risk, 7, pp. 18–20.
[1997]
El Karoui N., Modeles stochastiques de taux d’interet, Laboratoire de Probabilites, Universite de
Paris 6.
[1998]
ElKaroui N., Jeanblanc M. and Shreve S., Robustness of the BS formula, Mathematical Finance, 8,
93–126.
[2005] Fengler M.R., Semiparametric modeling of implied volatility, Springer Finance, Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg.
[2009]
Fengler M.R., Arbitrage-free smoothing of the implied volatility surface. Quantitative Finance, 9 (4),
pp. 417–428.
[2010]
Fengler M.R., Option data and modeling BSM implied volatility. Working Paper, University of St.
Gallen.
[1989]
Figlewski S., What does an option pricing model tell us about option prices?
Financial Analysts
Journal, 45: 12–15.
[1999]
Gatheral J., The volatility skew: Arbitrage constraints and asymptotic behaviour. Merrill Lynch.
[2006] Gatheral J., The volatility surface: A practitioner’s guide, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
[2002]
Hagan P.S.,
Kumar D.,
Lesniewski A.S. and
Woodward D.E., Managing smile risk. Wilmott
Magazine, September, 84–108.
[2003] Hentschel L., Errors in implied volatility estimation. Chapter 3 of PhD thesis ”Caveat invertor: Errors
in implied volatility estimation”, Simon School, University of Rochester.
[1987] Hull J., and White A., The pricing of options on assets with stochastic volatilities. Journal of Finance,
42 (2), 281-300.
[2011]
Hutchinson D., Relative value concepts in volatility. CBOE Risk Management Conference, Dana
Point, CA.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101

[1998] Ingersoll J.E., Approximating american options and other ﬁnancial contracts using barrier derivatives,
Journal of Computational Finance, 2 (Fall), 85-112.
[1996]
Jackwerth J.C., Rubinstein M., Recovering probability distributions from option prices. Journal of
Finance, 51, 1611–1631.
[2004]
Kahal´e N., An arbitrage-free interpolation of volatilities. Risk, 17 (5), pp. 102–106.
[2009] Kohler M., A review on regression-based Monte Carlo methods for pricing American options. Working
Paper, Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt.
[2009]
Ladokhin S., Volatility modeling in ﬁnancial markets. Master Thesis, VU University Amsterdam.
[2005]
Lapeyre B., Sulem A. and Talay D., Simulation of ﬁnancial models : mathematical foundation and
applications, Working Paper, October.
[2003] Lettau M. and Ludvigson S., Measuring and modeling variation in the risk return tradeoﬀ. Handbook
of Financial Econometrics, forthcoming.
[1997]
Malz A., Estimating the probability distribution of the future exchange rate from option prices.
Journal of Derivatives, Winter, pp 18–36.
[1997]
Melick W.,
Thomas C., Recovering an asset’s implied pdf from option prices: An application to
crude oil during the Gulf war. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 32, (1), 91–115.
[2003]
Novales A. and
Lafuente J.A., Optimal hedging under departures from cost-of-carry valuation :
evidence from the spanish stock index futures market. Journal of Banking and Finance, 27, 1053-1078.
[2002]
Overhaus M., Ferraris A., Knudsen T., Milward R., Nguyen-Ngoc L., Schindlmayr G., Equity
derivatives. Theory and Application John Wiley & Sons, New York.
[2004]
Rebonato R., Cardoso M.T., Unconstrained ﬁtting of implied volatility surfaces using a mixture of
normals, Working Paper, QUARC and Oxford University, July 6.
[2004]
Shreve S.E., Stochastic calculus for ﬁnance II, Continuous-time models. Springer Finance, Textbook,
NY, USA.
[2003] Simpson J., Currency options and volatility. Goldman Sachs Working Paper, Chapter 11, Siegel M.J.
at Stern NYU.
[2000]
Tankov P., GRM smile model, Rapport de stage de ﬁn d’etude de l’X.
[2005]
Tankov P., Calibration de modeles et couverture de produits derives, Working Paper, Universite
Paris VII.
[2004]
Wang Y., Yin H. and Qi L., No-arbitrage interpolation of the option price function and its reformation, Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 120 (3), 627–649.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2143101
