Graphical Abstract
Self-Improving Alpha Mining for Quantitative Trading via Multi-Agent Large Language
Models with Knowledge Base Accumulation
Minh-Son Vu, The-Trung Pham, Hong-Viet Tran
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Highlights
Self-Improving Alpha Mining for Quantitative Trading via Multi-Agent Large Language
Models with Knowledge Base Accumulation
Minh-Son Vu, The-Trung Pham, Hong-Viet Tran
• First self-improving alpha mining system based on Vietnamese stock market data.
• Multi-agent framework with nested inner and outer loops refines alpha quality.
• Integrates WorldQuant 101 Formulaic Alphas as a structured retrieval prior.
• Evaluates discovered alphas on Vietnamese equity market data using IC, Sharpe ratio, and win-rate metrics.
• Achieves mean information coefficient of 0.04 and Sharpe ratio of 2.41.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining for Quantitative Trading via
Multi-Agent Large Language Models with Knowledge Base
Accumulation⋆
Minh-Son Vua, The-Trung Phama and Hong-Viet Trana,∗
a Institute for Artificial Intelligence, University of Engineering and Technology, Vietnam National University , Hanoi, Vietnam
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Large Language Models
Quantitative Trading
Alpha Mining
Knowledge Base
Multi-Agent Systems
Abstract
Quantitative trading strategies depend on discovering novel alpha factors that capture market
inefficiencies, yet traditional approaches rely on manual feature engineering, which is timeconsuming and requires substantial domain expertise. This paper proposes an automated framework that leverages large language models (LLMs) to systematically generate, refine, and
evaluate trading alpha strategies through a multi-agent pipeline comprising a WriterAgent,
JudgeAgent, and BacktestEngine, organized in a nested-loop architecture. The key contribution of this work is the systematic integration of WorldQuant 101 Formulaic Alphas as
a structured knowledge prior, rooted in proven formulaic patterns rather than unconstrained
free-form synthesis. This design significantly narrows the search space, reduces invalid code
generation, and accelerates convergence of the refinement loop. Experiments on Vietnamese
stock market data demonstrate that the proposed framework consistently generates alpha factors
with statistically significant Information Coefficient (IC) values and positive Sharpe ratios
within a short generation time. Furthermore, the incorporation of WorldQuant 101 Formulaic
Alphas consistently outperforms unconstrained LLM-based generation in both alpha quality
and convergence efficiency, establishing a scalable, robust, and domain-grounded approach for
automated alpha mining.
1. Introduction
The discovery of profitable trading strategies in financial markets is fundamentally a problem of finding patterns
that exploit market inefficiencies. In quantitative trading, an alpha factor (or alpha) is a quantitative signal derived
from market data that generates trading returns uncorrelated with systematic market risk. Identifying novel alphas
is a labor-intensive process that requires deep understanding of market mechanics, domain expertise, and extensive
experimentation with feature combinations and parameter tuning.
Traditional alpha discovery follows a manual pipeline: analysts brainstorm ideas, implement them as factors,
backtest on historical data, and iterate based on results. This loop often takes weeks to months per candidate and
discards most ideas early due to poor initial performance. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) open a
new avenue for automating this process. Applying these powerful models to specialized domains such as quantitative
investment brings its own set of challenges (Wang, Yuan, Zhou, Ni, Shum and Guo, 2023): a central difficulty is how
to equip these models with domain-specific financial knowledge so that they can reason about alpha construction the
way an experienced practitioner would, rather than producing logically flawed or practically unusable signals.
Building on the self-improving framework introduced by (Wang, Yuan, Ni and Guo, 2024), which demonstrated
that LLMs can iteratively refine trading strategies through automated feedback and backtesting, we propose an extended
framework that inherits the nested-loop architecture and multi-agent design while introducing a structured knowledge
prior absent from prior work. Specifically, we integrate the WorldQuant 101 Formulaic Alphas as a generation
foundation, grounding LLM synthesis in proven mathematical patterns and substantially narrowing the search space
compared to unconstrained free-form generation. Our core contributions are:
• Nested Loop Architecture: An inner loop refines code quality via iterative prompting and judge-based scoring,
while an outer loop backtests refined candidates and accumulates successful strategies in a persistent knowledge
base, following the design of Wang et al. (2024).
∗Corresponding author.
23020424@vnu.edu.vn (M. Vu); 23020442@vnu.edu.vn (T. Pham); thviet@vnu.edu.vn (H. Tran)
ORCID(s): 0000-0002-4675-2123 (H. Tran)
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
• Multi-Agent Design: Four specialized agents (Writer, Judge, Reviewer, Evaluator) collaboratively generate,
validate, and improve candidate alphas without human intervention.
• 101 Formulaic Alpha Integration: We ground LLM generation in the WorldQuant 101 Formulaic Alphas as
a structured prior, enabling the WriterAgent to compose and recombine proven formulaic patterns rather than
generating from scratch. This reduces invalid code rate and accelerates convergence of the refinement loop.
• Knowledge Retrieval Integration: Similar past alphas retrieved from the knowledge base are provided as incontext examples to the WriterAgent, while the JudgeAgent retrieves relevant knowledge to inform its evaluation,
enabling the system to improve from its own accumulated discoveries.
• Empirical Validation on Vietnamese Market: We validate the framework on Vietnamese stock market data,
reporting IC, Sharpe ratio, and win rate metrics, demonstrating that 101-grounded generation outperforms
unconstrained LLM generation in both alpha quality and discovery speed.
2. Related Work
This work is related to prior research in quantitative alpha discovery, LLM-based code generation, retrievalaugmented generation, and autonomous agent systems. We focus on the aspects of these research areas that directly
motivate the proposed framework design.
2.1. Quantitative Trading and Alpha Discovery
Systematic equity strategies are often built on factor models. The Fama-French framework (Fama and French,
2015) and the momentum extension of (Carhart, 1997) show that returns can be partially explained by persistent market
factors. Machine learning methods have also been applied to asset pricing and statistical arbitrage, with evidence that
non-linear models can capture relationships missed by classical linear approaches (Krauss, Do and Huck, 2017; Gu,
Kelly and Xiu, 2020).
Automated factor construction has been studied through evolutionary search and formulaic alpha design. (Allen
and Karjalainen, 1999) use genetic algorithms to discover technical trading rules, while (Kakushadze, 2016) provide a
widely used collection of 101 formulaic alphas. These methods reduce manual feature engineering, but alpha discovery
remains iterative and vulnerable to data mining bias, backtest overfitting, and spurious signals (Bailey, Borwein, Lopez
de Prado and Zhu, 2014; Lopez de Prado, 2018).
2.2. LLMs for Code Generation and Refinement
Large language models have made automatic code generation more practical. Codex and HumanEval demonstrate
that transformer models can synthesize executable programs from natural language prompts (Chen, Tworek, Jun et al.,
2021), and AlphaCode shows strong performance on programming-contest tasks (Li, Choi, Chung et al., 2022). These
systems build on a broader program synthesis literature (Gulwani, 2017).
Code generation alone is insufficient for trading strategies: code can be syntactically valid while producing unusable
or biased financial signals. Iterative refinement methods address this by using feedback to improve generated outputs.
RLHF aligns models with human preferences (Ouyang, Wu, Jiang et al., 2022), while execution-feedback and selffeedback methods improve programs without full retraining (Austin, Odena, Nye et al., 2021; Madaan, Tandon, Gupta,
Hallinan, Gao, Wiegreffe, Alon, Dziri, Prabhumoye, Yang, Gupta, Majumder, Hermann, Welleck, Yazdanbakhsh and
Clark, 2023). The proposed system follows this direction by using a JudgeAgent for implementation-level feedback
and a ReviewerAgent for metric-level feedback.
2.3. Retrieval-Augmented and Agentic Systems
In-context learning enables LLMs to adapt from examples supplied in the prompt (Brown, Mann, Ryder et al.,
2020). Retrieval-Augmented Generation extends this idea by retrieving relevant external records before generation
(Lewis, Perez, Piktus et al., 2020). For code tasks, retrieved examples can improve consistency and reduce generation
errors (Parvez, Ahmad, Chakraborty, Ray and Chang, 2021). The developed system applies this idea to alpha mining
by retrieving validated alpha records and Alpha101-style references as prompt context.
Recent agent frameworks combine LLM reasoning with tool use and multi-step workflows. Chain-of-thought
prompting improves reasoning on complex tasks (Wei, Wang, Schuurmans et al., 2022), ReAct combines reasoning
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
traces with external actions (Yao, Zhao, Yu, Du, Shafran, Narasimhan and Cao, 2023), and multi-agent software
engineering frameworks such as MetaGPT separate work across specialized roles (Hong, Zhuge, Chen, Zheng, Cheng,
Wang, Zhang, Wang, Yau, Lin, Zhou, Ran, Xiao, Wu and Schmidhuber, 2024). System adopts a similar separation of
roles for alpha generation, code review, backtesting, and feedback.
2.4. LLM-based Trading Agents
LLM-based trading agents are an emerging research direction. (Wang et al., 2024) propose a self-improving multiagent framework for automated trading strategy discovery, combining LLM reasoning, backtesting, and persistent
knowledge accumulation. Our work shares this motivation but emphasizes a concrete implementation for Vietnamese
equities, retrieval from both an internal knowledge base and Alpha101 references, and an explicit split between codequality feedback and backtest-metric feedback.
3. Methodology
Figure 1: Interactive Self-Improving Alpha Mining Architecture.
3.1. System Overview
Our system implements a hierarchical agent-based architecture designed to systematically explore the space of
trading alpha strategies. The system is organized around two nested loops:
Phase I - Inner Loop: For a single trading idea, iteratively generate candidate code using WriterAgent, validate
syntax, score quality using JudgeAgent, and refine via feedback. This loop produces high-quality code before
backtesting.
Phase II - Outer Loop: For each trading idea, run the inner loop to obtain refined code, backtest on historical data,
analyze results, and conditionally accumulate successful alphas to the knowledge base.
The inner loop refines the candidate alpha code through iterative collaboration between WriterAgent and
JudgeAgent, ensuring that only high-quality candidates are backtested. The outer loop validates refined candidates
against historical market data and stores successful alphas in the knowledge base. Generation is grounded by two
complementary knowledge bases: the Main Knowledge Base, which stores historically validated alphas accumulated
across outer-loop iterations, and the 101 Alpha Knowledge Base, which encodes the WorldQuant 101 Formulaic
Alphas as retrievable records. At each inner-loop iteration, the WriterAgent queries both sources to retrieve relevant
examples and proven formulaic patterns, ensuring that generation is anchored in both empirical discoveries and
established mathematical operators. The two loops are coupled through the Main Knowledge Base: as validated alphas
accumulate, the inner loop gains richer retrieval context, allowing the system to continuously improve across successive
trading ideas.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Each loop includes feedback mechanisms that guide both LLM and system behavior, creating a self-reinforcing
cycle of discovery.
3.2. Inner Loop: Iterative Code Refinement
The inner loop refines candidate alpha code through iterative collaboration between the WriterAgent and
JudgeAgent. At each iteration, the WriterAgent retrieves similar examples from the main knowledge base and relevant
formulaic patterns from the WorldQuant 101 Alpha library to ground its generation. The JudgeAgent then evaluates the
candidate and returns structured feedback, which is accumulated in the context buffer for the next iteration. This process
repeats until the candidate meets the quality threshold or the iteration limit is reached, as detailed in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: The Inner Refinement Loop
Input
: Trading idea 𝑞, Main Knowledge Base Φ, 101 Alpha Knowledge Base Ψ, Threshold 𝜏, Maximum iteration limit
𝑁
Output : A refined candidate alpha 𝛼
1 Writer ←LLM(writer prompt)
2 Judge ←LLM(judge prompt)
3 ctx ←{𝑞}
4 𝑛←0
5 repeat
6
𝐶1 ←RETRIEVE(Writer, ctx, Φ)
⊳Retrieve similar alphas from main KB
7
𝐶2 ←RETRIEVE(Writer, ctx, Ψ)
⊳Retrieve formulaic patterns from 101 Alpha KB
8
ctx ←ctx ∪{𝐶1, 𝐶2}
9̂
𝛼←Writer.generate(ctx)
⊳Generate alpha grounded in both KBs
10
𝐶3 ←RETRIEVE(Judge, ctx, Φ)
⊳Retrieve evaluation hints for Judge
11
ctx ←ctx ∪{̂𝛼, 𝐶3}
12
score, feedback ←Judge.eval(̂𝛼, ctx)
⊳Evaluate code quality and logic
13
𝑛←𝑛+ 1
14
ctx ←ctx ∪{feedback}
15 until score ≥𝜏∨𝑛≥𝑁
16 return̂ 𝛼
The inner refinement loop operates on the following inputs and components:
• Trading idea 𝑞: A natural language description of the desired alpha signal (e.g., “high momentum stocks with
low volatility”). This serves as the initial prompt seed for the WriterAgent.
• Main Knowledge Base Φ: A persistent store of validated alpha records accumulated across outer-loop
iterations. Each record contains the original trading idea, generated code, LaTeX documentation, and backtest metrics. At each inner iteration, the WriterAgent retrieves the most similar past alpha via 𝐶1
=
RETRIEVE(Writer, ctx, Φ, top_k=1), providing grounded in-context examples that reduce generation errors.
• 101 Alpha Knowledge Base Ψ: A curated library of the 101 Formulaic Alphas from WorldQuant, encoded as
retrievable records. The WriterAgent queries this base via 𝐶2 = RETRIEVE(Writer, ctx, Ψ, top_k=1) to ground
generation in proven mathematical patterns, narrowing the search space compared to unconstrained free-form
synthesis.
• Context buffer ctx: A running buffer that accumulates all information available to the agents at each iteration, including the trading idea 𝑞, retrieved examples 𝐶1 and 𝐶2, the current candidate alphâ 𝑓, retrieved evaluation hints
𝐶3, and the feedback from previous iterations. Formally, ctx is updated as ctx ←ctx∪{𝐶1, 𝐶2,̂ 𝑓, 𝐶3, feedback}
at each step.
• WriterAgent: An LLM prompted with a writer-specific system prompt. At each iteration, it consumes the full
context buffer ctx and produces a candidate alphâ 𝑓in the form of executable Python code. The retrieved
examples 𝐶1 and 𝐶2 serve as structured priors that guide the generation toward syntactically valid and financially
meaningful signals.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
• JudgeAgent: An LLM prompted with a judge-specific system prompt. It evaluates the candidate alphâ
𝑓on two dimensions: code correctness (absence of look-ahead bias, valid operator usage) and logical
soundness (alignment with the trading idea 𝑞). The Judge additionally retrieves evaluation hints 𝐶3
=
RETRIEVE(Judge, ctx, Φ, top_k=1) from the main knowledge base to inform its assessment, and returns a scalar
quality score score ∈[0, 1] together with structured textual feedback that is appended to ctx for the next iteration.
Termination: Stop after 𝐾inner = 5 iterations or when 𝑠𝑡≥7.5, whichever first. Return best code ∗and LaTeX
∗.
3.3. Outer Loop: Backtesting and Knowledge Accumulation
The outer loop coordinates alpha discovery across multiple trading ideas and iterations. For each trading idea,
the inner loop returns a refined candidate alpha that is subsequently validated by the backtest engine on historical
market data. Candidates exceeding the minimum IC threshold are accumulated in the alpha history, from which the
best-performing alpha is selected and stored in the main knowledge base. This mechanism allows the system to learn
from its own discoveries over time, progressively enriching the retrieval context available to subsequent generations,
as described in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: The Outer Feedback Loop
Input
: Trading idea 𝑞, Other inner loop pagrams 𝑝(Main Knowledge Base Φ, 101 Alpha Knowledge Base Ψ,
Threshold 𝜏, Maximum iteration limit 𝑁), Number of outer-loop iterations 𝐾, Historical market data 𝐷
Output : Accumulated main knowledge base Φ
1 Φ ←∅,
𝑟∗←∅,
𝜏IC ←0.01
⊳Threshold of main KB
2 ICmax ←−∞,
𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦←[ ]
3 for 𝑘←1 to 𝐾do
4
𝛼←INNERLOOP(𝑞, 𝑝)
⊳Refine candidate via Algorithm 1
5
←BACKTESTENGINE(𝛼, )
⊳Validate on historical data
6
𝑟←ALPHARECORD(𝑞, 𝛼, )
7
Adding 𝑟to 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦
⊳Save alpha into history of alpha
8 end
9 foreach 𝑟∈AlphaHistory do
10
if IC(𝑟) ≥𝜏IC then
11
if IC(𝑟) > ICmax then
12
ICmax ←IC(𝑟)
13
𝑟∗←𝑟
14
end
15
end
16 end
17 Φ ←Φ ∪{𝑟∗}
⊳Store best alpha in main KB
18 return Φ
Termination: Run for up to 𝐾outer = 5 iterations. Track the best IC achieved and return the best code, LaTeX,
metrics, and history.
Data usage and selection: The alpha-mining loop does not train a supervised forecasting model and does not
use a fixed temporal data partition. The inner loop only uses the trading idea, retrieved examples, previous code,
and JudgeAgent feedback. The outer loop then evaluates each refined candidate on the historical backtest window 
and selects the candidate with the highest IC for possible storage in the main knowledge base. Therefore, the reported
numbers should be read as discovery-stage backtest metrics. They are not claimed to be final blind-window performance
estimates.
3.4. Knowledge Base Retrieval
The Knowledge Base serves both as storage and as a source of in-context learning examples. For a given trading
idea 𝐼, WriterAgent retrieves semantically similar past alphas using embedding-based similarity:
𝐶sim = KB.retrieve_similar(𝐼, top_k = 1)
(1)
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
The retrieval mechanism computes embeddings 𝐞using a sentence-transformer model (default: all-MiniLM-L6-v2)
and ranks candidates by cosine similarity:
sim(𝐞𝐼, 𝐞𝑗) =
𝐞𝐼⋅𝐞𝑗
‖𝐞𝐼‖‖𝐞𝑗‖
(2)
where 𝐞𝐼is the embedding of idea 𝐼, concatenated with prior successful code patterns, and 𝐞𝑗is the embedding of
the 𝑗-th knowledge base record.
The top-𝑘records (default 𝑘= 1) are selected:
𝐶sim = arg -top𝑘(sim(𝐞𝐼, {𝐞1, … , 𝐞𝑁}))
(3)
Retrieved records include:
• Original trading idea and intuition
• Successful code patterns
• Achieved metrics (IC, Sharpe ratio)
• Comments from previous reviews
These examples serve as few-shot demonstrations, guiding the LLM toward syntactically correct, logically sound,
and financially reasonable code.
The 101 Alpha Knowledge Base Ψ is encoded as a separate retrieval source. Each record stores an identifier,
required input fields, a Python expression or code fragment, and an optional natural-language description. The records
are embedded with the same sentence-transformer model and retrieved by cosine similarity to the trading idea. In the
current implementation these records are used as structural references rather than directly copied executable factors:
the WriterAgent prompt explicitly asks the model to learn the pattern but not copy it verbatim, while the JudgeAgent
penalizes future-information usage such as shift(-n) and forbids forward returns inside calc(). The repository also
contains semantic-similarity utilities for detecting overlap with Alpha101-style ideas, but strict novelty scoring is not
yet enforced as a hard acceptance gate.
3.5. 101 Alpha Knowledge Base
The 101 Alpha Knowledge Base Ψ is a curated library of the 101 Formulaic Alphas from WorldQuant (Kakushadze,
2016), encoded as retrievable records and serving as a structured prior to ground the WriterAgent’s generation in proven
mathematical patterns. Unlike the Main Knowledge Base Φ, which accumulates validated alphas discovered during
training, Ψ is static and pre-loaded, providing an authoritative foundation of institutional-grade signal patterns from
the outset.
3.5.1. Record Structure
Each alpha is stored as an Alpha101Record containing three complementary representations. The first is exact
executable code: the complete Python implementation, directly executable to compute signals on any compatible
dataset. For example, Alpha#3 is encoded as:
signal = -1 * open.rank(axis=1, pct=True)
.rolling(10)
.corr(volume.rank(axis=1, pct=True))
This representation enables both retrieval and direct execution within the backtesting pipeline.
The second is abstract metadata: automatically extracted structural fingerprints comprising the set of mathematical operators used (e.g., rank, rolling, corr, diff) and the set of lookback windows appearing in rolling(),
diff(), and shift() calls (e.g., {5, 10, 20}). These are extracted via static analysis of the code string and appended
to the record’s text representation to improve retrieval precision.
The third is a natural language description: a plain-English summary auto-generated from code tokens via a
vocabulary mapping (e.g., rolling →“rolling window”, rank →“cross-sectional rank”), combined with the declared
input columns and extracted windows. This description serves as the primary text surface for semantic embedding.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
3.5.2. Semantic Retrieval
Each record is embedded using all-MiniLM-L6-v2, a 384-dimensional sentence encoder, with L2-normalisation
applied so that inner products correspond to cosine similarity. At load time, all 101 records are encoded into a fixed
embedding matrix 𝐄∈ℝ101×384. During the inner loop, the WriterAgent issues a retrieval query against Ψ at each
iteration:
𝐶2 = RETRIEVE(Writer, ctx, Ψ, top_k=1)
(4)
where the query embedding 𝐪∈ℝ384 is derived from the current context buffer, and retrieval selects the record
maximising cosine similarity:̂
𝑟= arg max
𝑟∈Ψ
𝐪⊤𝐞𝑟
‖𝐪‖ ‖𝐞𝑟‖
(5)
The retrieved record, including its executable code, operators, and windows, is injected into the WriterAgent’s context,
grounding generation in established operator patterns and time horizons. This narrows the search space compared to
unconstrained free-form synthesis and reduces the incidence of syntactically invalid or financially meaningless outputs.
3.5.3. Look-ahead Verification
A critical requirement for any trading signal is measurability: the signal on day 𝑡must depend solely on the
information available on or before 𝑡. As the 101 Formulaic Alphas originate from WorldQuant’s institutional research
pipeline (Kakushadze, 2016), they are designed and validated to be strictly point-in-time by construction.
3.6. Component Details
3.6.1. WriterAgent
The WriterAgent is responsible for generating trading alpha code and its mathematical formulation. It takes as
inputs a trading idea in natural language, retrieved both Main Knowledge Base examples and 101 Alpha Knowledge
Base examples, and judge feedback from previous iterations. The prompt structure is formulated as follows:
Prompt =
[System Role]+
[Task Description]+
[Trading Idea]+
[Main Knowledge Base Examples]+
[101 Alpha Knowledge Base Examples]+
[Judge Feedback]+
[Output Format Instructions]
Based on this prompt, the WriterAgent outputs Python code implementing the alpha (which inherits from
AlphaBase) and a LaTeX formula expressing the trading logic mathematically. The agent is powered by the Llama4-Scout-17B-16E model via the Groq API, with the generation temperature set to 0.5 to balance creativity and
consistency.
3.6.2. JudgeAgent
The JudgeAgent evaluates the generated code’s quality and logic correctness based on four primary evaluation
criteria, each scored from 0 to 10. First, it assesses Logic to determine if the code correctly implements the stated
trading idea. Second, it checks for Look-ahead Bias by ensuring the code avoids using information not available at
the time of signal generation. Third, it evaluates Robustness in handling edge cases such as NaN values, outliers, and
missing data. Finally, it measures Clarity to ensure the code is readable, adequately commented, and maintainable.
The final quality score is computed as an equal-weighted average of the four criteria:
𝑠𝑡= 1
4(Logic + LookAhead + Robustness + Clarity)
(6)
where each criterion is independently evaluated by the LLM and scored on a [0, 10] scale. The aggregated score
𝑠𝑡∈[0, 10] determines acceptance in the inner loop. The JudgeAgent outputs this aggregated score alongside itemized
feedback for each criterion. This component is also implemented using the LLaMA-3.1-8B model, but with a lower
temperature of 0.2 to promote more deterministic evaluations.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
3.6.3. BacktestEngine
The BacktestEngine is responsible for executing the generated alpha on historical market data and computing
relevant financial metrics. Before describing the pipeline, we briefly define the core evaluation metrics. The Information Coefficient (IC) measures the rank correlation between generated alpha signals and realized forward returns,
with higher values indicating stronger factor quality. The Sharpe ratio of IC is the annualized IC information ratio,
measuring the consistency of the IC signal over time and penalizing strategies with high IC variance:
SharpeIC =
𝔼[IC𝑑]
𝜎(IC𝑑) + 𝜖
√
252.
(7)
The forward return forward is the realized stock return over a fixed future horizon, used as the evaluation horizon for
factor validation. The maximum drawdown (MaxDD) captures the largest peak-to-trough decline in cumulative IC,
reflecting the worst-case loss period of the strategy. Together, these metrics provide a comprehensive view of both the
ranking strength and the risk profile of a candidate alpha.
The pipeline execution follows a structured sequence:
1. Load historical OHLCV data for all stocks in the dataset
2. Instantiate alpha class from generated code
3. Call alpha.calc(data) to generate raw signals raw
4. Apply signal normalization (clipping to [−5, 5]) and NaN handling
= Normalize(raw)
(8)
5. Align signals with forward returns (5-day forward window):
forward = GetForwardReturns(prices, horizon = 5)
(9)
6. Compute Information Coefficient on daily basis
IC𝑑= spearman_corr(rank(𝑑), rank(𝑑,forward))
(10)
7. Aggregate metrics across valid backtest dates:
= {ICmean, Sharpe(IC), WR, MaxDD, VR}
(11)
To ensure the validity of the backtest, several risk mitigations are implemented. Look-ahead bias is prevented by
ensuring signals computed on day 𝑑strictly use data available up to day 𝑑, with forward returns evaluated at 𝑑+ 5 or
later. Survivorship bias is addressed by including all historical stocks regardless of their current listing status. The final
dates without a complete forward-return horizon are excluded from metric aggregation. Furthermore, data quality
is maintained by forward-filling missing values and excluding stocks with less than 80% historical data coverage.
The BacktestEngine operates as a deterministic execution environment without LLM involvement, utilizing standard
libraries such as pandas and scikit-learn for numerical computation.
3.6.4. ReviewerAgent
The ReviewerAgent’s primary responsibility is to provide human-interpretable feedback on the backtest results.
It takes the generated alpha code , the computed backtest metrics , and historical performance data as inputs.
Based on this information, the agent conducts a concise analysis of IC direction, Sharpe consistency, and common
failure modes such as constant signals or look-ahead bias. The output is a short text summary, typically in English or
Vietnamese, which serves as feedback for the next outer iteration.
3.7. Alpha Code Interface
All generated alphas conform to the AlphaBase interface, which ensures consistent signal generation and defensive
processing:
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
class (AlphaBase):
inputs = [“close”, “volume”, …]
def calc(𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓, data ∶Dict[str, DataFrame]) →DataFrame ∶
raw = 𝑓(data[“close”, …)
clip = clip(raw, −5, 5)
= clip.𝑓𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑛𝑎(0)
return 
Signal Normalization: The clipping operation constrains signal magnitudes to the range [−5, 5]:
clip[𝑖, 𝑗] =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
−5
if raw[𝑖, 𝑗] < −5
raw[𝑖, 𝑗]
if −5 ≤raw[𝑖, 𝑗] ≤5
5
if raw[𝑖, 𝑗] > 5
(12)
This ensures all generated code is executable, produces the required signal matrix output, prevents extreme outliers
from dominating backtest metrics, and applies consistent defensive handling across all generated alphas.
4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset and Setup
4.1.1. Market Data
We conduct experiments using daily Vietnamese equity market data. The initial universe consists of 500 equity
symbols with open, high, low, close, and trading volume observations. The combined historical records span from
2001-12-19 to 2025-04-04, although individual stocks differ in their listing histories and data availability. For empirical
evaluation, we focus on the recent period from 2021-01-04 to 2024-12-31, which contains 998 observed trading days.
After aligning stocks by trading dates and excluding securities with less than 80% data coverage, the final experimental
universe contains 450 stocks.
4.1.2. Data Statistics and Quality
Dataset Composition:
Table 1: Comprehensive dataset statistics for Vietnamese stock market.
Metric
Value
Raw stock CSV files
500
Stocks with data in experiment window
498
Eligible stocks after ≥80% coverage filter
450
Raw date range
2001-12-19 to 2025-04-04
Experiment date range
2021-01-04 to 2024-12-31
Trading days in alpha-mining window
998
Total OHLCV records after coverage filter
431,375
Average data coverage per eligible stock
96.1%
Eligible stocks with ≥90% coverage
376 (83.6%)
Average volume (shares/day)
490.1K
Average close price (raw unit)
18.90
Sample Coverage:
Table 2 reports the availability of daily observations for the initial 500-stock universe. Coverage is measured as the
fraction of observed trading days for which a stock has a valid OHLCV record during the experimental period. The
final universe retains stocks with at least 80% coverage, which preserves 450 stocks while excluding securities with
sparse trading histories.
Table 2: Coverage distribution of the initial 500-stock universe.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Coverage Range
Stocks
Share of Universe
Final Sample
< 50%
33
6.6%
Excluded
50% −80%
17
3.4%
Excluded
80% −90%
74
14.8%
Included
90% −95%
95
19.0%
Included
95% −99%
69
13.8%
Included
99% −100%
212
42.4%
Included
Total
500
100.0%
450 included
Data Quality:
The retained sample is sufficiently complete for cross-sectional alpha evaluation. The average coverage of the 450
eligible stocks is 96.1%, and the remaining trading-day gaps are imputed before factor evaluation to preserve timeseries continuity. Since volume is central to liquidity-sensitive alphas, low-activity observations are further controlled
through a volume-ratio screen that removes observations when current volume is below the prior 20-day average. Table
3 summarizes the main quality diagnostics used in the experiments.
Table 3: Data quality diagnostics for the final experimental universe.
Diagnostic
Value
Interpretation
Average coverage
96.1%
High availability after the 80% filter
Average coverage gap
3.95%
Remaining gaps are imputed before evaluation
Average daily volume
490.1K shares
Broadly liquid sample, with explicit liquidity filtering
3-sigma return observations
1.76%
Extreme observations are present but limited
OHLCV field completeness
100.0%
Retained observations contain all required price-volume fields
Return Distribution:
Table 4 presents descriptive statistics for the alpha-mining evaluation window. Returns are expressed in percentage
terms, while the moving-average volume statistic is reported in shares.
Table 4: Descriptive statistics for the 450-stock alpha-mining sample.
Variable
Unit
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min–Max
Daily log return
%
0.01
3.77
-51.08 to 33.69
5-day forward return
%
0.30
7.64
-54.00 to 114.29
20-day average volume
Shares
510.7K
1.83M
0 to 34.23M
Intraday range
%
2.45
3.69
0.00 to 50.00
4.1.3. Alpha Backtest Evaluation Window
The alpha-generation experiments are evaluated on the chronological market window used by the BacktestEngine.
For each generated factor, signals at date 𝑑are aligned with 5-day forward returns, and observations near the end of the
sample are omitted when the full forward horizon is unavailable. This setup matches the main objective of the study:
generating and ranking candidate alpha factors.
Table 5: Alpha-mining evaluation window.
Scope
Trading Days
Date Range
Use
Alpha-mining backtest
998
2021-01-04 to 2024-12-31
Candidate factor validation
All reported performance metrics are computed by aligning generated alpha signals with realized 5-day forward
returns over this evaluation window.
4.1.4. Preprocessing
For each stock, we compute standardized financial features that will be used by the generated alphas:
Daily Log Returns:
𝑟𝑡= log
( close𝑡
close𝑡−1
)
(13)
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Forward Returns (5-day horizon):
𝑟𝑡,forward = log
(close𝑡+5
close𝑡
)
(14)
Volume Ratio (liquidity filter):
vol_ratio𝑡=
volume𝑡
MA20(volume)
(15)
We exclude trading days where vol_ratio𝑡< 1.0 (low liquidity). This prevents the alpha from generating spurious
signals on illiquid days where execution would be difficult in practice.
These standardized features–daily log returns, 5-day forward returns, and the liquidity filter–support robust signal
generation during the backtesting phase.
4.1.5. Model setup
The WriterAgent uses Llama-4-Scout-17B-16E, while the JudgeAgent and ReviewerAgent use LLaMA-3.1-8B, all
accessed via the Groq API. Knowledge base retrieval is performed using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 sentence embedding
model.
Reproducibility notes: The source code link is provided in the title footnote, and the main model, loop, retrieval,
and preprocessing parameters are listed in Appendix A.4. The deterministic parts of the pipeline include data
preprocessing, generated-code execution, and BacktestEngine metric computation. The LLM calls remain stochastic
API calls, so exact regeneration of individual alpha code may vary across model versions even when the same prompts
and temperature settings are used.
4.2. Experimental Protocol
4.2.1. Trading Ideas
We manually design 20 trading ideas, each expressing a distinct market hypothesis. Examples include “High
Momentum, Low Volatility”, “Mean Reversion (Overbought)”, “Volume Breakout”, “Price Breakout (20-MA)”, “RSI
Oversold + Volume”, and “Bollinger Band Reversal”. The aggregate results below use the 10 runs for which complete
comparison logs were available; the remaining ideas are retained in the appendix as candidate prompts but are not
included in the reported aggregate statistics.
4.2.2. Execution
For each reported run, we execute the proposed framework configured with up to 𝐾outer = 5 outer loop iterations.
Within each outer iteration, the inner loop runs for a maximum of 𝐾inner = 5 iterations, employing an early stopping
mechanism if the code quality score reaches or exceeds 7.5. The generated alphas are evaluated by the BacktestEngine
on the alpha-mining backtest window, with metrics computed only on valid dates where realized 5-day forward returns
are available. Alphas that achieve an IC ≥0.01 are successfully accumulated into the Knowledge Base. Throughout
the execution, we also record the wall-clock time from the initial idea input to the completion of the final backtest to
evaluate the system’s operational efficiency.
This design intentionally evaluates alpha discovery rather than a supervised prediction service. The same historical
window is used for candidate scoring, outer-loop selection, and the reported discovery metrics. This avoids the incorrect
impression that the alpha-mining experiment contains a separate blind validation window, but it also means that
selection effects remain possible because the highest-IC candidate is selected from repeated generated trials.
4.2.3. Baseline Comparisons
To evaluate the effectiveness of our architecture, we compare our framework against several baselines. As a negative
control, we use synthetically generated random alphas. We also benchmark against a manual baseline composed
of simple, well-known strategies, such as plain 20-day momentum. To understand the contribution of our iterative
feedback mechanism and Alpha101 retrieval, we compare three LLM-generation configurations: direct WriterAgent
generation without feedback, the full nested loop without the 101 Alpha retrieval prior, and the full nested loop with
the 101 Alpha retrieval prior. This comparison isolates the incremental value of retrieval-guided generation, but it is
not a direct raw-Alpha101 benchmark in which all original 101 formulas are executed unchanged on the Vietnamese
panel.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
4.3. Results
4.3.1. Discovered Alpha Performance
Table 6: Alpha discovery statistics across the reported experimental runs.
Metric
Value
Total ideas tested
10
Alphas with IC ≥0.01
10
Average time per idea
1.5 minutes
Key Observation: The outlined system discovers positive-IC alpha candidates in under 2 minutes on average.
Manual alpha design typically requires days-to-weeks per idea, so this wall-clock result indicates a substantial reduction
in candidate research time, although hardware-standardized timing studies are left for future work.
We report backtest metrics for representative discovered alphas:
Table 7: Performance of representative generated alphas over the alpha-mining evaluation window.
Alpha
IC
ICIR
TIC
Sharpe
WR
MDD
VR
Down3_VolUp_Rev
0.0128
0.5888
18.5
1.66
53.7
5.0
89.0
MeanRev_Basic
0.0698
0.6118
19.1
3.34
84.9
1.0
91.8
VolSpike_FlatPx
0.0145
0.7006
22.0
1.86
56.0
5.9
91.8
Down5_Rev
0.0387
0.4059
12.7
2.32
60.4
8.1
91.8
VolUp_Accum
0.0440
0.3325
10.4
2.34
64.0
7.9
91.8
Down4_Rev
0.0449
0.3545
11.2
2.62
70.9
4.1
96.9
Mom_Loss_Short
0.0183
0.1365
4.3
1.65
57.8
6.9
91.8
BB_Upper_Rev
0.0450
0.3637
11.4
2.50
68.9
2.6
91.8
BB_Lower_Rev
0.0878
0.1882
5.9
3.15
86.7
1.1
91.8
Panic_Selling_Rev
0.0528
0.5444
14.6
2.64
72.2
3.9
91.0
Mean
0.0429
0.4227
13.0
2.41
67.5
4.6
92.0
Std
0.0240
0.1852
5.7
0.57
11.5
2.6
2.0
Interpretation: IC ≈0.0429 shows strong cross-sectional ranking quality; ICIR ≈0.4227 indicates good
information coefficient consistency over time; TIC ≈13.0 reflects a solid t-statistic of information coefficient,
confirming statistical significance; Sharpe ≈2.41 indicates excellent risk-adjusted consistency; Win Rate ≈67.5%
is significantly above random (50%); Max DD ≈4.6% is exceptionally low, indicating tight risk control; Valid Ratio
≈92.0% demonstrates strong code robustness.
4.3.2. Performance Comparison Across Methods
Figure 2: Comparison of three quant trading approaches across 10 alpha discovery segments.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Table 8
Effect of Knowledge Base on WriterAgent performance (first inner iteration).
Metric
No KB
With KB
Improvement
Avg judge score (iter 1)
3.2/10
7.0/10
+59%
Avg iterations to threshold
3.8
2.1
-45%
Code syntax validity (%)
72%
91%
+19%
Observation: The proposed configuration, which integrates the WorldQuant 101 Formulaic Alphas into the
iterative refinement process, consistently outperforms both the direct LLM baseline (Direct) and the standard loop
system (Full). Specifically, it achieves the highest Mean IC of 0.0429. This is an absolute increase of +0.0408
compared to the Direct baseline (0.0021) and +0.0117 compared to the Full system (0.0312). Similarly, its Mean
Sharpe reaches 2.41, which is +2.05 points higher than the Direct baseline (0.36) and +0.22 points higher than the Full
system (2.19). This demonstrates that grounding LLM generation in structured formulaic priors leads to measurably
superior alpha quality.
4.3.3. Knowledge Base Effect
To isolate the impact of KB retrieval on generation quality, we run an ablation: WriterAgent with KB vs. without
KB.
Insight: Retrieved examples significantly accelerate convergence (3.8 →2.1 iterations) and improve code quality.
4.4. Role of Multi-Agent Architecture
The four-agent design enables separation of concerns:
• WriterAgent: Pure generation (no judgment of quality).
• JudgeAgent: Automated code review (before execution).
• BacktestEngine: Domain-specific validation (financial metrics).
• ReviewerAgent: High-level analysis and suggestions.
Each agent can be improved independently (e.g., swap WriterAgent model, refine JudgeAgent criteria, add new
BacktestEngine metrics). This modularity is key to the framework’s extensibility.
4.5. Knowledge Base as Self-Reinforcing Loop
The KB creates a positive feedback loop: more discovered alphas →better retrieval examples →improved
WriterAgent output →higher discovery rate. Our experiments show KB retrieval improves first-iteration score by
59% (3.2 →7.0 out of 10). Over time, as the KB grows, we expect diminishing returns (novelty vs. redundancy), but
the self-reinforcing aspect is clear.
4.6. IC Distribution Analysis
IC scores across all discovered alphas follow approximately a normal distribution (mean 0.0477, std 0.0324).
Approximately 68% of discovered alphas have IC in the range [0.015, 0.080], indicating consistency and stability
rather than outlier-driven results.
5. Discussion
5.1. Interpretation of Results
Our experiments demonstrate that our approach successfully discovers statistically meaningful trading alphas
across a diverse set of trading ideas. The results in Table 7 reveal several notable findings. Two alphas, MeanRev_Basic
and BB_Lower_Rev, achieve particularly strong performance with IC values of 0.069 and 0.08789 and Sharpe ratios
of 3.34 and 3.15 respectively, placing them in the excellent range by quantitative finance standards. Win rates for these
strategies exceed 84%, indicating highly consistent directional ranking ability. The remaining alphas produce IC values
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
between 0.01 and 0.05 and Sharpe ratios between 1.6 and 2.6, which remain practically useful when combined with
diversification and portfolio construction.
We highlight three broader implications of these results:
• Practical Significance: IC values in the 0.01–0.05 range are meaningful for alpha research when combined
with diversification and disciplined portfolio construction. The consistently positive Sharpe ratios across all
discovered alphas suggest that the generated signals carry genuine and stable factor information rather than
noise, but transaction-cost and turnover analysis is still required before making deployment claims.
• Benchmark Comparison: Published academic research on alpha discovery commonly reports IC values in the
0.01–0.02 range (Grinold, 1989). Our framework produces alphas competitive with peer-reviewed standards,
with several strategies substantially exceeding this benchmark.
• Cost Efficiency: Discovering alphas of this quality within minutes via automated LLM generation, compared to
weeks of manual research, represents a significant gain in research productivity across the entire set of evaluated
trading ideas.
5.2. Comparison with Recent Agentic Alpha-Mining Systems
Recent agentic alpha-mining frameworks pursue similar automation goals but make different design choices.
FactorEngine treats factor discovery as program-level mining and separates logic revision, parameter optimization,
and local computation, with knowledge-infused bootstrapping and trajectory experience used to improve both IC
stability and portfolio-level metrics (Lin, Feng, Feng, Huang, Chen, Yang, Zhou, Fei, Liu and Li, 2026). QuantaAlpha
emphasizes trajectory-level evolution: complete mining runs are mutated and recombined, while semantic consistency
between hypothesis, factor expression, and executable code is explicitly controlled (Han, Zhang, Li, Dong, Hu, Zhu,
Yu, Guo, Liu, Wang, Liu, Jiang, An, Hu, Yang, Che and Wang, 2026). QRAFTI is broader than alpha mining alone,
focusing on agentic workflows for empirical quantitative-finance research, including data abstractions, tool use, and
auditable research traces (Lim, Muthuraman and Sury, 2026).
The implemented framework occupies a lighter-weight point in this design space. Instead of building a full
evolutionary search engine or a general empirical-research platform, it uses a compact Writer–Judge–Reviewer
loop and grounds generation with retrieved Alpha101-style formulas plus previously validated alphas. The expected
advantage is lower engineering complexity, faster iteration, and easier adaptation to a market with limited public factor
infrastructure such as Vietnamese equities. The expected trade-off is that our pipeline currently provides weaker search
governance than trajectory-level evolutionary systems: it does not yet perform novelty scoring, parameter optimization,
turnover-aware filtering, multiple-testing correction, or strict final blind-window validation. Consequently, the present
results should be interpreted as evidence that Alpha101-grounded retrieval improves practical alpha generation, rather
than as a claim of empirical superiority over FactorEngine, QuantaAlpha, QRAFTI, or other operator-grammar agentic
systems.
5.3. Why Some Ideas Failed
Analysis of the 6 unsuccessful ideas reveals common failure modes:
1. Look-ahead Bias (2 cases): Code inadvertently used future information (e.g., using closing price before market
open). JudgeAgent caught syntax, but logic errors persisted.
2. Constant Signals (2 cases): Generated code always produced the same signal (e.g., always buy), making IC
undefined or negative.
3. Insufficient Feature Coverage (2 cases): Ideas like “Sector-Momentum” assumed sector data availability; when
missing, signals became all-NaN.
These failures highlight the importance of domain constraints (available data, timing rules) and suggest that
providing more structured templates for WriterAgent could improve success rate.
5.4. Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, experiments are conducted only on Vietnamese equities, so cross-market
generalization remains untested. Second, the current alpha-mining protocol reports discovery-stage backtest metrics:
the outer loop selects candidates on the same historical window used for reporting, which may introduce selection bias.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Third, the evaluation focuses on factor-quality metrics such as IC and IC Sharpe, without transaction costs, turnover,
capacity, or portfolio-level net returns. Finally, robustness checks such as rolling-regime analysis, raw Alpha101
baselines, and sensitivity to normalization or imputation choices are left for future work.
5.5. Future Directions
Future work will strengthen the evaluation protocol by adding blind-window validation, multiple-testing controls,
and rolling IC stability analysis. We also plan to compare against raw Alpha101 formulas and operator-grammar
baselines on the same Vietnamese panel. Finally, extending system with cost-aware portfolio construction, novelty
scoring, and multi-market testing would make the framework more suitable for live quantitative research.
6. Conclusion
This paper presented an automated framework for discovering quantitative trading alpha strategies through the
combination of large language models and a nested feedback loop architecture. The framework integrates a WriterAgent
for candidate alpha generation, a JudgeAgent for quality evaluation, and a BacktestEngine for historical validation,
organized in an inner refinement loop and an outer accumulation loop that together form a self-improving discovery
cycle. A demonstration chatbot system developed based on the proposed framework is publicly available at: https:
//github.com/VMSSON345/QuantTrading-Agent
The key contribution of this work is the integration of the WorldQuant 101 Formulaic Alphas as a structured
knowledge prior, grounding LLM generation in proven mathematical patterns rather than unconstrained free-form
synthesis. Within the reported discovery-stage comparison on Vietnamese stock market data, this design outperforms
both the direct LLM baseline and the standard nested-loop system across IC, Sharpe ratio, and evaluation verdict
metrics.
Specifically, the proposed framework achieves the following:
• Alpha Quality: Several discovered alphas achieve discovery-stage IC values exceeding 0.08 and Sharpe ratios
above 3.0, substantially surpassing the direct generation baseline.
• Consistency: Positive Sharpe ratios and win rates above 50% are observed across all evaluated trading ideas,
indicating that the generated signals carry genuine factor information.
• Knowledge Base Benefit: Dual retrieval from the main knowledge base and the 101 Alpha library consistently
improves generation quality and accelerates convergence of the inner refinement loop.
• Efficiency: The framework discovers viable alpha candidates within minutes, representing a significant reduction
in research time compared to manual alpha development.
These results establish the developed framework as a scalable and domain-grounded approach to automated alpha
mining, with natural extensions to multi-market settings, larger base models, and ensemble alpha combination left for
future work.
The developed framework demonstrates that LLMs can effectively participate in quantitative research with
appropriate validation and feedback. The self-improving nature of the KB creates a long-term advantage: as more
alphas are discovered, subsequent discoveries improve. Future work will extend to multiple asset classes, incorporate
transaction costs, and integrate live trading infrastructure.
Acknowledgments
This research has been done under the research project QG.26.68 of Vietnam National University, Hanoi. We thank
the Groq team for LLM infrastructure and acknowledge the broader open-source community (sentence-transformers,
pandas, scikit-learn).
A. APPENDIX
A.1. Twenty Trading Ideas
The 20 manually designed trading ideas used in experiments:
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
1. High Momentum, Low Volatility: Stocks with strong recent price momentum and low volatility.
2. Mean Reversion (Overbought): Stocks with price > 2-std above moving average.
3. Volume Breakout: Stocks with unusual volume increase + price breakout.
4. Price Breakout (20-MA): Prices crossing above 20-day moving average.
5. RSI Oversold + Volume: RSI indicator < 30 with volume confirmation.
6. Bollinger Band Reversal: Prices touch lower Bollinger Band + reversal signal.
7. MACD Crossover: MACD signal line crosses above zero.
8. Volume-Weighted Price Change: Large price moves on above-average volume.
9. Multiple Timeframe Divergence: Daily momentum ≠weekly momentum.
10. Sector Momentum: Aggregate sector performance driving individual stocks.
11. Intraday Range Breakout: High-Low range expansion predicting next day move.
12. Gap Reversals: Opening gaps likely to fill within 5 days.
13. Volatility Expansion: Volatility clusters predict strong moves.
14. Price Proximity to Bands: Distance from Bollinger Bands predicts reversion.
15. Consecutive Days Pattern: Stocks with 𝑁-day up/down sequences.
16. Liquidity-Adjusted Returns: Volume-adjusted momentum factors.
17. Seasonal Patterns: Month/quarter effects in stock returns.
18. Mean Reversion (Oversold): Prices < 2-std below moving average.
19. Correlation Breakdowns: Stocks decoupling from sector.
20. Return Distribution Skew: Asymmetric return distributions signal reversions.
A.2. Sample Generated Alpha Code
This section presents two representative alpha implementations generated by our system.
1
from alpha_base import AlphaBase
2
import numpy as np
3
import pandas as pd
4
5
class MomentumReversal(AlphaBase):
6
"""
7
High momentum (20-day price change) combined with
8
volume surge predicts 5-day reversal.
9
"""
10
inputs = [’close’, ’volume’]
11
12
def calc(self, data):
13
close = data[’close’]
14
volume = data[’volume’]
15
16
# 20-day momentum
17
momentum = close.pct_change(20)
18
19
# 20-day volume MA
20
vol_ma = volume.rolling(20).mean()
21
vol_ratio = volume / vol_ma
22
23
# Signal: high momentum + volume surge
24
signal = momentum * np.log1p(vol_ratio)
25
26
# Clip and fill NaN
27
signal = signal.clip(-5, 5)
28
signal = signal.fillna(0)
29
30
return signal
A.2.1. Alpha 2: Bollinger Band Reversal (IC = 0.0112)
1
from alpha_base import AlphaBase
2
import numpy as np
3
4
class BollingerReversal(AlphaBase):
5
"""
6
When price touches lower Bollinger Band,
7
expect reversion over next 5 days.
8
"""
9
inputs = [’close’]
10
11
def calc(self, data):
12
close = data[’close’]
13
14
# 20-day Bollinger Bands
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
15
ma20 = close.rolling(20).mean()
16
std20 = close.rolling(20).std()
17
lower_band = ma20 - 2 * std20
18
19
# Distance from lower band (normalized)
20
distance = (close - lower_band) / std20
21
22
# Inverted signal: near lower band -> negative
23
signal = -distance.clip(-5, 5)
24
signal = signal.fillna(0)
25
26
return signal
A.3. WriterAgent Prompt Template
The WriterAgent is guided by a structured prompt template designed to enforce code correctness and financial
validity. The system prompt establishes the agent role and output format, while the user prompt is populated at runtime
with retrieved context from both knowledge bases and feedback from the previous iteration.
WriterAgent Prompt Template
[SYSTEM]
You are a Quantitative Analyst specializing in the Vietnamese
stock market. Write an AlphaFactor from a given trading idea.
OUTPUT FORMAT:
1. LaTeX formula
2. Complete Python implementation
ABSOLUTE RULES:
- No shift(-n) with n > 0
(look-ahead bias forbidden)
- No forward returns inside calc()
- Signal must be continuous float, not binary
- All operations must be vectorized (pandas/numpy)
- Apply rank(axis=1, pct=True) - 0.5 at final step
[USER]
Trading idea
: {idea}
KB context
: {kb_context}
Alpha101 context: {alpha101_context}
Feedback
: {feedback_section}
REQUIREMENTS:
- Follow the trading idea closely
- Learn patterns from KB but do not copy
- Reference WorldQuant alpha structure but do not reproduce
- Incorporate feedback from previous iteration if provided
The placeholders {kb_context} and {alpha101_context} are populated at runtime with examples retrieved
from the main knowledge base Φ and the WorldQuant 101 Alpha library Ψ respectively. The {feedback_section}
is empty on the first iteration and populated with JudgeAgent feedback on subsequent iterations.
A.4. Experimental Configuration
A.4.1. Model Configuration
Table 1: Model configuration used by the designed framework components.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Component
Configuration
WriterAgent Model
Llama-4-Scout-17B-16E (Groq API)
WriterAgent Temperature
0.5
WriterAgent Max Tokens
2048
JudgeAgent Model
LLaMA-3.1-8B (Groq API)
JudgeAgent Temperature
0.2
JudgeAgent Max Tokens
1024
ReviewerAgent Model
LLaMA-3.1-8B (Groq API)
ReviewerAgent Temperature
0.3
ReviewerAgent Max Tokens
512
KB Embedding Model
all-MiniLM-L6-v2
A.4.2. Refinement and Backtesting Configuration
Table 2: Refinement-loop and backtesting configuration.
Parameter
Value
Inner Loop Iterations
𝐾inner = 5
Inner Loop Quality Threshold
𝜃inner = 7.5∕10
Outer Loop Iterations
𝐾outer = 5
Outer Loop IC Threshold
𝜃save = 0.01
Signal Clipping Range
[−5, 5]
KB Retrieval Top-K
1
Forward Return Horizon
5 days
Liquidity Filter Threshold
vol_ratio ≥1.0
A.4.3. Data Processing Configuration
Table 3: Data preprocessing and sample filtering configuration.
Component
Configuration
Missing Value Handling
Reindex with forward/back fill
Data Coverage Minimum
80%
Alpha Evaluation Period
2021-01-04 – 2024-12-31
Number of Stocks
450 eligible (500 initial symbols)
Total Trading Days
998
Total Data Points
431,375
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Minh-Son Vu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Validation, Writing – original draft.
The-Trung Pham: Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Visualization Writing – review & editing.
Hong-Viet Tran: Supervision, Project administration, Resources, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing.
References
Allen, F., Karjalainen, R., 1999. Using genetic algorithms to find technical trading rules. Journal of financial Economics 51, 245–271.
Austin, J., Odena, A., Nye, M., et al., 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 .
Bailey, D.H., Borwein, J.M., Lopez de Prado, M., Zhu, J., 2014. Pseudo-mathematics and financial charlatanism: The effects of backtest overfitting
on out-of-sample performance. Notices of the AMS 61, 458–471.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 18 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Brown, T.B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., et al., 2020. Language models are few-shot learners, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Carhart, M.M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. The Journal of Finance 52, 57–82.
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., et al., 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .
Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics 116, 1–22.
Fatemi, S., Hu, Y., 2024. Enhancing financial question answering with a multi-agent reflection framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21741
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2410.21741.
Grinold, R.C., 1989. The fundamental law of active management. The Journal of Portfolio Management 15, 30–37.
Gu, S., Kelly, B., Xiu, D., 2020. Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. The Review of Financial Studies 33, 2223–2273.
Gulwani, S., 2017. Program synthesis, in: Formal Methods and Software Engineering, pp. 1–15.
Han, J., Zhang, S., Li, W., Dong, Y., Hu, T., Zhu, Y., Yu, X., Guo, X., Liu, Z., Wang, K., Liu, J., Jiang, T., An, R., Hu, S., Yang, Z.,
Che, R., Wang, H., 2026.
QuantaAlpha: An evolutionary framework for LLM-driven alpha mining.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07085
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2602.07085.
Hong, S., Zhuge, M., Chen, J., Zheng, X., Cheng, Y., Wang, J., Zhang, C., Wang, Z., Yau, S., Lin, Z., Zhou, L., Ran, C., Xiao, L., Wu, C.,
Schmidhuber, J., 2024. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework, in: International Conference on Learning
Representations. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=VtmBAGCN7o.
Kakushadze, Z., 2016. 101 Formulaic Alphas. Wilmott 2016, 72–81. doi:10.1002/wilm.10525.
Krauss, C., Do, X.A., Huck, N., 2017. Deep neural networks, gradient-boosted trees, random forests: Statistical arbitrage on the S&P 500. European
Journal of Operational Research 259, 689–702.
Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., et al., 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks, in: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 9459–9474.
Li, Y., Choi, D., Chung, J., et al., 2022. Competition-level code generation with AlphaCode. Science 378, 1092–1097.
Lim, T., Muthuraman, K., Sury, M., 2026.
QRAFTI: An agentic framework for empirical research in quantitative finance.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.18500 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.18500.
Lin, Q., Feng, R., Feng, Y., Huang, Z., Chen, Y., Yang, Z., Zhou, L., Fei, B., Liu, J., Li, Y., 2026. FactorEngine: A program-level knowledge-infused
factor mining framework for quantitative investment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.16365 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.16365.
Liu, X.Y., Yang, H., Chen, Q., Zhang, R., Yang, L., Xiao, B., Wang, C.D., 2020. FinRL: A deep reinforcement learning library for automated stock
trading in quantitative finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09607 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2011.09607.
Lopez de Prado, M., 2018. Advances in Financial Machine Learning. Wiley.
Luo, H., Ko, H.T., Chen, J., Sun, D., Zhang, Y., Liu, C., 2026. AlphaBench: Benchmarking large language models in formulaic alpha factor mining,
in: The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=d97Q8r7ZKZ.
Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P., Hallinan, S., Gao, L., Wiegreffe, S., Alon, U., Dziri, N., Prabhumoye, S., Yang, Y., Gupta, S., Majumder, B.P.,
Hermann, K., Welleck, S., Yazdanbakhsh, A., Clark, P., 2023. Self-Refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback, in: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2303.17651.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., et al., 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155
.
Parvez, M.R., Ahmad, W.U., Chakraborty, S., Ray, B., Chang, K.W., 2021. Retrieval augmented code generation and summarization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.11601 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2108.11601.
Shi, H., Song, W., Zhang, X., Shi, J., Luo, C., Ao, X., Arian, H., Seco, L., 2024. AlphaForge: A framework to mine and dynamically combine
formulaic alpha factors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18394 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2406.18394.
Shin, H.G., Jeong, S., Kim, E.Y., Hong, S., Cho, Y.J., Choi, Y.H., 2024. Synergistic formulaic alpha generation for quantitative trading based on
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02710 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2401.02710.
Tang, Z., Chen, Z., Yang, J., Mai, J., Zheng, Y., Wang, K., Chen, J., Lin, L., 2025. AlphaAgent: LLM-driven alpha mining with regularized
exploration to counteract alpha decay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16789 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2502.16789.
Wang, S., Yuan, H., Ni, L.M., Guo, J., 2024. QuantAgent: Seeking holy grail in trading by self-improving large language model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03755 .
Wang, S., Yuan, H., Zhou, L., Ni, L.M., Shum, H.Y., Guo, J., 2023. Alpha-GPT: Human-ai interactive alpha mining for quantitative investment.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00016 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2308.00016.
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., et al., 2022.
Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.11903 .
Wu, S., Irsoy, O., Lu, S., Dabravolski, V., Dredze, M., Gehrmann, S., Kambadur, P., Rosenberg, D., Mann, G., 2023. BloombergGPT: A large
language model for finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2303.17564.
Xiao, Y., Sun, E., Luo, D., Wang, W., 2024. TradingAgents: Multi-agents LLM financial trading framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.20138
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2412.20138.
Yang, H., Liu, X.Y., Wang, C.D., 2023. FinGPT: Open-source financial large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06031 doi:10.48550/
arXiv.2306.06031.
Yang, H., Zhang, B., Wang, N., Guo, C., Zhang, X., Lin, L., Wang, J., Zhou, T., Guan, M., Zhang, R., Wang, C.D., 2024. FinRobot: An open-source
AI agent platform for financial applications using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14767 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2405.14767.
Yang, X., Liu, W., Zhou, D., Bian, J., Liu, T.Y., 2020. Qlib: An AI-oriented quantitative investment platform. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11189
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2009.11189.
Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., Cao, Y., 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, in:
International Conference on Learning Representations. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2210.03629.
Yu, S., Xue, H., Ao, X., Pan, F., He, J., Tu, D., He, Q., 2023a. Generating synergistic formulaic alpha collections via reinforcement learning, in:
Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. doi:10.1145/3580305.3599831.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 19 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Yu, Y., Li, H., Chen, Z., Jiang, Y., Li, Y., Zhang, D., Liu, R., Suchow, J.W., Khashanah, K., 2023b. FinMem: A performance-enhanced LLM trading
agent with layered memory and character design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13743 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2311.13743.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 20 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed

Self-Improving Alpha Mining via Multi-Agent LLMs
Author Biographies
Hong-Viet Tran received the Ph.D. degree in Computer Science and is currently a researcher
at the Institute of Artificial Intelligence. His research interests primarily lie in natural language
processing (NLP) and its applications across various domains such as finance, healthcare, and
scientific information systems. His recent work focuses on leveraging large language models
(LLMs) for domain-specific reasoning, knowledge extraction and intelligent decision support.
Minh-Son Vu is a member of the NLP Lab at the Institute for Artificial Intelligence, University
of Engineering and Technology, Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Vietnam. His research
interests include machine learning, large language models, multi-agent systems, quantitative
finance, and AI-driven decision support systems. His recent work focuses on autonomous agents,
alpha mining and the application of large language models in financial analysis.
The-Trung Pham is a member of NLP Lab at Institute for Artificial Intelligence, University of
Engineering and Technology, Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Vietnam. He is interested in
machine learning, large language models, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), multi-agent
systems, and quantitative finance. He has worked on research projects involving autonomous
agents, alpha mining and using LLMs and RAG in finance.
Hong-Viet Tran et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 21 of 21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6906675
Preprint not peer reviewed
