 
High Frequency Trading and Stock Herding 
 
Servanna Mianjun Fu a, 1, Neil M. Kellard a, Thanos Verousis b, Iordanis Kalaitzoglou c 
a Essex Business School, b Vlerick Business School, c Audencia Business School 
 
November, 2023 
 
Abstract 
Using Trade and Quote (TAQ) data to infer variation in High frequency Trading (HFT) for the 
US equity markets and HFT start and colocation dates for a sample of 10 international 
exchanges, we find that increases in HFT activity lead to a significant increase in stock herding. 
The effect of HFT on herding is more pronounced for large-cap stocks, higher liquidity periods 
and during more volatile days. HFT activities are strongly associated with non-fundamental 
herding and encourage information cascades that induce price inefficiencies, suggesting 
changes to market design might be warranted. 
 
 
 
Keywords: High Frequency Trading; HFT; Herding; Colocation; Information cascades; 
Fundamental information 
 
JEL Codes: G23; G4; G14 
 
 
1 Corresponding author. 
  E-mail address: servanna.fu@essex.ac.uk (S. M. Fu). 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

1 
 
 
High Frequency Trading and Stock Herding 
 
 
November, 2023 
 
Abstract 
Using Trade and Quote (TAQ) data to infer variation in High frequency Trading (HFT) for the 
US equity markets and HFT start and colocation dates for a sample of 10 international 
exchanges, we find that increases in HFT activity lead to a significant increase in stock herding. 
The effect of HFT on herding is more pronounced for large-cap stocks, higher liquidity periods 
and during more volatile days. HFT activities are strongly associated with non-fundamental 
herding and encourage information cascades that induce price inefficiencies, suggesting 
changes to market design might be warranted. 
 
 
 
Keywords: High Frequency Trading; HFT; Herding; Colocation; Information cascades; 
Fundamental information 
 
JEL Codes: G23; G4; G14 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

2 
 
1. Introduction 
Algorithmic Trading (AT) and High Frequency Trading (HFT) now account for approximately 
50% of trading volume in U.S. stock markets (Breckenfelder, 2020 and NASDAQ, 2023). The 
explosion of AT and HFT activities has fuelled an intense debate between HFT firms, 
institutional investors, regulators and academics about the effects of the HFT ‘arms race’ on 
financial markets.1 Whilst AT and HFT potentially improve liquidity and price discovery, 
recent studies suggest that HFT activity increases comovement in returns and liquidity, 
discourages information acquisition and reduces long-term price informativeness. 2 In this 
paper, we examine a new prospective destabilising effect of HFT activities, namely an increase 
in stock herding.  
Herding refers to the tendency of market participants to suppress their own beliefs and 
imitate the actions of others. In the social learning literature (see Banerjee, 1992 and 
Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer and Welch, 1992), whether an individual would have chosen 
differently if she had acted on her own beliefs alone distinguishes informational cascades from 
herding. Informational cascades imply that individuals ignore their own set of beliefs when 
making a decision, simply imitating others, whereas herd behaviour occurs when a large 
number of individuals take the same decision, not necessarily imitating others (Çelen and 
Kariv, 2004). We conjecture that the high frequency arms race causes significant increases in 
stock herding. 
There are several reasons to believe that HFT induces herding. First, HFT trading 
strategies are highly correlated (see Chaboud et al., 2014 and Boehmer, Li and Saar, 2018). 
Second, High Frequency Traders (HFTs) trade as back-runners, that is, they observe past order 
 
 
1 Aquilina, Budish and Neill (2022) lists the regulatory investigations into HFT, including a list of proposals to 
curb HFT by introducing speed bumps. 
2 See Malceniece, Malcenieks and Putninš (2019); Weller (2018); Gider, Schmickler and Westheide (2019); 
Breckenfelder (2020); Aquilina et al., (2022).  
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

3 
 
flow of fundamental investors and trade in the same direction (see Yang and Zhu, 2019). Third, 
HFTs engage in short-term predatory trading, that is, they tend to trade in the direction of 
institutional investors before eventually changing direction and trading against them (see Van 
Kervel and Menkveld, 2019). Fourth, HFT activity has enhanced price discovery, implying that 
HFTs trade on the same fundamental information (see Brogaard, Hendershott and Riordan, 
2014; Chaboud, Chiquoine, Hjalmarsson and Vega, 2014). Fifth, as HFTs trade in order to 
adjust their inventory, they create noise (see Benos and Sagade, 2012), thereby inducing nonfundamental herding. Despite the above though, to date, there is no evidence in the extant 
literature on the impact of HFT on stock herding.   
Our paper fills this gap in the literature. We rely on two datasets. The first consists of 
all Trade and Quote (TAQ) data for the constituents of the S&P100 from January 2015 to 
December 2017. Second, we use the index constituents from 10 exchanges in nine countries 
around the world. We employ both the HFT effective start date and the colocation date i.e., the 
date each exchange started housing the trading firms’ computer servers within the exchange’s 
data centre, as the HFT start date. The use of colocation dates complements our analysis in the 
U.S. market as it can be seen as a quasi-natural experiment associated with a significant 
increase in HFT activity (see Aitken Cumming and Zhan, 2015). As the timing of colocation 
decisions vary across exchanges and due to the staggered introduction of colocation services, 
we avoid any potential identification bias in our results which are also not confounded by a 
single unrelated event.  
Our main finding is that increased HFT activity is strongly associated with stock 
herding. In particular, HFT-related herding is more pronounced during more volatile periods 
and periods of higher liquidity. This result is robust to the proxy employed for HFT. 
Interestingly, when we decompose trading activity into more active and less active HFT, we 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

4 
 
show that less active HFT inspires localised herding (anti-herding)3 causing cross-sectional 
dispersion to increase beyond rational levels. We also demonstrate that herding is more 
pronounced among large-cap stocks by considering the liquidity provision by HFT and the 
channel through which return comovement is impacted. This is in line with the literature that 
HFTs are typically more active in this context (see Brogaard, Carrion, Moyaert, Riordan, 
Shkilko and Sokolov, 2018, and Jarnecic and Snape, 2014).  
Subsequently, we investigate if HFT is related to fundamental or non-fundamental 
herding. Non-fundamental herding induces information cascades that are fragile and unstable 
whereas, in fundamental herding, the actions of market participants are still informative (see 
Çelen and Kariv, 2004). We show that HFT-related herding is strongly associated with nonfundamental herding. In line with our prior results, we show that the link between HFT 
activities and non-fundamental herding is stronger for large-cap stocks. Lastly, we use 
colocation dates and HFT effective start dates (see Aitken, Cumming, and Zhan, 2015) as 
exogenous shocks to HFT participation. Analogously to the results for the U.S. market, we 
show that HFT effective start dates, and colocation dates are associated with stock herding.  
We contribute to the behavioural finance literature as well as the HFT literature. First, 
by decomposing market activities into more and less active HFT, we produce evidence that 
herding is distinctly related to more HFT participation. Second, by documenting significant 
evidence after HFT start dates, we provide further evidence into how market microstructure 
affects financial market outcomes (see Gider, Schmickler and Westheide, 2019). Third, by 
identifying that HFT is related to non-fundamental herding, we add to the growing body of 
evidence that HFT activities induce price inefficiencies (see Weller, 2018 and Gider et al., 
2019). Finally, our findings show further support for the notion that correlated trading strategies 
 
 
3 Anti-herding implies that market participants largely ignore market-wide information and trade against the 
market consensus (see Sibande et al., 2021 and Gębka and Wohar, 2013). 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

5 
 
and not diffusion of market-wide information may be responsible for an increase in 
comovements in returns (see Malceniece, Malcenieks and Putninš, 2019).   
Our results have implications for policymakers and investors. Exchanges around the 
world are keen to attract HFTs as they are a valuable source of revenue, thus offering colocation 
services in exchange for trading fees (see Jørgensen, Skjeltorp and Ødegaard, 2018). Our 
analysis shows that there is a potential downside to the increased liquidity that comes with HFT 
in the form of increased price inefficiencies and fragility. Our finding that HFTs herd implies 
there is a level of systematic risk in the market that is associated with correlated trading 
strategies. From an investor perspective, by identifying the existence of anti-herding, we signal 
that there is insufficient diversification within a group of market participants (see Gębka and 
Wohar, 2013).  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the relevant 
literature on stock herding, AT and HFT. In Section 3, we discuss the sample, variables, and 
methods and in Section 4, we present the analysis. In Section 5, we conclude the paper.  
 
2. Literature review and hypothesis development 
2.1 Herding 
Conceptually, herding implies that investors suppress their private signals and resort or mimic 
their peers’ trading behaviour following observation of their activities (Hirshleifer and Teoh, 
2003). To the extent that investors fully suppress their own private information, herding leads 
to inefficiencies as equilibrium prices do not reflect the entire set of available information (see 
Banerjee, 1992). In that respect, whilst the decision to herd may be a rational one, i.e., an 
investor with little or no information will be better off following others rather than acting on 
their own private information, nevertheless it leads to inefficiencies. Equally, investors may 
herd as a response to irrational motivations. For example, Tedeschi, Iori and Gallegati (2012) 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

6 
 
and Kellard et al. (2017) demonstrate the importance of networks in the emergence of herding 
and Shleifer and Summers (1990) show that investors who suffer from systematic biases may 
induce herding. Relatedly, Cui, Gebka and Kallinterakis (2019) show that closed-end fund 
herding is mostly noise driven, reflecting the notion that the closed-end fund clientele mainly 
consists of retail investors (and thus is more susceptible to biases).  
Theoretically, Christie and Huang (1995) demonstrate that, under rational asset pricing 
expectations, the dispersion of individual returns increases with the absolute value of market 
returns as individual stocks differ in their sensitivity to the market return. When however 
investors suppress their own beliefs in favour of the market consensus (i.e., the market return), 
the return dispersion around the market return is relatively low. In the presence of herding, 
return dispersion around the market return will increase at a decreasing rate or even be negative 
(see Chang, Cheng and Khorana, 2000; Andrikopoulos Kallinterakis, Leite Ferreira and 
Verousis, 2017; Voukelatos and Verousis, 2019; Bernales, Verousis and Voukelatos, 2019; 
Benkraiem, Bouattour, Galariotis and Miloudi, 2021).  
An important distinction refers to the presence of fundamental versus non-fundamental 
herding (see Bikhchandani and Sharma, 2000). Imagine a situation where a group of investors 
observe the same set of (public or quasi-public) information and there is relative certainty about 
the quality of this information. It is reasonable to assume that this group of investors will 
interpret the information in the same way and possibly trade in the same direction. This will 
give rise to “spurious” or fundamental herding in the sense that investors did not suppress their 
own beliefs with the intention to follow others. Imagine now the same set of investors receive 
information that is however difficult to assess in terms of quality. In this scenario, each investor 
assesses this information independently of other investors and assessments are not shared 
between investors. Instead, each investor is only able to observe the actions of the other 
investors. In this situation, “intentional” or non-fundamental herding may arise, indicating that 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

7 
 
investors mimic each others’ actions with intent. Non-fundamental herding is noise-driven and 
affected by sentiment (see also Galarioties et al., 2015 and Cui et al., 2019). Importantly, nonfundamental herding is fragile (Bikchandani and Sharma, 2000), causes information cascades 
and leads to inefficiencies (see Çelen and Kariv, 2004).  
 
2.2 Algorithmic Trading, High Frequency Trading, and HFT start  
The European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) defines AT as follows: “trading in 
financial instruments where a computer algorithm automatically determines individual 
parameters of orders such as whether to initiate the order, the timing, price or quantity of the 
order or how to manage the order after its submission, with limited or no human intervention” 
(see ESMA MiFID II Review Report, 2021, p.12). There is a general agreement amongst 
academics that AT improves liquidity and informational efficiency (see Boehmer, Fong and 
Wu, 2021; Chaboud et al., 2014; Hendershott, Jones and Menkveld, 2011; Chakrabarty and 
Pascual, 2022). However, AT is also associated with higher adverse selection costs for slow 
traders (Chaboud et al., 2014) and a reduction in information acquisition (Weller, 2018).  
Relatedly, HFT is defined as, “an algorithmic trading technique characterised by: (a) 
infrastructure intended to minimise network and other types of latencies, including at least one 
of the following facilities for algorithmic order entry: co-location, proximity hosting or highspeed direct electronic access; (b) system-determination of order initiation, generation, 
routing or execution without human intervention for individual trades or orders; and (c) high 
message intraday rates which constitute orders, quotes or cancellations.” (ESMA MiFID II 
Review Report, 2021, p.14). The literature on HFT commonly finds that HFT has a positive 
impact on liquidity and informational efficiency, while facilitating price discovery (see 
Hasbrouck and Saar, 2013; Brogaard et al., 2014; Boehmer et al., 2018). However, research 
work on HFT faces a moving target, with firms engaging in a high-frequency arms race worth 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

8 
 
an estimated $5 billion annually (Aquilina et al., 2022). Critics of HFT argue that this arms 
race is “socially wasteful” (Budish, Cramton and Shim, 2015) and “socially excessive” (Biais, 
Foucault and Moinas, 2015).  
In order to examine the effects of HFT on stock exchanges, it is necessary to identify 
the HFT start date across different exchanges. Unfortunately, there is no established HFT start 
date corresponding to these various exchanges and therefore, previous literature commonly use 
colocation service start date in exchanges as the proxy of HFT emergence (Aitken, Cumming, 
and Zhan, 2017; Boehmer, Fong, and Wu, 2020), while Aitken, Cumming, and Zhan (2015, 
2017) also propose HFT effective date as another proxy of HFT emergence.4 Colocation refers 
to HFTs and associated firms locating their servers in the same building as the stock exchange 
servers, providing a higher speed to the flow of time-sensitive information (Brogaard, 
Hagströmer, and Nordén, 2015). Previous studies employ colocation service announcements 
as an indicator of AT and HFT activity and examine international differences (Boehmer, Fong, 
and Wu, 2020), market liquidity (Frino, Mollica, and Webb, 2014), severity of end-of-day price 
dislocation and average trade size influence (Aitken, Cumming, and Zhan, 2015 and 2017), 
and HFT firm trading performance (Baron, Brogaard, Hagströmer, and Kirilenko, 2019).  
 
2.3 Hypothesized effects of HFT on herding 
There are compelling reasons to believe that HFT activities are likely associated with 
significant herding. For example, HFT firms pursue several similar strategies, ranging from 
market making (Menkveld, 2013) to opportunistic strategies, including predatory trading (see 
Hagströmer and Nordén, 2013; Ye, Yao and Gai, 2013; O’Hara, 2010). Importantly, several 
studies show that strategies are highly correlated across HFTs, stocks and markets (see 
 
 
4 HFT effective date usually appears few years before colocation date. This probably due to HFT established 
themselves at locations proximate to exchanges earlier before colocation service offered (Aitken, Cumming, and 
Zhan, 2017). 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

9 
 
Chaboud et al., 2014; Boehmer et al., 2018; Menkveld, 2013), therefore giving rise to comovement in returns and liquidity (see Malceniece et al., 2019; Li, Yin and Zhao, 2020). These 
co-movements are likely to lead to further stock herding, especially over short-term intervals. 
Indeed, Jarrow and Protter (2012) describe a mechanism where HFT activity can induce 
herding. In their setting, HFTs unknowingly coordinate on the basis of a common signal. Their 
actions, albeit independent, create their own short-term momentum in the market and induce a 
type of herding behaviour. In addition, the introduction of colocation services would increase 
competition among HFT market makers and increase intensity of HFT activities (Hendershott, 
Jones, and Menkveld, 2011). Exchanges with colocation services expect to have more intensive 
HFT activity, therefore, we expect to find stronger herding evidence from these exchanges. On 
this basis, our primary hypothesis is the following: 
 
Hypothesis 1: HFT activity induces stock herding. 
 
In particular, if HFT is positively associated with herding, we would expect to see more herding 
when there is more HFT participation. High frequency traders are known for their ability to 
provide liquidity to the market due to their rapid trading activities (Brogaard et al., 2018). They 
use sophisticated algorithms to enter and exit positions, which can enhance market liquidity by 
reducing bid-ask spreads and increasing trading volume (Hasbrouck, 2007). The literature 
identifies that HFTs are more likely to trade in large-size stocks (see Brogaard et al., 2018), as 
these stocks provide greater opportunities for executing their high frequency strategies 
efficiently (Hendershott and Riordan, 2013). Therefore, when liquidity is abundant, the impact 
of HFT on price formation becomes more pronounced, potentially leading to stronger herding 
effects. Also, the literature suggests that HFTs participate more in the market when price 
volatility is high (see Jarnecic and Snape, 2014). During extreme market conditions 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

10 
 
characterized by heightened volatility, market participants may become more prone to herd as 
they react to rapid price movements (Bikhchandani et al., 1992). We therefore propose the 
following hypothesis: 
 
Hypothesis 2: The association between HFT activity and herding is stronger for large stocks  
during high liquidity periods. 
 
Further, we have reasons to believe that both fundamental and non-fundamental sources of 
herding are at play in the market. HFTs exploit the same set of public information, thus 
following the same set of market signals, which may induce fundamental herding. Given HFTs 
enhance price discovery also indicates that they trade on fundamental information. On the other 
hand, HFT trading strategies are highly correlated (see Chaboud et al., 2014; Boehmer et al., 
2018) suggesting non-fundamental herding. HFTs aim to close the trading day flat, implying 
their trading decisions may also be idiosyncratic (Benos and Sagade, 2012). Back-running and 
predatory trading (see Yang and Zhu, 2019; Van Kervel and Menkveld, 2019) may also lead 
to an increase in non-fundamental herding. Ultimately, however, we are agnostic regarding the 
nature of stock herding that is induced by HFT activities. We leave this as an empirical research 
question and therefore: 
 
Hypothesis 3: HFT activity is associated with both fundamental and non-fundamental herding. 
 
3. Data, variables, and methods 
3.1 Data 
The utilization of two datasets, one encompassing U.S. stocks and the other - international 
stocks, is of importance to our study, providing a robust platform to discernibly investigate the 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

11 
 
relationship between HFT and stock herding across varied market settings. It contributes to a 
more comprehensive understanding of the role HFT plays in shaping market dynamics such as 
herding. The U.S. market, with its high HFT penetration and mature infrastructure, provides 
an essential setting to observe the effects of established HFT practices on stock herding 
behavior. This domestic sample thus offers a basis for analyzing the potential causal link 
between HFT activities and stock herding, particularly in a market where HFT accounts for a 
significant proportion of total trading volume. 
Of course, one cannot straightforwardly draw causal inferences from the analysis of the 
U.S. sample. For example, there may be a latent factor influencing both HFT activity and 
herding. Seeking to examine causality in more depth, and using an event study approach, this 
paper uses HFT effective start dates and colocation introduction as start dates of AT and HFT 
for our international sample. Considering a range of international markets, with varying 
degrees of HFT adoption, provides a useful comparative dimension to our analysis. The 
potential variations in HFT induced herding across these markets could illuminate the impact 
of different market structures, regulatory environments, and trading practices.  
We obtain TAQ data for the constituents of the S&P100 from January 2015 to 
December 2017. This dataset contains information on company name, trade date, millisecond 
time stamp, types (i.e., trade or quote), trade and quote price, quote size and trade volume. We 
drop the first and last 10 minutes of the trading day to minimize any overnight and market 
closing effects. All stocks are sorted at the end of each year according to their market 
capitalisation and daily data of the Fama-French return factors is collected from Kenneth R. 
French’s Data Library. We average log returns per minute during the trading day.  
The sample of international stocks includes the main index constituents for 10 
exchanges in nine countries, including Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, India (Bombay and 
NSE), Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and the United States. At the end of each year, 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

12 
 
we update the constituents for each index and for each exchange. The dataset is collected from 
Refinitiv Eikon. We follow Aitken et al. (2015) to identify the colocation date and HFT 
effective date for each exchange.5 We list the colocation start dates and HFT effective date for 
each exchange in Table 1.  Given that the HFT effective date always precedes the colocation 
date, we select data three years before the HFT effective date and three years after the 
colocation date for each exchange (see Figure 1).  
[Insert Table 1 here] 
[Insert Figure 1 here] 
 
3.2 Variables 
Similarly to Malceniece et al. (2019), Hendershott et al. (2011) and Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang 
(2015) we use quote and trade message traffic to infer HFT activity.6 In particular, we estimate 
QuoteUpdates as the average number of quote (price and quantity) changes at best prices per 
minute and HFT_trades as the average negative trading volume (in USD 100) divided by the 
total number of messages per minute (see Conrad et al., 2015; Hendershott et al., 2011; 
Boehmer et al., 2020). An increase in QuoteUpdates and HFT_trades imply an increase in HFT 
activity. In Figure 2, we plot the time-series of QuoteUpdates and HFT_trades separately 
across terciles. In line with previous literature, HFTs are more active in large capitalisation 
stocks (see Brogaard et al., 2018 and Malceniece et al., 2019).  
 
 
5 Several recent studies use colocation dates in order to infer AT/HFT start dates in an international setting. See 
Boehmer, Fong and Wu, 2021; Frino, Mollica and Webb, 2014; Aitken et al., 2015 and 2017; Baron, Brogaard, 
Hagströmer and Kirilenko, 2019; Gider et al., 2019. 
6 Conrad et al. (2015) and Boehmer, Fong, and Wu (2020) show that HFTs mainly act through quotes rather than 
trades. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

13 
 
For the sample of international stocks, we generate two dummy variables: HFT_start7 
which equals zero before the HFT start date and one afterwards and Col_start8 which equals 
zero before the colocation date and one afterwards. As the timing of colocation decisions vary 
across exchanges, we avoid any potential identification bias in our results. Further, due to the 
staggered introduction of colocation services, our results are not confounded by a single 
unrelated event.  
 
3.3 Methods 
Methodologically, the empirical herding literature focuses on two domains. The first examines 
the presence of herding by institutional investors (see Bennett, Sias, and Starks, 2003; 
Gavriilidis, Kallinterakis, and Ferreira, 2013). On the other hand, most empirical studies use 
aggregate market data to investigate herding towards the market consensus (see Chang et al., 
2000; Chiang and Zheng, 2010; Bohl, Branger and Trede, 2017; Chong, Bany-Ariffin, 
Matemilola and McGowan, 2020; Duygun, Tunaru and Vioto, 2021). In this paper, we follow 
the second empirical approach.  
Importantly, Christie and Huang (1995) and Chang et al. (2000) demonstrated that in 
the absence of herding, the relationship between cross-sectional return dispersion and absolute 
market returns is expected to be linear and positive. If herding is present, the relationship 
between cross-sectional return dispersion and absolute market returns is expected to be nonlinear i.e., cross-sectional return dispersion will decrease for large absolute values of market 
return. As a consequence, Chang et al. (2000) proposed the following specification to detect 
herding:  
 
 
7 Unlike colocation dates, the HFT_start is from Aitken et al. (2015) using trade size and cancellations to identify 
HFT effective start date to refer the impact of HFT on the marketplace. It is expected as high frequency traders 
establish their servers close to exchanges before the introduction of colocation services. 
8 Col_start refers to the actual introduction of colocation services from exchanges, which is a commitment to offer 
low-latency infrastructure to attract higher intensity of AT/HFT (Boehmer et al., 2020). 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

14 
 
                                 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷! = 𝛽" + 𝛽#)𝑅$,!) + 𝛽&𝑅$,!
&
+ 𝜀!                                   (1)    
 
 
with CSAD denoting the Cross-Sectional Absolute Deviation of returns, estimated as follows: 
 
 
where N is the number of stocks i included in the cross-section at time t, and Ri,t and Rm,t are 
the stock return and market return for each day t, respectively.  
Under the no-herding scenario (i.e., rational pricing assumptions), 𝛽# is expected to be 
positive and 𝛽& is expected to be statistically insignificant. Positive 𝛽# represents a linear, 
positive relationship between absolute market return and the dispersion of individual returns. 
In other words, if the market return swings are larger (regardless of whether they're positive or 
negative), the individual stock returns should also disperse more widely. A statistically 
significant and positive 𝛽# reflects that greater market movements lead to more individual 
return dispersion in a fully rational and efficient market. If 𝛽# is significant and negative, it 
could potentially suggest anti-herding behavior, as it would mean that the dispersion of 
individual returns decreases when the market return increases in absolute terms. 
𝛽& captures any non-linear effects. Specifically, 𝛽& is negative and significant if the null 
of no-herding is rejected, suggesting that the dispersion of individual returns decreases when 
the market return is at extremely high or low levels. This implies that in times of extreme 
market conditions, individual returns tend to cluster around the market return, indicating 
herding behavior. However, if the value of 𝛽& is statistically significantly positive, this 
indicates the case of excessively high cross-sectional return dispersion and implies ‘antiherding’ (Christie and Huang, 1995; Chiang and Zheng, 2010; Gebka and Wohar, 2013, 
                                                         𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷! = 1
𝑁0)𝑅',! − 𝑅$,!)
(
')#
                                         (2) 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

15 
 
Sibande et al., 2021). Unlike market-wide herding, investors in this latter context appear to 
largely ignore information conveyed by the market-wide price movements. Instead, they focus 
on the dominant views from subset of market participants in an excessive and exaggerated 
way.9  
In order to investigate the hypothesis that HFT activity induces herding, we extend (1) 
as follows:   
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷! = 𝛽" + 𝛽#)𝑅$,!) + 𝛽&𝑅$,!
&
+ 𝛽*𝐻𝐹𝑇+,!'-'!.! 
                                                      + 𝛽/𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦!𝑅$,!
&
+ 𝜀!                                (3) 
 
where HFT_activity is a dummy variable that takes the value of one when 𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠! 
(𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠!) is within the top 10% of its distribution and zero otherwise.10 If HFT activity 
induces herding (anti-herding), we would expect 𝛽/ to be statistically significant and negative 
(positive). 𝛽* estimates the base influence of HFT activity on the dispersion of individual 
returns, independent of the state of the market. If 𝛽* is statistically significant and positive, it 
suggests a potential tendency towards market fragmentation or individualistic trading 
behaviors (anti-herding) as a result of HFT activity. Conversely, a significant and negative 𝛽* 
implies that heightened HFT activity tends to be associated with a narrower dispersion of 
individual returns, hinting at a tendency towards herding.11  
 
 
9 This behaviour of market participants in this context is often attributed to localised herding, retreating from the 
market during market stress, and overconfidence (Gebka and Wohar, 2013). 
10 We conducted a regression analysis that incorporated the interaction term 𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦!+𝑅",!+, however, the findings 
indicate that this interaction term did not exhibit statistical significance. 
11 If both 𝛽! and 𝛽" are significant and have the same sign, it suggests a consistent influence of HFT activity on 
herding (or anti-herding) behavior, regardless of market conditions. On the other hand, if 𝛽! and 𝛽"  are significant 
but have opposite signs, it suggests that the results can change depending on the market conditions. If 𝛽! is positive 
(indicating anti-herding under general market conditions) and 𝛽" is negative (indicating herding under extreme 
market movements), it implies that HFT activity encouraging more clustering in individual returns during periods 
of extreme market movement. If 𝛽! is negative (indicating herding under general market conditions) and 𝛽" is 
positive (indicating anti-herding under extreme market movements), it suggests that HFT activity promoting a 
higher diversity in individual returns during periods of extreme market movement. 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

16 
 
To investigate whether potential HFT herding is noise- or fundamental-driven, we 
decompose CSAD to its fundamental and non-fundamental components. Specifically, this is 
carried out by regressing CSAD against the Fama and French three factors: 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷! = 𝛽" + 𝛽#G𝑟$0!,! − 𝑟1,!H + 𝛽&𝐻𝑀𝐿! + 𝛽*𝑆𝑀𝐵! 
                                                                + 𝛽/𝑀𝑂𝑀! + 𝑒!                                                      (4)  
 
 
where HML is the high (book-to-market ratio) minus low value return factor, SMB is the small 
(market capitalization) minus big size return factor, and MOM is the monthly momentum 
factor. From (4), the residual 𝑒! captures the component of CSAD due to non-fundamental 
factors i.e. 
                                            𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(2(34(5,! = 𝑒!                                              (5) 
 
 
The component of the CSAD due to the fundamental factors is therefore the difference between 
CSAD in the baseline model and CSADNONFUND: 
 
                                  𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷34(5,! = 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷! − 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(2(34(5,!                     (6) 
 
 
We subsequently re-estimate (3) separately for CSADFUND and CSADNONFUND: 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷34(5,! = 𝛽" + 𝛽#)𝑅$,!) + 𝛽&𝑅$,!
&
+ 𝛽*𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦!
+ 𝛽/𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦!𝑅$,!
&
+ 𝜀!                                                       (7) 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

17 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(234(5,! = 𝛽" + 𝛽#)𝑅$,!) + 𝛽&𝑅$,!
&
+ 𝛽*𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦!
+ 𝛽/𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦!𝑅$,!
&
+ 𝜀!                                                       (8)  
 
 
A statistically significant and negative (positive) 𝛽/ in (7) or (8) would imply that HFT is 
associated with herding (anti-herding) due to fundamental or non-fundamental information. 
Finally, employing a sample of international stocks, we test if herding is associated with the 
colocation start date and therefore with HFT activities in the following manner: 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷',! = 𝛽" + 𝛽#)𝑅$,',!) + 𝛽&𝑅$,',!
&
+ 𝛽*𝐶𝑜𝑙6!+7!',! 
                                           + 𝛽/𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡',!𝑅$,',!
&
+ 𝜀',!                                           (9) 
 
where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷',! is the cross-sectional absolute deviation of exchange i on day t, Rm,i,t is the 
market return of exchange i on day t, 𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡',! denotes a colocation dummy variable in 
exchange i which equals zero before the colocation date and switches to one after the colocation 
date. Notably, Aitken et al. (2015) argue that HFT firms might have physically located 
themselves next to the exchange in order to obtain time advantages long before colocation was 
officially offered by exchanges. Therefore, it is possible that the colocation start date does not 
accurately proxy for the effective HFT date. In separate regressions, we therefore regress 
CSAD against a proxy of HFT effective start date (HFT_start) as follows: 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷',! = 𝛽" + 𝛽#)𝑅$,',!) + 𝛽&𝑅$,',!
&
+ 𝛽*𝐻𝐹𝑇6!+7!',! 
                                                  + 𝛽/𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡',!𝑅$,',!
&
+ 𝜀',!                                 (10) 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

18 
 
where 𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡',! is a dummy variable which equals zero before HFT effective date and one 
after that date. We follow the literature (see Aitken, Cumming and Zhan, 2015 and 2023) and 
control for year and exchange fixed effects in (9) and (10).  Additionally, all continuous 
variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile.  
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the U.S. and international sample. For the U.S. 
sample, (Table 2, Panel A), CSAD ranges from 0.0034 to 0.0304. The average daily CSAD 
ranges from a mean of 0.0076 in 2015 to 0.0068 in 2017. The average number of quote updates 
decreases from around 55 per minute in 2015 to around 38 in 2017. The average figure for 
HFT_trades also decreases from -43 in 2015 to -50 in 2017. In Table 2, Panel B, we present 
the descriptive statistics for the international sample covering the sample period from 3 years 
before the HFT effective start date to 3 years after the colocation start date (see Figure 1). The 
average daily CSAD ranges (Panel B) from a 0.0198 to 0.013 across the 10 exchanges in the 
sample.  
[Insert Table 2 here] 
 
 
4. Analysis of HFT’s impact on stock herding 
4.1 Do HFT activities induce herding? 
In Table 3, Column 1, we report the results from (1). As expected, 𝛽# is positive and significant 
at the 1% level. Also, 𝛽& is positive and insignificant. This result is consistent with earlier 
studies that there is no herding in the U.S. market (see Christie and Huang, 1995; Chang et al., 
2000; Gleason, Mathur and Peterson, 2004; Chiang and Zheng, 2010). In Table 3, Columns 2 
and 3, we test Hypothesis 1 that HFT activities induce herding and report the results from (3). 
When we proxy HFT activity using the number of quote updates (QuoteUpdates), the 
coefficient for 𝛽/ is negative and significant at 10% level (-5.868 with a t-statistic of -1.83) 
indicating that HFT activities induce herding under extreme market conditions. Moreover, 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

19 
 
stronger evidence is garnered when we use HFT_trades i.e., 𝛽/ is -6.595 with a t-statistic of -
3.69 and significant at 1% level. These provide evidence to support Hypothesis 1. The 
statistically significant and positive 𝛽* in Columns 2 and 3 suggests that during times of high 
HFT activity (when QuoteUpdates and HFT_trades equals one), the cross-sectional absolute 
deviation (CSAD) of returns tends to be higher than during periods of lower HFT activity 
(when HFT proxies equals zero). This could be interpreted as HFT activity enhancing antiherding behavior in normal market conditions. These results might suggest that the impact of 
HFT on market behavior is complex and context-dependent, with HFT possibly contributing 
to market stability under normal conditions but amplifying collective responses in more 
extreme situations. 
Interestingly, in the estimation of (3), 𝛽& is shown positive and significant (7.764 with 
a t-statistic of 1.74 in Column 2 and 6.862 with a t-statistic of 3.25 in Column 3). A positive 
value for 𝛽& indicates that cross-sectional return dispersion during period of large market 
movements is higher, not lower, than conventional asset pricing models predictions (see Gebka 
and Wohar, 2013 and Christie and Huang, 1995). In this case, market participants largely 
ignore information that reflect the market consensus. Given that in Table 3, we have essentially 
decomposed herding into two categories (i.e., herding induced by more active HFT, and 
herding induced by less active HFT), the results indicate more active HFT induced herding 
(statistically significant and negative 𝛽/), suggesting high frequency traders tend to align their 
trading decisions with the broader market consensus. Instead, less active HFT inspired antiherding (statistically significant and positive 𝛽&) in the market, implies market participants rely 
more on others or localized sources of information.  
[Insert Table 3 here] 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

20 
 
Next, we investigate if herding is conditional on firm size given HFTs are more likely 
to participate in trading large stocks (see Brogaard et al., 2018). To operationalise, for each 
sample year, we select all stocks that belong to the top 30% according to their market 
capitalisation at the end of that calendar year. We then re-estimate (1) and (3) for the sample 
of large stocks only, with the results presented in Table 4. 
Table 4, Column 1, provides the results from (1). The statistically significant and 
positive 𝛽# (-0.275 with a t-statistic of -1.75) and positive and significant coefficient for 𝛽& 
(28.931 with a t-statistic of 3.09) indicates anti-herding effects for large stocks. We then 
decompose trading activity to more active HFT and less active HFT (Table 4, 𝛽/ 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝛽& from 
Columns 2 and 3). The results indicate that, in line with the results in Table 3, more HFT 
activities induce herding for larger market-cap stocks under extreme market conditions but 
induce anti-herding with less active HFT. Indeed, we find statistically significant and positive 
𝛽* in Columns 2 and 3. 𝛽/ in Column 2 and Column 3 is negative and significant at 1% level 
(-28.869 with a t-statistic of -6.29 in Column 2 and -21.945 with a t-statistic of -4.31 in Column 
3). Also, our results indicate the presence of stronger herding effects amongst the sample of 
large-cap stocks compared to all stocks, which provide evidence to support the hypothesis two. 
When considering QuoteUpdates (HFT_trades) as the HFT activity measure, 𝛽/ is 5 (3.3) 
times larger for large-cap stocks than for all stocks.  
 [Insert Table 4 here] 
Given the body of empirical evidence indicating HFT activity intensifies during periods of 
heightened price volatility (Jarnecic and Snape, 2014), we dissect how variations in volatility 
might moderate the relationship between HFT and herding. If HFTs induce herding, then we 
would expect herding to be stronger in period of high volatility than in periods of low volatility. 
Below, we investigate this hypothesis. To this end, we employ the VIX index to split our 
sample to low and high volatility days. We define a day as a low (high) volatility day when 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

21 
 
VIX is in the bottom (top) 25% of its distribution. We then estimate (1) and (3) again, separately 
for low-volatility and high-volatility days. We report the results in Table 5.  
In Table 5, Column 1, we report the baseline results for low volatility days where there 
is no evidence of herding (𝛽& is insignificant). In Column 2 and Column 3, we report the results 
from (3). Unlike earlier results, there is no evidence of HFT herding (the 𝛽/s are insignificant). 
But there is some limited anti-herding evidence with less active HFT, when the number of 
quotes (QuoteUpdates) is intensive (𝛽& is 28.052 with a t-statistic of 2.02 in Column 2). In 
Table 5, Column 4, we report the results for the high-volatility days. The baseline results again 
indicate no herding (𝛽& is insignificant). However, when we decompose trading activity to 
more active HFT and less active HFT, the results strikingly indicate that more HFT activities 
induce herding during high volatility days (𝛽/ is negative and significant in both Columns 5 
and 6). Also, relative to the results in Table 3, the association between HFT activities and 
herding is stronger during periods of higher volatility. 
[Insert Table 5 here] 
The results suggest that HFT traders contribute to market herding during high-volatility periods. 
This indicates that in turbulent times, when market stability could already be at risk, the 
presence of more active HFT may further intensify market swings by promoting herd-like 
trading behavior. This could potentially lead to more pronounced market fluctuations and 
increase systemic risk. In low volatility conditions, less active HFT shows some degree of antiherding behavior in the market when the number of quotes is high. This suggests that in less 
turbulent market conditions, market participants may take a contrarian position to the market 
consensus, potentially aiding in the process of price discovery and adding to market stability. 
 
4.2 Analysis of the mechanism and channel by which HFT induces herding 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

22 
 
Moving on, we aim to illuminate the various means by which HFT induces herding and antiherding behavior within financial markets. This exploration is motivated by the revelation that 
evidence of herding is more pronounced among large-cap stocks, thereby hinting at a complex 
interplay between HFT and market behavior in this segment. Our exploration is two-fold. 
Firstly, we delve into the mechanism that underpin HFT’s influence - liquidity. We examine 
the interplay between liquidity conditions, a market aspect that HFT notably impacts, and 
herding behavior (Galariotis, Krokida and Spyrou, 2016). Secondly, we turn our attention to 
the channel through which HFT’s influence is transmitted - return comovements (Malceniece 
et al., 2019). We investigate how HFT impacts return comovements among large-cap stocks 
and how these comovements subsequently influence herding and anti-herding behavior. By 
investigating these mechanism and channels, we seek to provide a more textured understanding 
of how HFT shapes investor behavior, particularly within the large-cap stock arena, across 
diverse market conditions.  
Liquidity is an integral factor that governs trading decisions and market behavior, and 
its relationship with HFT is well-documented (e.g., Hendershott, Jones and Menkveld, 2011, 
Brogaard and Garriott, 2019). As such, understanding how liquidity conditions interact with 
herding behavior under the influence of HFT is a logical next step in our investigation. This 
will not only broaden our understanding of HFT's impact on market dynamics, but also provide 
a more comprehensive view of the mechanism through which HFT shapes investor behavior. 
Liquidity has many dimensions and many different measures, with each liquidity measure 
designed to capture a different aspect of liquidity. To investigate liquidity's role, we employ a 
modified version of the Amihud (2002) measure - a widely recognized tool to assess illiquidity 
taking into account price response elasticity to trading volume. We adapt this measure in line 
with Karolyi et al. (2012), allowing it to measure liquidity rather than illiquidity. This tailored 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

23 
 
variable enables us to explore how price responses interact with trading volumes, effectively 
reflecting liquidity conditions.12 
In order to further test Hypothesis 2, Table 6 presents our analysis of the role liquidity 
plays in herding behavior. In Column 1, we present the baseline results for low liquidity days, 
which show evidence of anti-herding (𝛽# is negative and 𝛽& is positive, both statistically 
significant). In Columns 2 and 3, we extend the analysis to include HFT activity. Similar to 
results in Tables 3 and 4, evidence suggests more active HFT induces herding (𝛽/ is negative 
and significant). Furthermore, we observe anti-herding when HFT is less active, as seen in the 
positive and significant 𝛽& in both Columns 2 and 3. In contrast, for high liquidity days 
(Column 4), baseline results do not indicate herding (𝛽& is insignificant). However, a more 
detailed picture unfolds when we distinguish between the effects of when HFT are particularly 
active or not particularly active. We find that high liquidity days are associated with HFTinduced herding (𝛽/ is negative and significant in both Columns 5 and 6). In fact, the link 
between HFT activity and herding intensifies during high liquidity periods, being about twice 
as strong compared to low liquidity days. Moreover, the consistently positive and significant 
𝛽*s indicate that in normal market conditions, more active HFT tends to enhance anti-herding 
in the market.  
[Insert Table 6 here] 
It is interesting to note the distinct behavior between more active HFT and less active 
HFT under varying liquidity conditions. Firstly, these observations suggest that more active 
HFT, potentially due to the capability to process information and execute trades quickly, may 
be better equipped to capitalize on opportunities arising in high liquidity conditions and thus 
 
 
12 We first measure liquidity as 𝐿𝑖𝑞$,% = −log 41 +
&'!,#&
(!,#)*+!,#7 , where 𝑅$,%, 𝑃$,%, and 𝑉𝑜𝑙$,% is the return, price, and trading 
volume for stock i on trade s. We then calculate the average liquidity (𝐿𝑖𝑞$,!) for each large stock i on day t. The market 
liquidity is measured across stocks as 𝐿𝑖𝑞",! =
,
- ∑𝐿𝑖𝑞$,!.
-
,
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

24 
 
tend to herd more during these periods. Secondly, the results show a dynamic interaction 
between HFT, liquidity, and herding, with implications for market stability and efficiency. 
Periods of high liquidity, associated with increased HFT-induced herding, could potentially 
exacerbate price deviations from fundamental values and contribute to the creation of 
speculative bubbles. On the other hand, in low liquidity conditions, the anti-herding behavior 
inspired by less active HFT might act as a stabilizing force. 
Building upon Sarr and Lybek's (2002) assertion, we propose that the percentage spread 
is a more fitting measure for cross-stock comparisons. This is primarily due to its ability to 
account for the fact that higher priced stocks tend to have less costly spreads. Therefore, to 
enrich our analysis and validate our previous findings, we incorporated a direct liquidity 
measure (the quoted bid-ask spread) as an additional robustness check.13 
[Insert Table 7 here] 
The subsequent results, presented in Table 7, adhere to the same sample period as Table 
6. The table reveals an anti-herding pattern in the baseline regression under extreme liquidity 
conditions. Evidence of HFT-related herding are qualitatively similar to the results reported 
with the Amihud measure during higher liquidity days (𝛽/ is significantly negative in both 
Columns 5 and 6). A notable divergence finding from table 6 is the detected anti-herding 
evidence in high liquidity stocks from the baseline regression in Column 4 (statistically 
significant and positive 𝛽&). In contrast to the results presented in Table 6, Table 7 did not 
reveal any evidence of HFT-related herding during periods of lower liquidity. This suggests 
 
 
13 The percentage bid-ask spread for large stock 𝑖 on quote 𝑞 is calculated as %𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑$,. = 
/%0!,$1 3$4!,$
(
%#&!,$' )!*!,$
+
). We estimate average 
spread for each large stock i on day t as the average spread across all quotes. The market spread on day 𝑡 is measured across 
stocks as %𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑",! =
,
- ∑%𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑$,!.
-
,
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

25 
 
additional layers of complexity in the relationship between liquidity conditions and herding 
behaviour, influenced by HFT activities, which worth further exploration.14 
In the context of our analysis on the channels of HFT, we employ return comovement 
as a key measure and differentiate HFT activity through two proxies. When we take into 
account number of quotes (QuoteUpdates) as a proxy of HFT activity, we find evidence of 
HFT-induced herding during periods of lower return comovement (𝛽/ is -13.664 with a tstatistic of -2.16). This suggests that when there is intensive activity in quote updates, this HFT 
activity leads to herding in market periods characterized by lower return comovements. This 
could indicate that in situations where the best prices are rapidly changing, HFTs might play a 
more influential role, especially when market prices are not moving very closely together. On 
the other hand, when considering HFT_trades as the proxy for HFT activity, we find evidence 
of HFT-induced herding in periods of higher return comovements (𝛽/ is -8.119 with a t-statistic 
of -3.37). This result implies that when trading volumes increase relative to the number of 
messages, HFTs could contribute to herding in periods where market prices tend to move more 
closely together. Interestingly, no evidence of herding is observed for HFT trades 
(HFT_trades) during periods of lower return comovements, nor for number of quote updates 
(QuoteUpdates) under periods of higher return comovements. This potentially underscores the 
varied roles and impacts of HFT activities under different market conditions. 
[Insert Table 8 here] 
The implications of these findings are twofold. First, they underscore the complexity 
role of HFT activities in influencing market dynamics under various market conditions, further 
emphasizing the need for differentiated and context-aware regulatory policies. Secondly, they 
 
 
14 The observed differences might be due to the unique aspects of the two different liquidity measures or could be 
suggestive of other underlying factors impacting these relationships. These differences are valuable as they can 
lead to further investigations to refine and expand our understanding of these dynamics. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

26 
 
highlight the heterogeneity within HFT activities, with each HFT proxy (QuoteUpdates and 
HFT_trades) displaying unique patterns of association with herding under different market 
conditions. 
 
4.3 Is HFT related to fundamental or non-fundamental herding? 
Below we investigate hypothesis three whether herding induced by HFTs is intentional (i.e., 
non-fundamental) or spurious (i.e., fundamental). In particular, we decompose 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷! to 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(2(34(5,! and 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷34(5,! as described earlier in subsection 3.3, estimating (7) and (8). 
We report the results in Table 9. When observing the baseline results for 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(2(34(5,! 
(Table 9, Column 1), 𝛽& is positive and insignificant, indicating the absence of nonfundamental herding. However, when we decompose trading activity to more active HFT and 
less active HFT (𝛽/ 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝛽& from Columns 2 and 3), there is a clear indication that more HFT 
activities are associated with non-fundamental herding (𝛽/ is -6.18 with a t-statistic of -1.93 in 
Column 2 and -6.741 with a t-statistic of -3.55 in Column 3). Relatedly, less active HFT is 
associated with anti-herding (𝛽& is positive and highly significant at 1% level). Equally, when 
looking at fundamental herding (Column 4), 𝛽& is insignificant. However, there is no herding 
evidence that HFT activities are associated with fundamental herding (𝛽/ is insignificant in 
Columns 5 and 6).  
[Insert Table 9 here] 
In order to investigate this further, in Table 10, we focus on large stocks. When looking at 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(2(34(5,!, the baseline results indicate anti-herding (𝛽& is 27.616 with t-statistic of 3.01 
in Column 1). We further decompose trading activity to more active HFT and less active HFT 
in Columns 2 and 3. More active HFT is clearly associated with non-fundamental driven 
herding for large stocks herding (𝛽/ is negative and highly significant at 1% level for both 
QuoteUpdates and HFT_trades). The size of 𝛽/ also indicate that for large stocks HFT 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

27 
 
activities are strongly associated with intentional (i.e. non-fundamental), where 𝛽/ of 
QuoteUpdates (HFT_trades) is 4.7 (3.3) times larger for large cap stocks than for all stocks. In 
contrast, when looking at 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷34(5,!, 𝛽/ is insignificant in Columns 5 and 6 and indicates no 
herding evidence that HFT activities induce fundamental-driven herding for large stocks.  
Overall, the results in Tables 9 and 10 provide evidence to hypothesis three and indicate 
that HFT activities are strongly associated with non-fundamental herding, especially for large 
stocks. This finding is consistent with the view that HFT trading strategies are highly correlated 
(see Chaboud et al., 2014; Boehmer et al., 2018) and that market making strategies account for 
the majority of HFT volume (see Hagströmer and Nordén, 2013; Menkveld, 2013). Relatedly, 
Malceniece et al. (2019) show that whilst HFTs are faster at incorporating market-wide 
information, two-thirds of the increase in commonality in returns is associated with correlated 
trading strategies of HFTs. Indeed, our results show that HFTs engage in non-fundamental, 
highly correlated trading, that is induced by the HFT arms race.  
[Insert Table 10 here] 
 
4.3 Evidence on the International Herding 
Finally, in this section, we use the colocation dates as an exogenous shock in HFT activities in 
order to investigate the effect of HFT trading on herding. To this end, we estimate (9) and (10) 
using our sample of international stocks from 10 exchanges in nine countries (see Table 1). All 
regressions include year and exchange fixed effects.  
In Table 11, we compare the estimation results from (1) and (10). In Column 1, we 
report the baseline herding equation and 𝛽& is found positive and significant at the 1% level 
(1.529 with a t-statistic of 5.13). In Column 2, we use the HFT effective date dummy to proxy 
for the HFT start date. 𝛽/ is negative and significant at 1% (-8.084 with a t-statistic of -7.14), 
indicating that HFT is strongly associated with herding after the HFT start date. This finding 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

28 
 
is consistent with the view that the HFT effective date results in intensive HFT activity (see 
Aitken et al., 2015 and 2017). On the other hand, non-HFT activities seem to explain the 
negative stock herding coefficient picked up in the baseline equation. We investigate these 
findings further in Table 12.    
In Table 12, we employ the colocation date as a proxy for the HFT start date (see Table 
1) and estimate (1) and (9).15 In line with the results from Table 11, the results in Table 12 
indicate that HFT activities induce herding (𝛽/ is negative and significant, -1.32 with a tstatistic of -3.15). Importantly, 𝛽/ in Table 11 is 6.12 times larger than in Table 12 (-8.084 
compared to -1.32), implying that the HFT effective date has a stronger power in explaining 
the presence of herding than the colocation start date.  This finding supports the work by Aitken 
et al. (2015) that colocation services are the result of HFT provision.  
[Insert Table 11 here] 
[Insert Table 12 here] 
Lastly, in Table 13, we report the estimation results for (1), (9) and (10), separately for “up 
days” and “down days” (see Galariotis et al., 2015). “Down days” refers to days when market 
return is in bottom 5% of its distribution and “up days” to days when market return is at the top 
5% of its distribution.  In Table 13, Column 2 and 3, we decompose herding to HFT and nonHFT. The results for the “up days” indicate that the HFT start date as well as the colocation 
start date induce HFT herding. As expected, the coefficient for HFT_start is larger than for 
Col_start (-8.901 vs -8.621). In Table 13, Panel B, we report the results for “down days”. 
HFT_start is negative but insignificant and Col_start is positive and significant. 
 
 
 
15 The baseline results in Table 11 are little different from the baseline results in Table 10. As Figure 2 and Table 
1 show, the HFT effective dates are around one year to four years earlier than the Colocation start dates. It also 
covers the period of post-colocation start date. Thus, the baseline results without considering the effect of HFT 
are not much different. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

29 
 
[Insert Table 13 here] 
 
5. Conclusion  
In this paper, we examine the role of HFT in herding. To this end, we employ TAQ data for 
the U.S. market and daily price data for 10 exchanges in nine countries. We posit that HFT 
activities induce stock herding and add to the literature on how market microstructure affects 
market efficiency (see Easley, López de Prado, O’Hara and Zhang, 2021 and Hirschey, 2021).   
Our starting point is that HFT activities are strongly correlated and increase commonality in 
liquidity (Malceniece et al., 2019), indicating that HFTs, either knowingly or unknowingly, 
induce stock herding. Indeed, we show consistent results for the U.S. market and for 10 
exchanges around the world that HFT activities are positively associated with herding and that 
such herding is stronger for larger stocks and during more volatile periods. Notably, our results 
suggest that HFT activities are strongly associated with non-fundamental herding, and antiherding, pointing towards the role of HFT in fostering information cascades and resultant price 
inefficiencies. This indicates that the positive effects on price discovery and liquidity induced 
by HFT are, at least, partially offset by an increase in price inefficiencies. 
These findings significantly contribute to the literature on HFT and behavioral finance, 
while offering valuable insights for both policymakers and investors. Budish et al. (2015) 
argues that the high-frequency arms race for speed is “socially wasteful” and Aquilina et al. 
(2022) estimate that the race is worth $5 billion annually. It is not surprising therefore that HFT 
activities have been a concern to policy makers. Considering the revenue generation potential 
of HFTs for exchanges worldwide, the potential downside of increased price inefficiencies and 
market fragility brought by HFT-induced herding calls for considered policymaking. For 
investors, understanding the existence of anti-herding could illuminate the necessity for 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

30 
 
diversification strategies to mitigate systematic risk. Future research should continue to 
investigate these dynamics to ensure market stability and efficiency. 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

31 
 
References 
Aitken, M., Cumming, D. and Zhan, F., 2015. High frequency trading and end-of-day price 
dislocation. Journal of Banking & Finance, 59, pp.330-349. 
Aitken, M., Cumming, D. and Zhan, F., 2017. Trade size, high-frequency trading, and 
colocation around the world. The European Journal of Finance, 23(7-9), pp.781-801. 
Aitken, M., Cumming, D. and Zhan, F., 2023. Algorithmic Trading and Market Quality: 
International Evidence of the Impact of Errors in Colocation Dates. Journal of Banking 
and Finance, 151, 106843. 
Andrikopoulos, P., Kallinterakis, V., Leite Ferreira, M. and Verousis, T., 2017. Intraday 
herding on a cross-border exchange. International Review of Financial Analysis, 53, 
pp.25-36. 
Aquilina, M., Budish, E. and O'Neill, P., 2022. Quantifying the High-Frequency Trading 
"Arms Race." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 137(1), pp.493-564. 
Banerjee, A., 1992. A Simple Model of Herd Behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
107(3), pp.797-817. 
Baron, M., Brogaard, J., Hagströmer, B. and Kirilenko, A., 2019. Risk and Return in HighFrequency Trading. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 54(3), pp.993-1024. 
Benkraiem, R., Bouattour, M., Galariotis, E. and Miloudi, A., 2021. Do investors in SMEs 
herd? Evidence from French and UK equity markets. Small Business Economics, 56(4), 
pp.1619-1637. 
Bennett, J. R., Sias, R. and Starks, L., 2003. Greener pastures and the impact of dynamic in- 
stitutional preferences. Review of Financial Studies, 16, pp.1203–1238. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

32 
 
Benos, E. and Sagade, S., 2012. High-Frequency Trading Behaviour and Its Impact on 
Market Quality: Evidence from the UK Equity Market. SSRN Electronic Journal. 
Bernales, A., Verousis, T. and Voukelatos, N., 2020. Do investors follow the herd in option 
markets?. Journal of Banking & Finance, 119, p.104899. 
Biais, B., Foucault, T. and Moinas, S., 2015. Equilibrium fast trading. Journal of Financial 
Economics, 116(2), pp.292-313. 
Bikhchandani, S. and Sharma, S., 2000. Herd behavior in financial markets. IMF Staff 
papers, 47(3), pp.279-310. 
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D. and Welch, I., 1992. A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, 
and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades. Journal of Political Economy, 100(5), 
pp.992-1026. 
Boehmer, E., Fong, K. and Wu, J., 2020. Algorithmic Trading and Market Quality: 
International Evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, pp.1-30. 
Boehmer, E., Li, D. and Saar, G., 2018. The Competitive Landscape of High-Frequency 
Trading Firms. The Review of Financial Studies, 31(6), pp.2227-2276. 
Bohl, M., Branger, N. and Trede, M., 2017. The case for herding is stronger than you think. 
Journal of Banking & Finance, 85, pp.30-40. 
Breckenfelder, J., 2020. Competition Among High-Frequency Traders, and Market 
Quality. VoxEU, org, 17. 
Brogaard, J. and Garriott, C. (2019) ‘High-frequency trading competition’, Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 54(4), pp. 1469–1497.  
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

33 
 
Brogaard, J., Carrion, A., Moyaert, T., Riordan, R., Shkilko, A. and Sokolov, K., 2018. High 
frequency trading and extreme price movements. Journal of Financial Economics, 
128(2), pp.253-265. 
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T. and Riordan, R., 2014. High Frequency Trading and Price 
Discovery. The Review of Financial Studies, 27, pp.2267-2306. 
Budish, E., Cramton, P. and Shim, J., 2015. The High-Frequency Trading Arms Race: 
Frequent Batch Auctions as a Market Design Response*. The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 130(4), pp.1547-1621. 
Çelen, B. and Kariv, S., 2004. Distinguishing Informational Cascades from Herd Behavior in 
the Laboratory. American Economic Review, 94(3), pp.484-498. 
Chaboud, A., Chiquoine, B., Hjalmarsson, E. and Vega, C., 2014. Rise of the Machines: 
Algorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market. The Journal of Finance, 69(5), 
pp.2045-2084. 
Chakrabarty, B. and Pascual, R., 2022. Stock liquidity and algorithmic market making during 
the COVID-19 crisis. Journal of Banking & Finance, p.106415. 
Chang, E.C., Cheng, J.W. and Khorana, A., 2000. An examination of herd behavior in equity 
markets: an international perspective. Journal of Banking & Finance, 24 (10), pp.1651–
1679. 
Chiang, T. and Zheng, D., 2010. An empirical analysis of herd behaviour in global stock 
markets? Journal of Banking & Finance, 34, pp.1911–1921. 
Chong, O., Bany- Ariffin, A., Matemilola, B. and McGowan, C., 2020. Can China’s crosssectional dispersion of stock returns influence the herding behaviour of traders in other 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

34 
 
local markets and China’s trading partners?. Journal of International Financial Markets, 
Institutions and Money, 65, p.101168. 
Christie, W. G. and Huang, R. D., 1995. Following the pied piper: Do individual returns herd 
around the market? Financial Analysts Journal, 51, pp.31–37. 
Conrad, J., Wahal, S. and Xiang, J., 2015. High-frequency quoting, trading, and the efficiency 
of prices. Journal of Financial Economics, 116(2), pp.271-291. 
Cui, Y., Gebka, B. and Kallinterakis, V., 2019. Do closed-end fund investors herd?. Journal 
of Banking & Finance, 105, pp.194-206. 
Duygun, M., Tunaru, R. and Vioto, D., 2021. Herding by corporates in the US and the 
Eurozone through different market conditions. Journal of International Money and 
Finance, 110, p.102311. 
Easley, D., López de Prado, M., O’Hara, M. and Zhang, Z., 2021. Microstructure in the 
Machine Age. The Review of Financial Studies, 34(7), pp.3316-3363. 
Frino, A., Mollica, V. and Webb, R., 2014. The Impact of Co-Location of Securities 
Exchanges' and Traders' Computer Servers on Market Liquidity. Journal of Futures 
Markets, 34(1), pp.20-33. 
Galariotis, E.C., Krokida, S.-I. and Spyrou, S.I. (2016) ‘Herd behavior and equity market 
liquidity: Evidence from major markets’, International Review of Financial Analysis, 
48, pp. 140–149.  
Galariotis, E.C., Rong, W. and Spyrou, S.I., 2015. Herding on fundamental information: A 
comparative study. Journal of Banking & Finance, 50, pp.589-598. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

35 
 
Gavriilidis, K., Kallinterakis, V. and Ferreira, M.P.L., 2013. Institutional industry herding: 
intentional or spurious?. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and 
Money, 26, pp.192-214. 
Gębka, B. and Wohar, M., 2013. International herding: Does it differ across sectors?. Journal 
of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 23, pp.55-84. 
Gider, J., Schmickler, S. and Westheide, C., 2019. High-Frequency Trading and Price 
Informativeness. SSRN Electronic Journal. 
Gleason, K.C., Mathur, I. and Peterson, M.A., 2004. Analysis of intraday herding behavior 
among the sector ETFs. Journal of Empirical Finance, 11(5), pp.681-694. 
Hagströmer, B. and Nordén, L., 2013. The diversity of high-frequency traders. Journal of 
Financial Markets, 16(4), pp.741-770. 
Hasbrouck, J. and Saar, G., 2013. Low-Latency Trading. Journal of Financial Markets, 
16(4), pp.646-679. 
Hendershott, T., Jones, C. and Menkveld, A.J., 2011. Does Algorithmic Trading Improve 
Liquidity?. The Journal of Finance, 66(1), pp.1-33. 
Hirschey, N., 2021. Do High-Frequency Traders Anticipate Buying and Selling 
Pressure?. Management Science, 67(6), pp.3321-3345. 
Hirshleifer, D. and Hong Teoh, S., 2003. Herd Behaviour and Cascading in Capital Markets: 
a Review and Synthesis. European Financial Management, 9(1), pp.25-66. 
Jarnecic, E. and Snape, M. (2014) ‘The provision of liquidity by high-frequency participants’, 
Financial Review, 49(2), pp. 371–394.  
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

36 
 
Jarnecic, E. and Snape, M., 2014. The Provision of Liquidity by High-Frequency 
Participants. Financial Review, 49(2), pp.371-394. 
Jarrow, R. and Protter, P., 2012. A Dysfunctional Role of High Frequency Trading in 
Electronic Markets. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, 15, pp.219-249. 
Jørgensen, K., Skjeltorp, J. and Ødegaard, B., 2018. Throttling hyperactive robots – Order-totrade ratios at the Oslo Stock Exchange. Journal of Financial Markets, 37, pp.1-16. 
Kellard, N.M., Millo, Y., Simon, J. and Engel, O., 2017. Close communications: Hedge 
funds, brokers and the emergence of herding. British Journal of Management, 28, pp.84101.  
Li, M., Yin, X. and Zhao, J., 2020. Does program trading contribute to excess comovement of 
stock returns?. Journal of Empirical Finance, 59, pp.257-277. 
Malceniece, L., Malcenieks, K. and Putniņš, T., 2019. High frequency trading and 
comovement in financial markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 134(2), pp.381-399. 
Menkveld, A., 2013. High frequency trading and the new market makers. Journal of 
Financial Markets, 16(4), pp.712-740. 
MiFID II Review Report., 2021. European Securities and Markets Authority, ESMA70-1564572.  
O’Hara, M., 2010. What Is a Quote?. The Journal of Trading, 5(2), pp.10-16. 
Shleifer, A. and Summers, L., 1990. The Noise Trader Approach to Finance. Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 4(2), pp.19-33. 
Sibande, X. et al. (2021) ‘Investor sentiment and (anti) herding in the currency market: 
Evidence from Twitter Feed Data’, Journal of Behavioral Finance, 24(1), pp. 56–72.  
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

37 
 
Tedeschi, G., Iori, G. and Gallegati, M., 2012. Herding effects in order driven markets: The 
rise and fall of gurus. Journal of Economic Behavior &Organization, 81(1), pp.82-96. 
Van Kervel, V. and Menkveld, A., 2019. High‐Frequency Trading around Large Institutional 
Orders. The Journal of Finance, 74(3), pp.1091-1137. 
Voukelatos, N. and Verousis, T., 2019. Option‐implied information and stock 
herding. International Journal of Finance and Economics, 24(4), pp.1429-1442. 
Weller, B., 2018. Does Algorithmic Trading Reduce Information Acquisition?. The Review of 
Financial Studies, 31(6), pp.2184-2226. 
Yang, L. and Zhu, H., 2019. Back-Running: Seeking and Hiding Fundamental Information in 
Order Flows. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(4), pp.1484-1533. 
Ye, M., Yao, C. and Gai, J., 2013. The externalities of high-frequency trading. WBS Finance 
Group Research Paper, (180). 
 
 
 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

38 
 
Figures and Tables 
Figure 1: Timeline of the Colocation Event 
 
 
Notes: This figure shows the timeline of the colocation event for each exchange. We have in total 10 exchanges 
in nine countries as the full sample. The HFT effective date is at least eight months earlier than the colocation 
start date for each exchange. We collect three years data before the HFT effective date and three years data after 
the colocation start date for each exchange. 
 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

39 
 
Figure 2: Quote Updates and HFT Trades Measure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes: This figure presents the time series of average quote updates and HFT trades measure per minute across 
days for all stocks and large stocks. The sample covers the period between 2015 and 2017. All stocks include 
constituents of S&P 100, while large stocks include the top 30 stocks from the full sample. Panel A plots the time 
series of quote updates per minute, which proxy the HFT quotation and activity. We count all quotes that indicate 
changes in the price or size of the best quotes for each stock per minute and report equally weighted average of 
shares across days. Panel B graphs the time series of HFT trades, which defines as the negative of trading volume 
(in $100) divided by the number of messages. This is a proxy for HFT trades. 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

40 
 
Table 1: HFT Effective Date and Colocation Start Date 
This table includes the list of 10 exchanges and the corresponding country. HFT effective dates are from Aitken 
et al. (2015), and colocation start dates are from Boehmer et al. (2020). 
 
 
Country 
Exchange Name 
HFT Effective 
Date 
Colocation Start 
Date 
Data Period 
Australia 
Australia stock exchange 
Apr2006 
Nov2008 
01May2003-31Oct2011 
Canada 
Toronto stock exchange 
May2005 
Nov2008 
01Jun2002-31Oct2011 
Germany 
XETRA Germany 
Jan2003 
Q42006 
01Feb2000-30Sep2009 
India 
Bombay stock exchange 
May2009 
15Nov2010 
01Jun2006-14Nov2013 
India 
NSE India 
May2009 
Aug2009 
01Jun2006-31Jul2012 
Japan 
Tokyo stock exchange 
May2005 
May2009 
01Jun2002-30Apr2012 
United Kingdom 
London stock exchange 
Feb2006 
Sep2008 
01Mar2003-31Aug2011 
United State 
NASDAQ 
Jan2003 
Apr2005 
01Feb2000-31Mar2008 
Sweden 
Stockholm stock exchange 
Apr2005 
25Jun2008 
01May2002-24Jun2011 
Switzerland 
Swiss stock exchange 
Jan2004 
24Jun2008 
01Feb2001-23Jun2011 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

41 
 
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics 
 
Panel A: Descriptive statistics for the U.S. market 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
 
𝑅$,# 
Year 
2015 
2016 
2017 
 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Minimum 
0.0039 
0.0034 
0.0038 
 
-0.0343 
-0.0364 
-0.0177 
Maximum 
0.0304 
0.0258 
0.0162 
 
0.0293 
0.0238 
0.0126 
Mean 
0.0076 
0.0081 
0.0068 
 
-0.0001 
0.0004 
0.0007 
Std.dev 
0.0025 
0.0031 
0.0019 
 
0.0095 
0.0082 
0.004 
Skewness 
3.3303 
2.0263 
1.6187 
 
-0.3062 
-0.5249 
-0.3365 
Kurtosis 
28.535 
9.5848 
7.4073 
 
4.1171 
5.2358 
5.7171 
No. (# of assets) 
100 
100 
100 
 
100 
100 
100 
Observations 
251 
251 
251 
 
251 
251 
251 
 
 
𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠# 
 
 
 
𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠# 
 
Year 
2015 
2016 
2017 
 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Minimum 
28.462 
23.935 
26.981 
 
-60.642 
-57.007 
-60.039 
Maximum 
206.966 
156.189 
83.398 
 
-25.249 
-25.913 
-36.037 
Mean 
54.627 
52.481 
37.788 
 
-42.907 
-43.469 
-49.681 
Std.dev 
22.151 
24.487 
7.7763 
 
7.0643 
6.7302 
3.9755 
Skewness 
2.5725 
1.9055 
2.0589 
 
0.1652 
0.6003 
0.2528 
Kurtosis 
14.559 
6.5809 
9.4326 
 
2.6118 
2.826 
3.2425 
No. (# of assets) 
100 
100 
100 
 
100 
100 
100 
Observations 
251 
251 
251 
 
251 
251 
251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

42 
 
 
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for the US sample (S&P 100) in Panel A, and for the international 
sample in Panel B. The CSAD is defined as 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# =
&
' ∑
|𝑅(,# − 𝑅$,#|
'
()&
, where 𝑅$,# is the market return which 
is measured as the equally weighted average of individual stock returns (𝑅(,#) and is the first difference of the log 
price series. The cross-sectional absolute deviation (CSAD) is measured for the US market (S&P100) in Panel A 
for the period between 2015 to 2017, while Panel B reports the results of CSAD for the international sample from 
10 exchanges in 9 countries from 3 years before HFT effective start date to 3 years after the colocation start date 
(see Figure 1). No. (# of assets) reports the number of constituents of the main index for each exchange. 
 
Panel B: Descriptive statistics for the international sample 
Name of 
exchange 
ASX 
BSE 
LSE 
NASDAQ 
NSE 
Country 
Australia 
India 
United Kingdom 
United State 
India 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
Minimum 
0 
-0.1849 
0 
-0.1212 
0 
-0.1024 
0 
-0.1721 
0 
-0.145 
Maximum 
1.2436 
0.1219 
1.0069 
0.1736 
1.088 
0.1171 
1.0072 
0.0969 
0.8392 
0.1914 
Mean 
0.0151 
0.0003 
0.0171 
0.0001 
0.013 
0.0003 
0.0198 
0.0001 
0.0164 
0.0002 
Std.dev 
0.0411 
0.0178 
0.0366 
0.0196 
0.035 
0.016 
0.0332 
0.0173 
0.0368 
0.0208 
Skewness 
26.345 
-1.446 
23.324 
-0.156 
24.29 
-0.297 
20.82 
-0.303 
19.498 
0.054 
Kurtosis 
744.913 
18.113 
579.18 
9.059 
639.8 
10.947 
515.07 
9.523 
400.81 
10.51 
No. (# of assets) 
100 
100 
100 
100 
50 
Observations 
2214 
1941 
2212 
2125 
1604 
Name of 
exchange 
NASDAQ Stockholm 
SIX Swiss 
TYO 
TSX 
XETRA 
Country 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Japan 
Canada 
Germany 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# 
𝑅$,# 
Minimum 
0 
-0.1063 
0 
-0.0759 
0 
-0.1025 
0 
-0.1165 
0 
-0.637 
Maximum 
0.0393 
0.1283 
1.5645 
0.0899 
0.873 
0.1161 
0.8493 
0.097 
1.265 
0.7232 
Mean 
0.013 
0.0003 
0.0135 
0.0002 
0.013 
0.0001 
0.014 
0.0004 
0.018 
0.0001 
Std.dev 
0.0059 
0.0204 
0.0413 
0.0137 
0.029 
0.0151 
0.0248 
0.0151 
0.0527 
0.0275 
Skewness 
1.348 
0.082 
31.286 
-0.232 
23.56 
-0.217 
29.796 
-0.633 
18.893 
2.184 
Kurtosis 
6.278 
8.038 
1054.9 
8.392 
603.5 
7.952 
957.46 
11.399 
371.13 
324.91 
No. (# of assets) 
60 
50 
100 
60 
90 
Observations 
1686 
2706 
2580 
2192 
2520 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

43 
 
Table 3: Herding for All Stocks 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
Baseline 
Intensive Quote Updates 
Intensive HFT trades 
|𝑅$,#| 
0.107*** 
-0.006 
0.037 
 
(2.17) 
(-0.11) 
(0.9) 
𝑅$,#
* 
2.688 
7.764* 
6.862*** 
 
(1.11) 
(1.74) 
(3.25) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# 
 
0.003*** 
0.002*** 
 
 
(6.33) 
(5.68) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-5.868* 
-6.595*** 
 
 
(-1.83) 
(-3.69) 
Observations 
753 
753 
753 
𝑅* 
0.12 
0.23 
0.17 
Note: This table presents the results of herding on all stocks for the period 2015-2017. Column (1) shows the 
results of the basic herding specification from regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀#. Column (2) 
and (3) reports the results of herding including the effects of HFT activity from regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ +
 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# , where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# is the cross-sectional 
absolute deviation on day 𝑡, 𝑅$,# is the market return,  𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# are dummy variables for number of quotes 
(𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠#) and HFT trades (𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠#), which takes value of one on its top 10% distribution and takes 
value of zero otherwise. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. T-statistics in 
parentheses. 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

44 
 
Table 4: Herding for Large Stocks 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
Baseline 
Intensive Quote Updates 
Intensive HFT trades 
|𝑅$,#| 
-0.275* 
-0.314*** 
-0.266*** 
 
(-1.75) 
(-4.91) 
(-2.91) 
𝑅$,#
* 
28.931*** 
39.320*** 
33.639*** 
 
(3.09) 
(7.41) 
(4.88) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# 
 
0.005*** 
0.003*** 
 
 
(6.86) 
(5.59) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-28.869*** 
-21.945*** 
 
 
(-6.29) 
(-4.31) 
Observations 
753 
753 
753 
𝑅* 
0.4 
0.56 
0.47 
Note: This table shows the herding results for large stocks from 2015 to 2017. Large stocks are 30 stocks with the 
higher market capitalization. The results of regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# are presented in 
Column 
(1). 
The 
results 
of 
regression 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# +
 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# are presented in Column (2) and (3), where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# is the cross-sectional absolute 
deviation on day 𝑡, 𝑅$,# is the market return,  𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# are dummy variables for number of quotes 
(𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠#) and HFT trades (𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠#), which takes value of one on its top 10% distribution and takes 
value of zero otherwise. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. T-statistics in 
parentheses. 
 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

45 
 
Table 5: HFT herding conditional on volatility 
 
 
Low volatility days 
 
High volatility days 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Baseline 
Intensive Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
 
Baseline 
Intensive 
Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
|𝑅$,#| 
-0.07 
-0.149 
-0.085 
 
0.013 
-0.083 
-0.022 
 
(-0.48) 
(-1.15) 
(-0.58) 
 
(0.17) 
(-1.16) 
(-0.27) 
𝑅$,#
* 
19.142 
28.052** 
19.876 
 
3.613 
8.515*** 
5.815 
 
(1.27) 
(2.02) 
(1.31) 
 
(1.03) 
(2.76) 
(1.56) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# 
 
0.002*** 
-0.0002 
 
 
0.006*** 
0.003*** 
 
 
(4.03) 
(-0.49) 
 
 
(6.74) 
(3.94) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-21.703 
21.091 
 
 
-10.101*** 
-5.989*** 
 
 
(-1.17) 
(1.67) 
 
 
(-5.1) 
(-2.99) 
Observations 
188 
188 
188 
 
188 
188 
188 
𝑅* 
0.02 
0.21 
0.02 
 
0.11 
0.39 
0.2 
Note: This table shows the results of basic herding specification and results of herding including HFT effects on 
volatile days for all stocks for the period 2015-2017, following the regressions: 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ +
 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# and 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# , 
where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# is the cross-sectional absolute deviation on day 𝑡, 𝑅$,# is the market return,  𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# are 
dummy variables for number of quotes (𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠#) and HFT trades (𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠#), which takes value of 
one on its top 10% distribution and takes value of zero otherwise. Column (1) to (3) show the results from subsample of low volatile days, which defines as lower 25% of Volatility Index from Chicago Board Options 
Exchange's (CBOE) for period 2015-2017. Column (4) to (6) report the results for high volatile days from upper 
25% of Volatility Index. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. T-statistics in 
parentheses. 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

46 
 
Table 6 Herding under extreme market liquidity of large stocks 
 
 
Low Liquid 
 
High Liquid 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Baseline 
Intensive 
Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
 
Baseline 
Intensive 
Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
@𝑅$,#@ 
-0.449*** 
-0.409*** 
-0.429*** 
 
0.041 
-0.475* 
-0.128 
 
(-4.76) 
(-6.99) 
(-4.95) 
 
(0.13) 
(-1.97) 
(-0.33) 
𝑅$,#
* 
37.939*** 
39.653*** 
38.232*** 
 
15.360 
65.622*** 
34.833 
 
(8.75) 
(27.74) 
(10.70) 
 
(0.76) 
(3.47) 
(1.18) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# 
 
0.005*** 
0.003*** 
 
 
0.005*** 
0.003** 
 
 
(4.79) 
(5.34) 
 
 
(3.64) 
(2.51) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-23.329*** 
-17.800*** 
 
 
-51.798*** 
-30.633* 
 
 
(-9.62) 
(-4.36) 
 
 
(-3.78) 
(-1.72) 
Observations 
188 
188 
188 
 
188 
188 
188 
𝑅* 
0.829 
0.896 
0.846 
 
0.249 
0.664 
0.437 
Notes: To incorporate the concept of liquidity elasticity, we adopt the methodology introduced by Galariotis et al. 
(2016) to calculate the Amihud liquidity measure for stocks with large market capitalization as follows: 𝐿𝑖𝑞(,, =
−log G1 +
-.!,#-
/!,#012!,#I , where 𝑅(,,, 𝑃(,,, and 𝑉𝑜𝑙(,, is the return, price, and trading volume for stock i on trade s. 
Within our sample, we identify 30 stocks classified as "large stocks," representing the top 30% of market 
capitalization for each year in the sample period. To determine the average liquidity (𝐿𝑖𝑞(,#) for each individual 
large stock i on day t. We conduct the market liquidity across stocks as 𝐿𝑖𝑞$,# =
&
' ∑𝐿𝑖𝑞(,#.
'
&
 Then we use market 
liquidity (𝐿𝑖𝑞$,#) to define low liquidity (lower 25% of its distribution) and high liquidity (upper 25% of its 
distribution). The results of regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀#  and 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛼+ 𝛽&|𝑅$,#| +
 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# are reported in this table. In Column (1) and Column 
(4), the results show baseline herding specification of large stocks during lower liquidity period and higher 
liquidity period. The findings presented in Column (2) and Column (3) (or Column (5) and Column (6)) 
demonstrate the presence of herding behavior under different liquidity conditions, induced by high-frequency 
trading. To account for this, we introduce dummy variables for number of quotes (𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠#) and HFT 
trades (𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠#) in the regression analysis. These dummy variables take a value of one if they fall within the 
top 10% of their respective distributions, and zero otherwise. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity and 
autocorrelation. T-statistics in parentheses.  
 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

47 
 
Table 7 HFT-related herding and liquidity on large stocks – robustness tests 
 
 
Low Liquid 
 
High Liquid 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Baseline 
Intensive 
Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
 
Baseline 
Intensive 
Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
@𝑅$,#@ 
-0.790 
-0.947* 
-0.799 
 
-0.690** 
-0.655*** 
-0.675*** 
 
(-1.41) 
(-1.65) 
(-1.39) 
 
(-2.57) 
(-5.95) 
(-4.04) 
𝑅$,#
* 
125.236* 
151.975** 
125.392* 
 
34.685*** 
40.659*** 
38.552*** 
 
(1.79) 
(2.00) 
(1.76) 
 
(2.95) 
(8.06) 
(4.80) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# 
 
0.000 
-0.000 
 
 
0.008*** 
0.004*** 
 
 
(0.52) 
(-0.99) 
 
 
(4.82) 
(3.98) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-57.463 
-6.600 
 
 
-26.668*** 
-20.513*** 
 
 
(-1.63) 
(-0.17) 
 
 
(-7.90) 
(-4.75) 
Observations 
188 
188 
188 
 
188 
188 
188 
𝑅* 
0.393 
0.453 
0.395 
 
0.522 
0.706 
0.625 
Notes: The table mirrors the findings presented in Table 6, albeit with a notable change in our approach - we 
measure liquidity using the percentage bid-ask spread as %𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑(,3 = 
4,5!,$6 8(9!,$
(
%#&!,$' )!*!,$
+
)
 for each large stock 𝑖 on 
quote 𝑞. The spread for stock i on day t measures as the average spread across all quotes. The market spread on 
day 𝑡 is measured across large-cap stocks as %𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑$,# =
&
' ∑%𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑(,#.
'
&
 See also notes to Table 6. 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

48 
 
Table 8 Herding on comovement in returns of large stocks 
 
 
Lower Returns Comovement 
 
Higher Returns Comovement 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Intensive Quote 
Updates 
Intensive HFT 
trades 
 
Intensive Quote 
Updates 
Intensive HFT 
trades 
@𝑅$,#@ 
0.124 
0.202* 
 
0.052 
0.053 
 
(1.21) 
(1.70) 
 
(0.64) 
(0.77) 
𝑅$,#
* 
-0.207 
-3.803 
 
4.468 
7.574** 
 
(-0.04) 
(-0.61) 
 
(0.92) 
(2.40) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# 
0.007*** 
0.001 
 
0.004*** 
0.003*** 
 
(5.24) 
(1.08) 
 
(4.19) 
(2.85) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
* 
-13.664** 
-0.038 
 
-5.365 
-8.119*** 
 
(-2.16) 
(-0.01) 
 
(-1.44) 
(-3.37) 
Observations 
188 
188 
 
188 
188 
𝑅* 
0.398 
0.062 
 
0.372 
0.315 
Notes: To generate a time series of return comovement for large stocks, we employ the weighted average of 
principal components. Initially, we standardize the returns of the 30 large stocks, which are selected based on 
being in the top 30% of market capitalization as of December 31st in each sample year. Subsequently, we calculate 
the daily proportion of variance communality using Principal Component Analysis (PCA). This table presents the 
results from regression  𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛼+ 𝛽&|𝑅$,#| + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# 
for lower 25% return comovement in Column (1) and Column (2), and for higher 25% return comovement in 
Column (3) and Column (4), where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# is the Cross-Sectional Absolute Deviation, 𝑅$,# is the market return, 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# are dummy variables for number of quotes (𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠#) and HFT trades (𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠#), 
which takes value of one on its top 10% distribution and takes value of zero otherwise. Standard errors are robust 
to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. T-statistics in parentheses. 
 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

49 
 
Table 9: Intentional and Spurious Herding for All Stocks 
 
Note: This table reports results for basic herding specification for all stocks from regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,# =
 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# in Column (1) and regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷=>'?,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# in 
Column (4). 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,# = 𝑒# from regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&Q𝑅$5#,# − 𝑅@R + 𝛽*𝐻𝑀𝐿# + 𝛽!𝑆𝑀𝐵# +
 𝛽"𝑀𝑂𝑀# + 𝑒#; 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷=>'?,# = 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# − 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,#. Column (2), (3), (5), and (6) decompose 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# to 
deviations 
due 
to 
non-fundamental 
and 
fundamental 
factors 
and 
presents 
results 
from 
the 
regressions: 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷=>'?,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$5#,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$5#,#
*
 + 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# , 
and 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$5#,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$5#,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀#
, 
where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# is the cross-sectional absolute deviation on day 𝑡, 𝑅$,# is the market return,  𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# are 
dummy variables for number of quotes (𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠#) and HFT trades (𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠#), which takes value of 
one on its top 10% distribution and takes value of zero otherwise. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity 
and autocorrelation. T-statistics in parentheses. 
 
 
 
Non-fundamental driven CSAD 
(𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,#) 
 
Fundamental driven CSAD 
(𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷=>'?,#) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Baseline 
Intensive Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
 
Baseline 
Intensive 
Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
|𝑅$,#| 
0.089* 
-0.028 
0.019 
 
0.018* 
0.021 
0.017 
 
(1.72) 
(-0.45) 
(0.44) 
 
(1.71) 
(1.49) 
(1.65) 
𝑅$,#
* 
3.256 
8.887** 
7.533*** 
 
-0.567 
-1.123 
-0.671 
 
(1.24) 
(1.97) 
(3.18) 
 
(-1.2) 
(-1.31) 
(-1.25) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# 
 
0.003*** 
0.002*** 
 
 
0.0002 
0.0001 
 
 
(6.29) 
(5.49) 
 
 
(1.22) 
(0.67) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-6.18* 
-6.741*** 
 
 
0.318 
0.146 
 
 
(-1.93) 
(-3.55) 
 
 
(0.53) 
(0.31) 
Observations 
753 
753 
753 
 
753 
753 
753 
𝑅* 
0.12 
0.22 
0.17 
 
0.05 
0.02 
0.01 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

50 
 
Table 10: Intentional and Spurious Herding for Large Stocks 
Note: Column (1) to (3) report results for non-fundamental herding for large stocks. 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,# is the error 
term from regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&Q𝑅$5#,# − 𝑅@R + 𝛽*𝐻𝑀𝐿# + 𝛽!𝑆𝑀𝐵# + 𝛽"𝑀𝑂𝑀# + 𝑒# , while 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷=>'?,# = 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# − 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,#. Column (1) and (4) show baseline results from 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,# and 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷=>'?,# , respectively. Column (2) and (3) report results of HFT activity reacting to non-fundamental 
information 
from 
regression 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$5#,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$5#,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# +
 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# , while results of HFT activity to fundamental information  is regressed as 
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷=>'?,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$5#,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$5#,#
*
 + 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
*
+ 𝜀# in Column 
(5) and Column (6), where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷# is the cross-sectional absolute deviation on day 𝑡, 𝑅$,# is the market return,  
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# are dummy variables for number of quotes (𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠#) and HFT trades (𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠#), 
which takes value of one on its top 10% distribution and takes value of zero otherwise. Standard errors are robust 
to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. T-statistics in parentheses. 
 
 
Non-fundamental driven CSAD 
(𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷'<'=>'?,#) 
 
Fundamental driven CSAD (𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷=>'?,#) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Baseline 
Intensive 
Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
 
Baseline 
Intensive 
Quote 
Updates 
Intensive 
HFT 
trades 
|𝑅$,#| 
-0.252* 
-0.289*** 
-0.243*** 
 
-0.024* 
-0.030** 
-0.026** 
 
(-1.65) 
(-4.33) 
(-2.76) 
 
(-1.93) 
(-2.38) 
(-2.07) 
𝑅$,#
* 
27.616*** 
38.083*** 
32.404*** 
 
1.337** 
1.401** 
1.343** 
 
(3.01) 
(6.80) 
(4.73) 
 
(2.53) 
(2.42) 
(2.51) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦# 
 
0.005*** 
0.003*** 
 
 
0.000** 
0.000 
 
 
(6.95) 
(5.57) 
 
 
(2.22) 
(0.83) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-29.012*** 
-22.272*** 
 
 
-0.166 
0.086 
 
 
(-6.03) 
(-4.29) 
 
 
(-0.24) 
(0.10) 
Observations 
753 
753 
753 
 
753 
753 
753 
𝑅* 
0.38 
0.54 
0.46 
 
0.03 
0.03 
0.02 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

51 
 
Table 11: Herding for the Post-HFT Effective Start Date 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
Baseline 
HFT start date 
|𝑅$,#| 
0.601*** 
0.449** 
 
(3.5) 
(3.12) 
𝑅$,#
* 
1.529*** 
9.88*** 
 
(5.13) 
(9.19) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡# 
 
0.002** 
 
 
(2.95) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-8.084*** 
 
 
(-7.14) 
Number of exchanges 
10 
10 
𝑅* 
0.22 
0.24 
Year FEs 
Yes 
Yes 
Exchange FEs 
Yes 
Yes 
Notes: This table presents the results of herding on 10 exchanges from the full sample. Column (1) shows the 
results of the basic herding specification for period of the post-HFT effective start date from regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# =
 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,(,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝜀(,#. Column (2) reports the results of herding including the effect of HFT start date 
from 
regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,(,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,#𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝜀(,#
, 
where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# is the cross-sectional absolute deviation for exchange 𝑖 on day 𝑡, 𝑅$,(,# is the market return,  
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,# is a dummy variable for HFT effective date which takes value of one after this date on exchange  𝑖 
and takes value of zero before this date. Year fixed effects and exchange fixed effects are included in both 
regressions. Standard errors are clustered on the exchange level. T-statistics in parentheses. 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

52 
 
Table 12: Herding for the Post-Colocation Start Date 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
Baseline 
Colocation start date 
|𝑅$,#| 
0.509** 
0.618** 
 
(2.64) 
(3.17) 
𝑅$,#
* 
1.453*** 
2.591*** 
 
(5.37) 
(4.2) 
𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡# 
 
-0.001* 
 
 
(-1.98) 
𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-1.32** 
 
 
(-3.15) 
Number of exchanges 
10 
10 
𝑅* 
0.19 
0.21 
Year FEs 
Yes 
Yes 
Exchange FEs 
Yes 
Yes 
Notes: This table presents the results of herding on 10 exchanges from the full sample. Column (1) shows the 
results of the basic herding specification from regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,(,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝜀(,# during 
period of the post-colocation start date. Column (2) reports the results of herding after the introduction of 
colocation services from exchanges, which  follows regression 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,(,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,(,#
*
+
 𝛽!𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,# + 𝛽"𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,#𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝜀(,# , where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# is the cross-sectional absolute deviation for 
exchange 𝑖 on day 𝑡, 𝑅$,(,# is the market return,  𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,# is a dummy variable of colocation services which 
takes value of one after exchange  𝑖 offers colocation services and takes value of zero otherwise. Year fixed effects 
and exchange fixed effects are included in both regressions. Standard errors are clustered on the exchange level. 
T-statistics in parentheses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed

53 
 
Table 13: Herding during Extreme Market Returns 
 
 
Panel A: Up days 
 
Panel B: Down days 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
Baseline 
HFT start date 
Colocation 
start date 
 
Baseline 
HFT start date 
Colocation 
start date 
|𝑅$,#| 
1.686* 
0.697 
0.301 
 
2.195** 
2.037** 
1.831** 
 
(1.95) 
(1.39) 
(0.69) 
 
(3.06) 
(2.58) 
(2.81) 
𝑅$,#
* 
-0.131 
9.811*** 
10.045*** 
 
-0.355 
3.769 
0.026 
 
(-0.11) 
(6.48) 
(5.32) 
 
(-0.29) 
(0.35) 
(0.03) 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡# 
 
0.021*** 
 
 
 
0.03 
 
 
 
(5.47) 
 
 
 
(0.48) 
 
𝐻𝐹𝑇_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡#𝑅$,#
* 
 
-8.901*** 
 
 
 
-3.896 
 
 
 
(-9.95) 
 
 
 
(-0.39) 
 
𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡# 
 
 
0.017* 
 
 
 
-0.027* 
 
 
 
(2.06) 
 
 
 
(-2.01) 
𝐶𝑜𝑙_𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡#𝑅$,#
* 
 
 
-8.621*** 
 
 
 
3.246* 
 
 
 
(-5.14) 
 
 
 
(2.13) 
Number of exchanges 
10 
10 
10 
 
10 
10 
10 
𝑅* 
0.24 
0.33 
0.32 
 
0.28 
0.29 
0.29 
Year FEs 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Exchange FEs 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Notes: This table reports the results of herding during extreme market returns for the full sample, following 
regressions: 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,(,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝜀(,#,  where 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# is the cross-sectional absolute 
deviation for exchange 𝑖 on day 𝑡, 𝑅$,(,# is the market return;  𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# = 𝛽+ + 𝛽&@𝑅$,(,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,(,#
*
+
 𝛽!𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,# + 𝛽"𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,#𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝜀(,#, where 𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(,# is dummy variable for HFT effective date 
which takes value of one after this date on exchange  𝑖 and takes value of zero before this date; 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷(,# = 𝛽+ +
 𝛽&@𝑅$,(,#@ + 𝛽*𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝛽!𝐶𝑜𝑙(,# + 𝛽"𝐶𝑜𝑙(,#𝑅$,(,#
*
+ 𝜀(,#, where 𝐶𝑜𝑙(,# is dummy variable for the colocation start 
date which takes value of one after this date on exchange  𝑖 and takes value of zero before this date. Panel A shows 
the results of sub-sample of market return on its upper 5% distribution and Panel B shows the results of subsample of market return on its lower 5% distribution. The regressions include year FEs and exchange FEs. *** 
(**) (*) Significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level. Standard errors are clustered on the exchange level. 
T-statistics in parentheses. 
 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4670334
Preprint not peer reviewed
