 
1 
 
 
Rue d'Arlon 80 / Aarlenstraat 80 
B 1040 Brussels 
 
 
 
Professional Certificate in Risk Management 
 
 
 
 
“High Frequency Trading and the 
 risk monitoring of automated trading.” 
 
Robert Fernandez Ferrandiz 
robert.fernandez@nbb.be 
 
 
Brussels, March 2013 
 
 
 
 
Agenda 
 
 
Executive Summary......................................................................................................p2 
 
Introduction...................................................................................................................p4 
 
Chapter I   The key challenges to monitor risk in automated trading............................p5 
 
Chapter II   Case study of NYSE Euronext HFT & Chicago Stock Exchange patent.....p18   
 
Conclusion ...................................................................................................................p35 
 
Bibliography.................................................................................................................p36 
 
Appendix..................................................................................................................p37-65.  
o 
Appendix I      
Algorithm trading and HFT definition 
o 
Appendix II     
Patent research in USPTO 
o 
Appendix III    
Chicago Board Options Exchange patent to define how  organize the IT 
 
  
 
architecture of the risk monitoring of automated trading. 
o 
Appendix IV     
Research questions on HFT and Algorithm trading. 
o 
Appendix V     
Lessons learned from the Flash Crash 
o 
Appendix VI   
CFTC Audit Trail 
o 
Appendix VII    
CFTC Electronic trading analysis 
o 
Appendix VIII    
The Global Financial Network 
o 
Appendix IX   
NYSE Technologies - Market Access Gateway Inventory (January 2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key words: 
Financial innovation, Systemic risk, IT monitoring, High Frequency Trading, Financial stability. 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
2 
Executive Summary 
 
Automated and algorithm trading are nowadays important drivers in financial markets. High 
Frequency trading (as a subdivision of automated trading) is also an important driver in US 
and EU automated trading platforms. This new paradigm involves important questions on 
risks, monitoring and regulation.   
 
The High Frequency Trading evolution underlines three keys questions:  
 How High Frequency traders could improve risk management tools to manage 
operational risks (algorithm issues) and market risks (price manipulation, liquidity and 
volatility)? 
 How stocks markets (and brokers-dealers) could improve and contribute to prevent 
individual failure but also systemic risks (including interdependencies and correlations 
from HFT algorithms)? 
 How supervisory authorities could / should regulate high frequency technology in 
financial markets in a risk monitoring perspective?  
 
Based on case study and regulatory guidelines, this paper analyses key specifications on the 
automated trading risk monitoring tools.    
 
In an automated trading environment, a certain amount of control is lost when a market-maker 
has issued quotes in a large number of option series. The quotes are typically recorded in the 
automated and computer-based trading system, and matched up automatically with orders 
that enter the system electronically. 
 
IOSCO has clearly identified the risk of "black box" regarding the evolution of automated 
trading and ultra-speed trading. Regulators (as ESMA and CFTC) call for monitoring tools 
implemented not only by High Frequency Traders but also by stock exchanges and all 
professional traders.   
 
ESMA asks that trading platforms should monitor in real time their electronic trading systems 
(a real time audit trail). Additionally, ESMA asks that investment firms should prior to 
deploying an electronic trading system (or a trading algorithm) and prior to deploying updates, 
make use of clearly delineated development and testing methodologies.  For algorithms, 
these might include performance simulations/back testing or off line testing within a trading 
platform testing environment (where market operators make testing available).  
 
CFTC encourages development of more industry-wide testing procedures (to test algorithms 
in “real life” conditions), including scenario and stress testing.  
 
Based on the NYSE Technologies platform case study, we can observe that audit trail from 
NYSE automated platforms is limited to the timeframe of hundredth of a second (1/100sec). In 
the same time, NYSE platforms provide total end-to-end latency (including inter-process and 
inter-server communications) of approximately 70 microseconds (1/1000.000 sec). This case 
study illustrates the current gap existing between the capacity of trading and the real capacity 
of monitoring HFT. This gap is creating a "shadow trading" where supervisors would not have 
the possibility to analyze what is really happening.  
 
Volume is also increasing with HFT. In Europe, before MiFID went live back in 2007, It was 
observed rates of 5,000 to 10,000 messages per second.  Nowadays, the automated trading 
platform Chi-X alone can peak at over 80,000 messages per second. In the US the rates have 
already exploded, with total equity, options and futures markets topping 4 million messages 
per second. Additionally to the end-to-end latency issue, HFT increases the volume "message 
queue" creating a new challenge in the implementation of automated risk trading monitoring. 
The case study of the Chicago Board Options Exchange patent provides some useful ideas. 
This patent is dedicated to an automated risk monitoring IT architecture (including automated 
revision or cancellation of quotes based on risk thresholds). 
Additionally to individual risk (For example, the crash of Knight Capital Group in August 
2011), Algorithm trading (with direct access to the market and with a high frequency trading 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
3 
timeframe) could also involve systemic risk due to correlation between algorithms. CFTC 
underlines the importance of testing. For CFTC, It is possible that code rollouts related to 
small changes in market structure (e.g. new order types) involve important risks due to the 
fact that many market participants affected simultaneously the condition of the market and 
that these new trading algorithms were potentially never employed before. 
The conclusion of this paper is to support the idea that the new worldwide trading architecture 
should be articulated around Stock exchanges as regulated Hub. There are worldwide around 
50 major stock exchanges. Stock exchange could be responsible to organize "Quality 
Acceptance" test environment to challenge algorithms in an individual perspective but also in 
a systemic approach (linked to potential correlation of algorithms).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
4 
Introduction:  
 
The declining costs of technology have led to its widespread adoption throughout financial 
industries. The resulting technological change has revolutionized financial markets and the 
way financial assets are traded. Many institutions now trade via algorithms and High 
Frequency Trading (more than 70% of Equity volume US markets, around 30/40% for 
European markets).  
 
Automated 
and 
algorithm 
trading 
are 
nowadays 
important 
drivers 
in 
financial 
markets. High Frequency trading (as a 
subdivision of automated trading) is also 
nowadays a driver in US and EU automated 
trading platforms.  
 
Based on lessons learned from the Flash 
Crash of May 2010 and the state of art on 
algorithmic trading and High Frequency 
Trading (see appendix), this paper provides 
an analysis to understand how to improve risk 
monitoring of automated trading. 
  
HFT is subject of many interrogations on net social benefice in the point of view of market 
efficiency (liquidity, volatility & pricing) but also potential risks for regulators (manipulation & 
systemic risk) but also for traders.  
 
The rise of HFT is a result of two important changes that have increased the ability and 
desirability of trading fast and frequently.  First, the decimalization of quotes, the change from 
having bid and offer prices being quoted in eighths to having them quoted in pennies, has 
allowed for more minutes price variation. The smaller price increments makes trading during 
short horizons less risky as a tick in the wrong direction now can cause a penny per-stock 
loss whereas previously it would cost an eight of a dollar. Second, there have been 
technological advances in the ability to quickly analyze information and to rapidly transport 
data between locations. 
 
This evolution has involved the migration from floor-based to electronic (point-and-click) to 
high speed trading (or high frequency trading). This change also has involved the possibility 
to have direct access to the markets for a growing number of operators in a multitude of 
decentralized automatic trading platforms.  
 
In the present paper, we will run through key specifications from scholar to supervisory bodies 
regarding algorithm and High Frequency Trading and the creation of a “shadow trading” area. 
 
This paper is articulates on supervisory guidelines and case studies. Firstly, I examine the 
keys specifications from ESMA and CFTC. Secondly, as hub in the financial market, I 
challenge stock market regarding this issue. I examine the NYSE Euronext as case study and 
I present the Chicago Stock Exchange Board patent as illustration of IT architecture on risk 
monitoring of automated trading.   
 
The purpose of this paper is not to provide, as the majority of scholar paper, an exhaustive 
summary of the current debate on algorithm and HFT trading. The added value of this 
analysis is to present key ideas on the monitoring of automated trading. The main limit of this 
paper is due to the absence of possibility to challenge the analyzed specifications with 
experts from Stock market, dealing room and brokers.  The second important limit of this 
research is the absence of additional analysis regarding the challenge to register and to audit 
algorithms used in HFT. The main innovative part of this study, regarding previous paper on 
the topic of HFT, comes from the presentation of a patent specification. This patent, from the 
Chicago Stock Exchange, deals with technical specifications of risk monitoring implemented 
in automated trading platforms. I hope that the singularity of this approach will provide a 
personal added-value on HFT risk management debate.  
US stock exchange automated trading timeline 
1980s – First electronic trading systems appeared. 
1992 – The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) launched 
its first electronic platform, Globex. 
1993 – Systematic/electronic trading was enabled for CME 
equity futures. 
2000 – New York-based International Securities Exchange 
(ISE), the first fully electronic U.S. options exchange, was 
launched. 
2003 – NYSE introduced automated quote dissemination. 
2010 – All seven U.S. exchanges offered either fully 
electronic or a hybrid mix of floor and electronic trading in 
options. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
5 
Submultiples on 1 Second 
 
Value Symbol 
Name 
10−1 s 
ds 
decisecond 
10−2 s 
cs 
centisecond 
10−3 s 
ms 
millisecond 
10−6 s 
µs 
microsecond 
10−9 s 
ns 
nanosecond 
10−12 s 
ps 
picosecond 
10−15 s 
fs 
femtosecond 
10−18 s 
as 
attosecond 
10−21 s 
zs 
zeptosecond 
10−24 s 
ys 
yoctosecond 
HFT 
timeframe 
Monitoring 
and 
supervisory 
timeframe 
Chapter I : Guidelines to monitor automated trading. 
 
Introduction - High Frequency Trading Definitions and functionalities 
 
The first question that we need to go through is about the definition of High Frequency 
trading.  
 
High-frequency trading (HFT) describes the execution of electronic trading strategies 
involving extremely rapid capital turnover. 
 
Brogaard & co (2010) defines HFT as a type of investment strategy whereby stocks are 
rapidly bought and sold by a computer algorithm and held for a very short period, usually 
seconds or milliseconds. 
 
For Menkveld (2011), HFT can be characterized as a modern market maker with a latency 
(inter-message time) upper bound of 1.67 millisecond and engaged in proprietary trading 
starting and ending most trading days with a zero net position. 
 
Peter Gomber (2011) provides a study on HFT and algorithm trading definition (academic and 
regulatory point of view) and functional analysis.  
 
He presents algorithmic trading as the use of computer 
algorithms to execute human generated, pre-designated 
trading decisions and designed specifically to minimize price 
impact. So in algorithmic trading (AT), computers directly 
interface with trading platforms, placing orders without 
immediate human intervention. The computers observe 
market data and possibly other information, and, based on a 
built-in algorithm, send back trading instructions (Chaboud 
A., 2009).  
 
These trading instructions are often based on parameters 
like price, volume, instrument, news and timing. In the same 
way, European Commission (MiFId) defines algorithm 
trading as the use of computer programs to enter trading 
orders where the computer algorithm decides on aspects of 
execution of the order such as the timing, quantity and price of the order.  
 
High Frequency Trading is defined, by Jovanovic Boyan and Menkveld Albert (2010), as 
electronic limit order markets enable agents to automate trading decisions. Computer 
algorithms are used to either minimize transaction cost when trading into position (working an 
order through time and across markets or to simply profit from buying and selling securities as 
a middleman).  
 
HFT typically refers to trading activity that employs extremely fast automated programs for 
generating, routing, canceling, and executing orders in electronic markets. HF traders submit 
and cancel a massive number of orders and execute a large number of trades, trade in and 
out of positions very quickly, and finish each trading day without a significant open position. 
 
High Frequency trading appears as a sub category of algorithm trading based on the new 
paradigm provided by ultra-high execution speed.  In October 2012, The Financial Times has 
published a paper on HFT with an explicit title:  "Faster than a nanosecond" (FT, 3th Oct. 
2012 - http://video.ft.com/v/1861499789001/Faster-than-a-nanosecond). 
 
For the European commission, HFT definition is similar to “automated trading” as trading in 
financial instruments at speeds where the physical latency of the mechanism for transmitting, 
cancelling or modifying orders becomes the determining factor in the time taken to 
communicate the instruction to a trading venue or to execute a transaction. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
6 
Gomber (2011) classifies the functionalities of algorithmic trading and High Frequency 
Trading as follow: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According Gomber (P. Gomber, 2011), the key related concepts to HFT are the Market 
making characteristic, the Quantitative Portfolio Management  (QPM) tools, and the Smart 
Order Routing (SOR) technology.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Peter Gomber (2011) provides the following picture who summarizes also the specifications 
between Algorithm trading and HFT.  
 
 
 
 
 
Common for HFT and AT 
 
1) Pre-designed trading decisions 
2) Used by professional traders 
3) Observing market data in real-time 
4) Automated order submission 
5) Automated order management 
6) Without human intervention 
7) Use of direct market access 
 
Specific for AT excl. HFT 
 
1) Agent trading 
2) Minimize market impact 
(for large orders) 
3) Goal is to achieve a 
particular benchmark 
4) Holding periods possibly 
days/weeks/months 
5) Working an order through 
time and across markets 
Specific for HFT 
 
1) Very high number of orders 
2) Rapid order cancellation 
3) Proprietary trading 
4) Profit from buying and selling (as middleman) 
5) No significant position at end of day (flat 
position) 
6) Very short holding periods 
7) Extracting very low margins per trade 
8) Low latency requirement 
9) Use of co-location/proximity services and 
individual data feeds 
10) Focus on high liquid instruments 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
7 
The US Commodity Futures Trading Commission provides also an useful definition (October 
2012). According this definition, High frequency trading is a form of automated trading that 
employs:  
 
o 
algorithms for decision making, order initiation, generation, routing, or execution, for each 
individual transaction without human direction;  
 
o 
low-latency technology that is designed to minimize response times, including proximity 
and co-location services;  
 
o 
high speed connections to markets for order entry; and  
 
o 
recurring high message rates (orders, quotes or cancellations) determined using one or 
more objective forms of measurement, including:  
 
cancel-to-fill ratios;  
 
participant-to-market message ratios; or  
 
participant-to-market trade volume ratios. 
 
(source: http://www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@newsroom/documents/file/tac103012_wg1.pdf) 
 
 
The ESMA 2012 Guidelines for automated trading platforms. 
 
In May 2012, the European Security and Markets Authority (ESMA) has published his 
“Guidelines - Systems and controls in an automated trading environment for trading platforms, 
investment firms and competent authorities”. 
 
For ESMA guidelines, trading platforms should, within their overall governance and decisionmaking framework, develop, procure (including outsourcing) and monitor their electronic 
trading systems through a clear and formalized governance process.  
 
On regulated markets and multilateral trading facilities, electronic trading systems should also 
for the ESMA have sufficient capacity to accommodate reasonably foreseeable volumes of 
messaging. They must be able to increase capacity in order to respond to rising message 
flow and emergency conditions that might threaten their proper operations. 
 
Regarding risks issues involved by the development of HFT, ESMA asks that trading 
platforms should monitor in real time their electronic trading systems. They should deal 
adequately with problems identified as soon as reasonably possible in order of priority and be 
able when necessary to adjust, wind down, or shut down the electronic trading system.  
 
Regarding their testing obligations, investment firms should prior to deploying an electronic 
trading system or a trading algorithm (and prior to deploying updates), make use of clearly 
delineated development and testing methodologies. For algorithms, these might include 
performance simulations/back testing or off line testing within a trading platform testing 
environment (where market operators make testing available).  
 
To ensure that there is orderly trading on the platform, trading platforms should have 
minimum requirements for members’/participants’ and users’ pre- and post-trade controls on 
their trading activities (including controls to ensure that there is no unauthorized access to 
trading systems). 
 
In particular, trading automated platforms should implement controls on filtering order price 
and 
quantity 
(this 
requirement 
is 
without 
prejudice 
to 
the 
responsibility 
of 
members/participants or users to implement their own pre and post-trade controls). 
 
ESMA guidelines also impose that trading platforms should have arrangements to prevent the 
excessive flooding of the order book at any one moment in time, notably through limits per 
participant on order entry capacity. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
8 
Trading platforms should also have arrangements (for example, volatility interruptions or 
automatic rejection of orders which are outside of certain set volume and price thresholds) to 
constrain trading or to halt trading in individual or multiple financial instruments when 
necessary, to maintain an orderly market.  
 
Moreover, investment firms should, during the hours they are sending orders to trading 
platforms, monitor their orders in as close to real time as possible, including from a crossmarket perspective, for potential signs of disorderly trading.  
 
Regarding MiFID and MAD implementing Directive 2004/72/EC for regulated markets and for 
multilateral trading facilities, ESMA guidelines includes that trading platforms should have 
effective arrangements and procedures which enable them to identify market abuse (in 
particular market manipulation) in an automated trading environment. 
 
Potential cases of market manipulation that could be of particular concern in an automated 
trading environment include: 
 
Potential cases of market manipulation 
Details 
Ping orders 
Entering small orders in order to ascertain the level of 
hidden orders and particularly used to assess what is 
resting on a dark platform. 
Quote stuffing 
Entering 
large 
numbers 
of 
orders 
and/or 
cancellations/updates to orders so as to create uncertainty 
for other participants, slowing down their process and to 
camouflage their own strategy. 
Momentum ignition 
Entry of orders or a series of orders intended to start or 
exacerbate a trend, and to encourage other participants to 
accelerate or extend the trend in order to create an 
opportunity to unwind/open a position at a favorable price. 
Layering and Spoofing 
Submitting multiple orders often away from the touch on 
one side of the order book with the intention of executing a 
trade on the other side of the order book. Once that trade 
has taken place, the manipulative orders will be removed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
9 
New European legislative initiative: MiFID II proposal 
 
Under the new MiFID II proposal, European regulators are focusing greater scrutiny on highspeed trading.  
 
MiFID already covered Multilateral Trading Facilities and regulated markets, but the revision 
will now bring a new type of trading venue into its regulatory framework: the Organized 
Trading Facility (OTF). These are organized platforms which are currently not regulated but 
are playing an increasingly important role. 
 
MiFID will introduce new safeguards for algorithmic and high frequency trading activities 
which have drastically increased the speed of trading and pose possible systemic risks. 
These safeguards include the requirement for all algorithmic traders to become properly 
regulated, provide appropriate liquidity and rules to prevent them from adding to volatility by 
moving in and out of markets. Finally, the proposals will improve conditions for competition in 
essential post-trade services such as clearing, which may otherwise frustrate competition 
between trading venues. 
 
The proposals will reinforce the role and powers of regulators. In coordination with the 
European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) and under defined circumstances, 
supervisors will be able to ban specific products, services or practices in case of 
threats to investor protection, financial stability or the orderly functioning of markets. 
Unsatisfied with delays to MiFID II, a draft legislation in Germany is set to curb high-frequency 
trading (HFT), bringing it under the control of Germany’s Federal Financial Supervisory 
Authority (BaFin) probably by the end of 2013. Under a new law known as the “Act for the 
prevention of risks and the abuse of high-frequency trading”, the definition of proprietary 
trading would be widened to include HFT firms, forcing them to be licensed, and compelling 
trading venues to enforce minimum tick sizes and order-to-trade ratios.  
The draft of MiFID II contained a provision requiring all those operating automated trading 
strategies to be continuous market-makers whatever the market conditions. This proposed 
requirement will only apply (if adopted) to those operating a "high frequency strategy" and 
which has at least one of the four of the following characteristics:  
 
it uses co-location facilities;  
 
it relates to a daily portfolio turnover of at least 50%;  
 
the ratio of orders to trades exceeds 4:1;  
 
the proportion of orders cancelled exceeds 20%;  
 
the majority of positions taken are unwound within the same day;  
 
over 50% of the orders are made on trading venues offering discounts or 
rebates to orders which provide liquidity. 
In 
this 
new 
European 
regulation, 
it 
is 
proposed 
that ESMA 
shall be 
tasked 
with developing regulatory technical standards for general position limits. It is also proposed 
that a minimum resting period for all orders is imposed at 500 milliseconds. European 
Parliament’s financial committee decided in September 2012 to rein in the velocity of highfrequency trading (a half-second speed limit on those using computers to execute lightningfast stock deals). 
An important remark is to understand that not only speed but also volume traded is growing 
very fast. Hirander Misra, co-founder and chief executive of Algorithm Technologies, notes 
that, collectively across all the major equity exchanges in Europe, It was observed rates of 
5,000 to 10,000 messages per second before MiFID went live back in 2007. Nowadays, the 
automated trading platform Chi-X alone can peak at over 80,000 messages per second and 
it's anounced total market peaks approaching 150,000. In the US the rates have, of course, 
already exploded, with total equity, options and futures markets topping 4 million messages 
per 
second 
according 
to 
marketdatapeaks.com. 
(Source: 
http://www.automatedtrader.net/online-exclusive/80415/market-data-maelstrom). 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
10
US Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) 
 
 
In October 2012, the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has adopted the 
following HFT Draft Definition:  
 
=> High frequency trading is a form of automated trading that employs: 
 
algorithms for decision making, order initiation, generation, routing, or execution, for each 
individual transaction without human direction; 
 
low-latency technology that is designed to minimize response times, including proximity 
and co-location services; 
 
high speed connections to markets for order entry; and 
 
recurring high message rates (orders, quotes or cancellations) determined using one or 
more objective forms of measurement, including:  
o 
cancel-to-fill ratios; 
o 
participant-to-market message ratios; or 
o 
participant-to-market trade volume ratios. 
=> High frequency trading is a mechanism utilized by a variety of trading strategies [including 
- but not limited to - liquidity provision and statistical arbitrage]. 
 
 
For CFTC, the objective forms of measurement are determined by a regulator for specific 
financial instruments or classes of instruments and provide a benchmark for comparing 
activity that is higher than normal. Such benchmarks should be published on a periodic basis 
and applied for a specified time period following publication. These measurements should be 
applied to the participant responsible for the recurring high message rates. 
 
The forms of measurement chosen are intended to allow a regulator to measure activity 
without direct access to the trading algorithms employed to generate the high message rates.  
 
CFTC October 2012 definition of HFT can be illustrated by the following flow Chart and 
Automated Trading process: 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
11
 
(CFTC source) 
 
CFTC also has defined the key specifications of an audit trail regarding automated trading 
(see appendix).  
 
Pre-trade risk controls are now required in US equity markets. Equity markets require (limited) 
risk checks for all participants. Brokers are allowed to self-check.  
 
For CFTC, Exchange should expand the pre-trade risk checks available on their 
systems. CFTC also estimated that Exchange based risk checks should be applied equally to 
all participants including ensuring that they are applied with equal latency for all participants.  
 
Additionally, CFTC underlines the fact that all participants need risk controls, and not just 
firms specializing in automated trading. Substantial trading errors generated in electronic 
systems can happen in trading systems used by brokers and end investors. Coding, data, and 
procedural errors may be more dependent on the trading technology than on the purpose of 
the trading strategy. 
 
Also CFTC underlines the key role used by post-trade risk controls. Post-trade risk controls in 
the form of drop copies of orders to third parties or brokers can enable useful near real-time 
risk calculations that cannot be done with ultra-low latency pre-trade risk controls. Post-trade 
risk controls must: 
 
Provide an alternative pathway for trade positioning; 
 
Enable further data gathering for post-event analysis. 
 
CFTC also underlines the importance of testing. For CFTC, It is possible that code rollouts 
related to small changes in market structure (e.g. new order types) are particularly risky: 
 
Many market participants could affected simultaneously market parameters; 
 
New trading mechanics are potentially never employed before. 
 
On testing topic, CFTC encourages development of more industry-wide testing procedures 
(to test algorithms in “real life” conditions), including scenario and stress testing. But in 
the same time, CFTC says to be not optimistic that regulatory certification of algorithms 
or testing methods can be practical or effective.  
  
In the field of HFT registration, CFTC suggests to make the following distinctions: 
 
Distinctions in degree of automation, latency, messaging and volume; 
 
Distinctions across products, contract months, and range of strategies; 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
12
 
Distinctions in time horizon over which messaging/volume is measured.  
  
In this approach, HFT participants can be identified and differentiated as desired to serve 
surveillance objectives using current data: 
 
Distinguish ATS (Automated Trading System) from non-ATS activity;  
 
Distinguish users’ type of connectivity;  
 
Identify high messaging/volume participants at many levels (e.g. firm, account,…) for 
any instrument over any time period. 
 
To the question to know if each algorithm should be registered, CFTC underlines the 
following limits:  
 
Algorithms, inputs and parameters change frequently; 
 
Difficult to consistently define what constitutes a unique algorithm; 
 
No empirical basis to support need for strategy registration.  
  
 To the question to know if algorithms should be audited, CFTC underlines the following 
limits:  
 
Enormous numbers of algorithms deployed;  
 
Inefficient use of limited regulatory resources even assuming expertise were available 
in regulatory bodies to assess each algorithm; 
 
Foresight economic impact study estimated cost of $1.3 billion/year in US if full 
descriptions of algorithmic trading strategies were collected and analyzed by 
regulators; 
 
Entity employing the algorithm should be responsible for appropriate evaluation and 
testing.  
 
The position of CFTC is to support robust and effective controls and supervision; established 
at all levels of the infrastructure (to mitigate any single point of failure) and not limited to postdeployment operation.  
 
CFTC considers that this controls and supervision should also be considered during every 
deployment phases. In this approach, it is important to conduct appropriate testing (internal 
& external conformance) in the following dimensions:  
 
Administrative (user, product and market setup);  
 
Quantitative (back testing algorithm changes against historic trade data);  
 
Technical (connection logic, disconnect/reconnect management);  
 
Functional (order entry, trade & market data processing, market support); 
 
Error (trade bust/adjust management);  
 
Alerting (exchange message & internal alerting notification and display); 
 
Regulatory (clearing and regulatory tag validation);  
 
Stress (load, capacity, performance under unusual market conditions);  
 
Pre-trade risk management (order validation, position management,..). 
 
As other IT development, supervision need to implement a clear control framework on: 
 
acceptance, installation and deployment/validation of ATS and HFT; and 
 
Maintenance and monitoring (including an Audit trail tool for Supervision purpose). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
13
CFTC Control Recommendation Summary 
 
 
  
The audit trail data should be collected, for CFTC, in a way that enables meaningful 
aggregation, reconstruction, and analysis. The audit trail is also a critical tool to enhancing 
regulators’ ability to reconstruct and properly sequence activities include:  
 
uniform market participant identifiers,  
 
consistent approaches to the type of data to be collected,  
 
and the use of accurate time-stamp mechanisms.  
 
 
CFTC Audit Trail Data Model (Oct.2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
14
Examples of derived data (CFTC) 
 
 
The CFTC Rule 536.B. fixes the “Recordkeeping Requirements" for US Stock exchanges as 
Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. (“CME”), The Board of Trade of the City of Chicago, Inc. 
(“CBOT”), The New York Mercantile Exchange, Inc. (“NYMEX”) and Commodity Exchange, 
Inc. (“COMEX”). 
 
To illustrate key specification, we have analyzed a regulation certification regarding Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange (CME Globex). 
 
(source:http://www.cftc.gov/stellent/groups/public/@rulesandproducts/documents/ifdocs/rul09
1912cmecbotnymexandcomex1.pdf) 
 
The regulatory requirement asks that orders entered into CME Globex must contain an 
accurate identification of whether the order is entered via automated or manual means 
(since June 2011). Inaccurate submission of this regulatory requirement may result in 
disciplinary action. 
 
Core principles of this regulatory requirement are also identified as follows: 
 
An accurate audit trail must be able to identify trading activity that may be disruptive; 
 
Clearing member firms will be required to maintain the front-end audit trail which will 
include trade information; 
 
The Exchanges (as CME Globex) are formally adopting this regulatory requirements 
in order to ensure that each Exchange has accurate information concerning whether 
orders entered are done by automated or manual means. 
 
So entering orders (into CME Globex) shall input for each order:  
 
the user ID assigned him by the Exchange; 
 
a clearing member or other authorized entity; 
 
the price, quantity, product, expiration month, CTI code (Customer Type Indicator);  
 
automated or manual indicator; 
 
and account number; 
 
and, for options, put or call and strike price. 
 
The order must be entered (into CME Globex) when it becomes executable. The electronic 
audit trail must be maintained for a minimum of 5 years and clearing members must have the 
ability to produce this data in a standard format. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
15
For executed orders, the audit trail must record the execution time of the trade along 
with all fill information. So a record of all fields relating to order entry must be produced 
(including transaction date, product, Exchange code, expiration month, quantity, order type, 
order qualifier, price, buy/sell indicator, stop/trigger price, order number, unique transaction 
number, account number, session ID, automated or manual indicator, host order number, 
trader order number, clearing member, type of action, action status code, customer type 
indicator, origin, and timestamps).  
 
This electronic audit trail must contain all order receipt, order entry, order modification, and 
response receipt times to the highest level of precision achievable by the operating system, 
but at least to the hundredth of a second (1/100sec). The times captured must not be able 
to be modified by the person entering the order. 
 
According CFTC publications (see appendix), the HFT timeline is around 3.6 milliseconds in 
2012 on average.  
 
 
High Frequency Traders website (http://highfrequencytraders.com/news/2309/traders-lookwireless-lowest-latency) estimates that latency, due to wireless technology, could reach 13.3 
milliseconds between the markets of Chicago and New York.  
 
Hibernia Atlantic (www.hiberniaatlantic.com/gfn.html - see appendix) provides the following 
worldwide vision of low latency: 
 
24,000 Kilometers of Fiber Optic Cable 
 
Access to over 120 key financial cities around the globe 
 
Connection between London and New York City, with <60 ms latency, the fastest in 
transatlantic cable history 
 
These examples underline the key challenge to monitor risk management in the high 
speed automated trading. Audit trail is expected to record and track orders in a 
timeline of 1/100 sec when transatlantique latency (London/NY) is less of 60/1000sec 
and with a HFT technology running to the nanosecond according the Financial Times. 
 
In this context, the question for regulators is to define how it would be possible to 
implement an audit trail monitoring HFT and covering the “shadow automated trading" 
due to ultra-fast trading (from the millisecond to the nanosecond).  
 
In October 2011, IOSCO issued its report on "Regulatory Issues Raised by the Impact of 
Technological Changes on Market Integrity and Efficiency". This report explicitly addresses 
the need for regulators to continuously evaluate the regulatory challenges related to new and 
evolving trading strategies. In this report, IOSCO issued the following recommendations:  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
16
Recommendation 4: “Regulators should continue to assess the impact on market integrity and 
efficiency of technological developments and market structure changes, including algorithmic 
and high frequency trading. Based on this, regulators should seek to ensure that suitable 
measures are taken to mitigate any related risks to market integrity and efficiency, including 
any risks to price formation or to the resiliency and stability of markets, to which such 
developments give rise” 
 
(source: http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD407.pdf) 
 
In his report "Regulatory Issues Raised by the Impact of Technological Changes on Market 
Integrity and Efficiency", IOSCO underlines also that HFT and algorithmic trading have 
arguably played a significant role in the developments of the new trading environment. 
IOSCO supports also the need for changes to the way competent authorities monitor 
trading. 
 
(source: http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD354.pdf) 
 
Regarding market access for automated trading, IOSCO has clearly identified the risk of 
"black box" due to algorithm and HFT trading: "Facilitating algorithmic trading through 
automated systems, which raises issues of capacity and the potential need for rationing 
bandwidth. Indeed, some “black box” trading systems are capable of transmitting several 
thousand order messages to a market in less than a second". 
 
(source: http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD284.pdf) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
17
Few Comments... 
 
Many trading systems utilize what is known as an open outcry method of trading. In the open 
outcry system, market-makers are required to make a two-sided market by providing a bid 
and offer quote in all option series.  
 
The market-makers typically communicate verbally or visually with contra traders indicating 
their willingness to buy and sell various quantities of securities. Because the market-makers 
have personal control over the types and number of contracts traded, they can adjust their 
trading strategies as their positions change. In this way, the market-makers can manage their 
exposure, or risk, associated with their holdings by adjusting their quotes to favor trades that 
would tend to hedge away unwanted exposure.  
 
In an automated trading environment, a certain amount of control is lost when a market-maker 
has issued quotes in a large number of option series. The quotes are typically recorded in the 
automated and computer-based trading system, and matched up automatically with orders 
that enter the system electronically.  
 
With the proliferation of computer trading systems and increased communication speeds, the 
rate at which trades may be executed by an automated system far surpass the rate of trades 
that occur in an open outcry system. The speeds are such that the rapidity of trades may 
exceed the market-maker's ability to adapt his or her position.  
 
Specifically, one disadvantage of automated trading systems is that a number of automatic 
trades may occur within a very short time that result in an unacceptable risk being assumed 
by a market-maker. That is, the trades may occur so rapidly that the market-maker is unable 
to withdraw or modify his quotes in a timely manner (e.g. Knigh Capital crash in August 2012). 
 
There exist software tools that can analyze stock and option portfolios in close to real time. 
Market data is provided to the software analysis tools and used to evaluate the risk 
associated with stock and option portfolios. In addition, the tools may provide 
recommendations for trades and quotes and automated submission of those trades and 
quotes.  
 
However, even if a market-maker utilizes such a computer-implemented automated position 
analysis tool to revise or cancel quotes, the software tools may be unable to act in time given 
the speed at which an automated trading exchange system is capable of executing incoming 
orders. In particular, one aspect of existing exchange systems is that transactions are 
received and processed in the order received.  
 
Thus, even if a market-maker responds immediately using an automated software tool, the 
exchange may have a message queue containing additional orders that will be processed 
before the exchange system receives and processes the market-maker's quote cancellation 
request. 
 
The result is that a market-maker who is willing to take on a predetermined level of risk must 
limit the number of quotes or the depth (quantity) of each quote to ensure that rapid trades do 
not result in an unacceptable aggregate risk, rather than issuing quotes having greater depth 
and breadth (where the filling of a single quote might reach the market-maker's risk limit).  
 
Thus, a market-maker's limited control over risk management may have the undesirable effect 
of hindering the liquidity of the market.  
 
It would therefore be desirable to have a trading exchange system and method for 
automatically canceling, regenerating, or modifying quotes under certain trading conditions.  
 
The Chicago Board Options Exchange patent on risk monitoring of automated trading 
provides few ideas on the IT architecture needed to avoid "message queue" in automated 
revision or cancellation of quotes. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
18
Chapter II: Case study of NYSE Euronext HFT & Chicago Stock Exchange patent 
 
In this section, we propose to analyze information from stock market regarding the 
implementation of automated trading and High Frequency technology.  Acting as node in the 
financial network, stock markets are key actors in the risk management specifications. Also, 
stock market must incorporate very fast processing to stay competitive in a very fragmented 
and changing environment. 
 
This paper will focus on two case studies. One will analyze the specifications from the 
implementation of High speed trading technology in HFT NYSE Euronext. The other one will 
analyze the patent from Chicago Stock Exchange on the risk monitoring of automated trading.  
 
The case study of the NYSE Euronext HFT services 
 
NYSE Euronext (NYX) is a leading global operator of financial markets and a provider of 
innovative trading technologies. With exchanges in the US and Europe, NYSE Euronext 
equities marketplaces represent one-third of equities trading worldwide. NYSE Euronext is 
also one of the world’s leading futures and options trading venues, with four markets based in 
the US and Europe offering derivatives on commodities, FX, equities, bonds, interest rates, 
indices and swaps. Its commercial technology division, NYSE Technologies, provides 
transaction, data, and infrastructure management services and solutions. 
 
From a single global business, NYSE Technologies delivers best of breed products using 
world-class technology connected to all the world major markets. NYSE Technologies is one 
of the world's leading providers of end-to-end electronic trading solutions. Through leading 
edge software, combined with high performance connectivity, NYSE Technologies engages 
the global trading community with innovative tools, access to liquidity and worldwide markets.. 
 
NYSE Technologies provides High Frequency Trading services, also through Market Access 
Gateway (MAG) and Risk Management Gateway (RMG).  
 
For an investment firm to enter the arena of algorithmic trading, it must have reliable systems 
capable of moving tremendous volume in microseconds. NYSE Technologies combines these 
elements into a single normalized messaging interface.  
 
Market Access Gateway (MAG) is an extremely low-latency order routing platform, that offers 
high-frequency traders, institutional investors and broker-dealers a scalable connection to 
global execution venues. MAG provides high speed messaging on commodity hardware, with 
deployment specific fine-tuning to maximize performance and throughput.  
 
Regarding Risk management tools, MAG provides optional pre-trade risk checks to 
allow to mitigate operational risk (fat finger checks) and keeps orders compliance in 
real-time. 
 
MAG technology easily integrates with other NYSE Technologies products to provide 
complete trading solutions. The diagram below shows typical integration examples, providing 
low latency Direct Market Access (DMA) in both broker-managed and hosted/co-located 
environments. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NYSE Technologies Market Data Platform feed handlers normalize the incoming market data 
with very low latency and pass the updates to SuperBook and to OneTick. 
 
SuperBook builds a consolidated view of all open orders for stocks while. OneTick captures 
the updates and stores them for historical processing. The OneTick (as Complex Event 
DMA = Direct Market Access providing low latency 
MAMA or open MAMA = Open Middleware Agnostic 
Messaging APITM 
LDMA = physical box as the trading engine providing 
sub- microsecond transport latency, at throughputs 
approaching millions of messages per second. 
MAG = Market Access Gateway  
RMG = Risk Management Gateway 
FH =  Feed Handlers 
SFTI=  Secure Financial Transaction Infrastructure 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
20
Processing Engine) calculates a range of mathematical analytics, which are delivered to the 
Client’s algorithmic engine.   
 
Finally, when the algorithm decides it’s time to trade, it issues the order to the NYSE 
Technologies (Market Access Gateway); which converts the trade to the format required by 
the corresponding Trading Venue.  
 
All this communication is handled at sub-microsecond latency via NYSE Technologies 
LDMA (Local Direct Memory Access = messaging platform). 
 
NYSE Technologies has published his Market Access Gateway Inventory for January 10, 
2013 (see appendix).  
 
The total end-to-end latency introduced by the NYSE Technologies platform, including 
inter-process and inter-server communications, was approximately 70 microseconds 
(1/1000.000 sec).  
 
The NYSE Technologies tests were designed to measure key factors of relevance to 
algorithmic traders: 
 the latency and throughput characteristics of the market data and market access 
infrastructure; 
 platform performance under varying market data update rates;  
 and platform performance while varying the rate that orders are sent to market. 
 
A logical view of the components in the test environment and the measurement points is 
shown in the following figure. 
 
 
 
In a supervisory point of view, it’s 
fundamental to assess the impact of 
exchange 
simulator 
testing 
on 
latency. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
21
LATENCY MEASUREMENT – CLASSIC MISTAKES 
1. Measuring the parts, not the whole. Measuring the 
performance of components in isolation does not provide 
a true picture of how they will perform in combination. 
2. Not using representative test data. Testing with 
artificial data, or data from a different market, can 
produce results that do not accurately characterize real 
world performance. 
3. Measuring only what can easily be captured. 
Often, the metrics reported are those that are easy to 
measure, rather than those that are critical to trading 
system performance. 
4. Not measuring what is important to business. If the 
trading strategy is sensitive to latency outliers, there is 
little benefit in measuring averages. Similarly, capturing 
network round-trip times or single-component delays may 
not be particularly relevant in a business context. 
The performance of the components shown in 
grey with dashed outlines was not measured in 
the tests.  
 
Latency was measured across three different 
segments of the platform:  
 the inbound components,  
 the trading application, and 
 the outbound components.  
 
Inbound latency measures the time between a 
market data update being sent by the exchange 
simulator and the corresponding update being 
received by the algo engine code.  
 
This measures the end-to-end latency of the 
market data platform from the point of view of an algorithmic trader in the most stringent way: 
this is the total interval between a packet of market data entering the trader’s network from 
the exchange, and the time that the algorithm code can act upon it. 
 
Application latency measures the internal latency of the algorithm engine, defined as the time 
between it receiving a market data update and it being about to send an order message to the 
MAG. It was measured in order to be able to exclude the effect of the test code from the 
results and, therefore, is not included in the reported figures from NYSE Technologies. 
 
Outbound latency measures the time between the algorithm engine sending an order to the 
MAG and the network packet containing the order being sent to the exchange simulator. This 
measures the end-to-end latency of the market access platform from the point of view of an 
algorithmic trader. 
 
The first test (the market data test) was designed to determine the maximum rate at which the 
market data infrastructure could perform without introducing excessive latency. The algorithm 
engine was configured to send an order message to the MAG in response to every thousand 
price updates it received, and the multicast publisher was configured to send data at between 
5,000 and 80,000 packets per second. This corresponds to approximately 2,300 to 37,000 
market data updates per second.  
 
The second test (the Market Access test) was designed to determine the maximum order 
volume that the market access infrastructure could support. The algorithm engine was 
configured to send an order message to the MAG for every single market data update it 
received, and the multicast publisher was configured to send data at rates between 1,000 and 
15,000 packets per second.  These results correspond to market data update rates, and 
hence also order rates, between 450 and 7,000 per second.  
 
The test was run for ten minutes (five million packets for the market data test or half a million 
packets for the market access test). The entire day’s capture file contained 19.8 million 
packets, so the higher-rate market data tests correspond to consuming a quarter of a day’s 
data in just over a minute. 
 
The market data test showed consistent average inbound latency of between 46.7 and 50.1 
microseconds for all data rates up to the maximum rate of 36,925 packets per second (and 
never exceeded 290.1 microseconds). 
 
The market access test showed very consistent average outbound latency of between 19.8 
and 21.5 microseconds.  
 
The results of these tests are useful to understand the total end-to-end performance that can 
be achieved with a set of trading platform components that have been designed to work 
together.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
22
NYSE Technologies - Test and results specifications. 
 
 
 
 
As we can observe in this case study, testing on latency doesn’t cover the fundamental part of 
Stock exchange simulation.  
 
NYSE Technologies has created the industry standard for one of the highest-performance, 
lowest-latency global networks.  It gives a single point of connection to a wide array of 
markets, through infrastructure reliable enough to power every NYSE Euronext market 
around the world. With over 1,600 potential counterparties and a wealth of third-party 
markets, It is one of the largest networks in the world. 
 
NYSE Technologies deploy Access Centers in London, Paris, Amsterdam, Brussels, Lisbon 
and Frankfurt. The Access Centers are housed in telco-neutral, third party data centers and 
are located a minimum distance apart. The speed of the cross connect is dependent on the 
bandwidth of the connection the costumer has ordered (this could be 10Mb, 100Mb, 1Gb).  
NYSE Euronext provides the equipment to be hosted. Most Tier 1 carriers have a presence 
within these facilities.   
 
To conclude this NYSE case study presentation, we would like focus on the "NYSE 
TECHNOLOGIES TERMS AND CONDITIONS". These Terms and conditions are useful to 
understand how a stock exchange defines responsibilities with his customers:   
 
 
The Supplier may at any time, for any reason (except where prohibited by 
applicable law), deny the Client’s request for the Service or limit the available facilities 
of the Service as determined in the Supplier’s sole discretion. 
 
 
The Client is responsible for making separate arrangements for use of any 
services (other than the Service) provided by the Supplier and its Affiliates (including 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
23
trading platform and market data services) and nothing in this Agreement entitles the 
Client or any other party to use or receive such services. 
 
 
Only the Client (and not any third party) may use and access the Service, and 
the Client may not resell the Service (in whole or in part) or permit any third party to 
use or access the Service without the prior written consent of the Supplier. 
 
 
Prior to allowing any of its Affiliates to use and access the Service, Client shall 
submit to the Supplier, for the Supplier’s approval, notice of such use and access 
and the identity of the Affiliates of the Client that would use and access the Service. 
The Supplier shall promptly notify the Client of its approval or disapproval of such use 
and access by such Affiliates of the Client.  
 
 
A “Client User” means any third party, other than an Affiliate of the Client, who the 
Client permits to use and access the Service in accordance with this Agreement. 
 
 
The Supplier reserves the right to make Policies governing the use of the Service 
(the “Policies”) and specifications concerning connection of systems to the 
Service (the “Specifications”) and to amend the Policies and the Specifications from 
time to time.  
 
 
The Client agrees to comply with the Policies and Specifications and the rules and 
regulations of the Supplier as are notified by the Supplier to the Client from time to 
time. 
 
 
The Supplier exercises no control over, and accepts no responsibility for, the 
content of any information transmitted using the Service. Use of such 
information is at the Client’s own risk. The Client is solely responsible for 
maintaining the accuracy and integrity of its own data. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
24
Chicago Board Options Exchange as case study - A patent to define how organize the 
IT architecture of the risk monitoring of automated trading. 
 
In the fields of Patents, US market gives the originality to allow corporate to patent business 
model or organization.    
 
This section will analyze the Chicago Board Options Exchange patent as case study on what 
kind of IT architecture could be implemented in a risk management perspective for automated 
trading. This patent also provides IT architecture specification to help in managing "message 
queue" for High Frequency quotes revision or cancellation regarding Risk thresholds.  
 
To select the Chicago Board Options Exchange patent, we conduct a research in the US 
Patent & Trademark Office data base.  This research has used key "words" to filter patents 
with the target to find patents related to risk monitoring of automated trading: 
 
On the filter “Title&Abstract&Document” for the key words “automated trading”, we 
have found 92  patents; 
 
If we include an additional filter on the key words “Risk management”, we have 15 
patents; 
 
If we include an additional filter on keys words “monitoring” or “risk monitoring”, we 
have 4 patents.  
 
On these 4 patents, one patent comes from the Chicago Board Options on Exchange 
and his content covers the purpose of this paper. (see appendix) 
 
This patent was approved in 2012 with the ID number 20020082967. It was submitted by 
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) and coverts the following organization topic: 
“Automated trading exchange system having integrated quote risk monitoring and integrated 
quote modification services”. 
 
CBOE sum up his patent as follow:  
 
“An automated trading exchange having integrated quote risk monitoring and quote 
modification services. An apparatus is implemented using at least one computer, having 
memory, and a processor.  
 
The computer is configured to receive orders and quotes, wherein specified ones of the 
quotes are contained in a quote group, and have associated trading parameters such as a 
risk threshold. Not all received quotes are required to have trading parameters as described 
herein. Preferably, the quote group contains all the quotes, or a subset of quotes, belonging 
to an individual market-maker for a given class of options contracts, or possibly the quotes of 
two or more market-makers that have identified themselves as belonging to a group for the 
purposes of risk monitoring and quote modification.  
 
The computer typically generates a trade by matching the received orders and quotes to 
previously received orders and quotes, and otherwise stores each of the received orders and 
quotes if a trade is not generated. The computer then determines whether a quote within the 
quote group has been filled as a result of the generated trade, and if so, determines a risk 
level and an aggregate risk level associated with said trade.  
 
The computer then compares the aggregate risk level with the market-maker's risk threshold, 
and if the threshold is exceeded, automatically modifies at least one of the remaining quotes 
in the quote group. The computer may also automatically regenerate quotes that have been 
filled”. 
 
CBOE has structured his patent on fhe following 30 claims: 
 
1. A system for processing trades of securitized instruments based on security orders and 
quotes received from client computers, comprising:  
 
at least one server computer comprising a memory, and a processor, said server 
computer configured to perform the steps of: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
25
o 
receiving orders and quotes, wherein specified ones of said quotes belong to 
a quote group, and wherein said specified ones of said quotes have 
associated trading parameters comprising a risk threshold; 
o 
generating a trade by matching said received orders and quotes to previously 
received orders and quotes; 
o 
storing each of said orders and quotes when a trade is not generated; 
o 
determining whether a quote having associated trading parameters has been 
filled as a result of the generated trade, and if so, determining a risk level and 
an aggregate risk level associated with said trade;  
o 
comparing said aggregate risk level with said risk threshold;  
o 
and, automatically modifying at least one of the remaining said specified ones 
of said quotes in the quote group if said threshold is exceeded.  
 
2. The apparatus of claim 1 further comprising a quote data structure stored in said first 
memory, said data structure containing a plurality of quotes fields and at least one risk 
threshold field.  
 
3. The apparatus of claim 2, wherein said plurality of quote fields comprises a bid quote field 
and an offer quote field.  
 
4. The apparatus of claim 2, wherein said data structure further comprises a group indicator 
field.  
 
5. The apparatus of claim 2, wherein said data structure further comprises a quote 
modification increment field.  
 
6. The apparatus of claim 2, wherein said data structure further comprises a quote 
regeneration increment field.  
 
7. The apparatus of claim 2, wherein said data structure further comprises an owner field.  
 
8. A method of : 
 
modifying quotes in an automated exchange trading system that receives orders and 
quotes from remote computers, matches the orders and quotes to generate trades, 
and stores orders and quotes that are unmatched, comprising the steps of: 
 
receiving trading parameters comprising a risk threshold;  
 
associating said trading parameters with specified ones of received quotes; 
 
determining whether a quote having associated trading parameters has been filled as 
a result of a generated trade, and if so,  
 
determining a risk level and an aggregate risk level associated with said trade; 
 
comparing said aggregate risk level with said risk threshold;  
 
and, automatically modifying at least one of the specified ones of received quotes if 
said threshold is exceeded.  
 
9. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of determining a risk level comprises calculating a 
delta value for the generated trade.  
 
10. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of determining a risk level comprises calculating a 
trading volume for the generated trade.  
 
11. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of determining an aggregate risk level comprises 
determining a net delta.  
 
12. The method of claim 8 wherein the trading parameters further comprise a time duration, 
and wherein the step of determining an aggregate risk level comprises summing the deltas 
from trades involving at least a subset of quotes contained in said quote group that were 
executed within the time duration.  
 
13. The method of claim 8 wherein the trading parameters further comprise an integer N, and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
26
wherein the step of determining an aggregate risk level comprises summing the deltas from 
the most recent N trades involving at least a subset of quotes contained in said quote group.  
 
14. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of determining an aggregate risk level comprises 
determining a net contract volume. 
 
15. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of determining an aggregate risk level comprises 
determining a weighted sum of contract volumes.  
 
16. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of determining an aggregate risk level comprises 
determining an aggregate volume quantity.  
 
17. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of automatically modifying at least one of the 
specified ones of said received quotes comprises canceling all said specified ones of said 
received quotes.  
 
18. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of automatically modifying at least one of the 
specified ones of said received quotes comprises reducing the quantity associated with the 
specified ones of received quotes.  
 
19. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of automatically modifying at least one of the 
specified ones of said quotes comprises revising at least one of the bid and offer values of 
each of the specified ones of received quotes.  
 
20. The method of claim 8 wherein the trading parameters comprise a positive risk threshold 
and a negative risk threshold.  
 
21. The method of claim 20 wherein the step of comparing the aggregate risk level with the 
risk threshold comprises comparing the aggregate risk level to the positive risk threshold if the 
aggregate risk level is positive, and comparing the aggregate risk level to the negative risk 
threshold if the aggregate risk level is negative. 
  
22. The method of claim 8 wherein the step of comparing the aggregate risk level with the risk 
threshold comprises comparing the absolute value of the aggregate risk level to the risk 
threshold.  
 
23. The method of claim 8 wherein each of the specified ones of received quotes are 
associated with one of a first subgroup and second subgroup, and wherein the step of 
automatically modifying at least one of the specified ones of received quotes in the quote 
group comprises reducing the offer values of the quotes in the first subgroup and raising the 
bid values of the quotes in the second subgroup.  
 
24. The method of claim 23 wherein the first subgroup comprises quotes on call series 
options and the second subgroup comprises quotes on put series options, and wherein the 
aggregate risk is positive.  
 
25. The method of claim 23 wherein the first subgroup comprises quotes on put series options 
and the second subgroup comprises quotes on call series options, and wherein the aggregate 
risk is negative.  
 
26. The method of claim 23 where the amount of said reducing and raising is determined in 
response to a modification increment parameter.  
 
27. The method of claim 8 further comprising the step of automatically modifying a quote 
comprises regenerating a quote having associated trading parameters that has been filled as 
a result of the generated trade.  
 
28. The method of claim 27 wherein the step of regenerating a quote is performed utilizing a 
regeneration increment.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
27
 
29. In a system, for processing trades of a security, that includes a computer that receives 
orders and quotes, executes a trade by matching the received orders and quotes, and stores 
received orders and quotes for which a trade is not executed, a computer-based risk 
monitoring apparatus, comprising:  
 
a quote service module that associates market-maker trading parameters comprising 
a risk threshold with at least one received quote; and 
 
a broker service module that communicates with the quote service module, wherein 
the broker service module automatically executes trades and provides corresponding 
fill reports to said quote service module, and wherein the quote service module 
modifies received quotes in accordance with the trading parameters and the fill 
reports.  
 
30. In a system for processing trades of securitized instruments, the system including: 
 
a computer having a memory and a processor, said computer being configured to 
perform the steps of receiving orders and quotes, generating a trade by matching 
said received orders and quotes to previously received orders and quotes, and 
storing each of said orders and quotes if a trade is not generated,  
 
a method for managing risk comprising the steps of: 
o 
identifying specified ones of said quotes as belonging to a quote group; 
o 
associating trading parameters comprising a risk threshold with specified 
ones of said quotes; 
o 
determining whether a quote having associated trading parameters has 
been filled as a result of the generated trade, and if so, determining an 
aggregate risk level associated with said trade; 
o 
comparing said aggregate risk level with said risk threshold; and 
o 
automatically modifying at least one of the remaining said specified ones of 
said quotes in the quote group if said threshold is exceeded.  
 
So the CBOE's invention is based on a method and apparatus for an automated trading 
exchange having integrated quote risk monitoring and quote modification services.  
 
The computer is configured to receive orders and quotes, wherein specified ones of the 
quotes are contained in a quote group, and have associated trading parameters such as a 
risk threshold. All received quotes are required to have trading parameters as described 
herein. Preferably, the quote group contains all the quotes belonging to an individual marketmaker for a given class of options contracts, or possibly the quotes of two or more marketmakers that have identified themselves as belonging to a group for the purposes of risk 
monitoring and quote modification.  
 
The computer typically generates a trade by matching the received orders and quotes to 
previously received orders and quotes, and otherwise stores each of the received orders and 
quotes if a trade is not generated. The computer then determines whether a quote within the 
quote group has been filled as a result of the generated trade, and if so, determines a risk 
level and an aggregate risk level associated with said trade.  
 
The computer then compares the aggregate risk level with the market-maker's risk threshold, 
and if the threshold is exceeded, automatically modifies at least one of the remaining quotes 
in the quote group. The computer may also automatically regenerate quotes, that is, 
automatically issue new quotes when trades have occurred against previous quotes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
28
CBOE provides the following illustration of his architecture: 
 
 
In this CBOE's figure, a preferred embodiment of the system 100 utilized for trading and quote 
modification is described. The system 100 (also referred to herein as a screen-based trading 
system, or SBT system) includes a plurality of computers, which may be one or more 
workstations, servers, mainframes, or other computer hardware platforms that provide 
sufficient resources to meet the desired trading volume and desired transaction-processing 
rate.  
 
The system includes a number of computer clusters such as cluster 102 (although only one is 
depicted in the figure), where each cluster 102 handles trading for a number of securities, 
such as one or more classes of options.  
 
In the preferred embodiment, each cluster 102 is made up of two servers (104 & 106). The 
servers 104 and 106 in cluster 102 communicate with a plurality of client servers (110 & 112) 
that are typically located at remote locations, such as at a brokerage house, but may also be 
located in the same facility as the clusters 102.  
 
Network 108 facilitates communication between the clusters 102 and the client servers (Two 
clients are showed in CBOE figure: 110 & 112). For CBOE, the network 108 is preferably a 
private LAN/WAN configuration, but a public network may be utilized, if it provided sufficient 
redundancies and message security.  
 
Each client server (110 & 112) may be provided with a predetermined message throughput 
rate into network (108), where the throughput rate may be a maximum rate determined by 
various parameters, including the volume of orders sent by the client server (110 & 112), the 
volume of quotes sent by the client server (110 & 112), the number of option series for which 
quotes are provided, communication/connection fees paid by the brokerage house or other 
entity utilizing the client server (110 & 112), the overall capacity of the trading system 100, 
etc.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
29
The client servers (110 & 112) preferably communicate with other elements of the automated 
exchange system using a client application server module (210), as further described below, 
running on client servers (110 & 112).  
 
Each client server (110 & 112) is capable of serving a number of clients (shown in the figure 
as terminals 114, 116, 118, 120, 122, and 124). The client terminals may be "dumb" 
terminals, stand alone computing devices (PCs or workstations), or even portable wireless 
terminals.  
 
The client servers (110 & 112) may communicate with the client terminals (114-124) using a 
proprietary protocol or one of many standard public domain protocols.  
 
The automated exchange system 100 is comprised of the following five logical software 
modules:  
 
Presentation Services Graphical User Interface (130- GUI);  
 
Application Services (210  - Client Application Server, Gateway);  
 
Business Services (132) - see appendix;  
 
External Integration Services (133) - see appendix;  
 
and, Infrastructure Services (134) - see appendix. 
 
 
 
  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
30
The Presentation Services (GUI module 130) is constituted by applications that interact with 
the exchange system (100) via the Member Interface (API 135). There are two types of client 
applications, those that provide a GUI to allow user interaction with the system directly and 
applications that automate trading functions.  
 
An SBT-GUI module (131) (screen-based trading - Graphical User Interface)  is responsible 
for displaying the contents of a particular model to the screen and updating the display if the 
model's contents change. This module 131 contains several GUI applications, one for each of 
the major classes of human actors that use the system 100: traders, market-makers, clearing 
firm brokers, and system operators.  
 
The Application Services module 210 contains subordinate modules that forward requests 
initiated by human or automated actors, to be executed by the appropriate Business Services 
module(s) 132 (see appendix). These applications submit requests to Business Services 
components 132, notify clients of business events, and maintain user-specific views of 
information in the Business Services 132. This module also encompasses a Member 
Interface (MI) API 135 that provides a single entry point to the system exposing the 
applications in the Application Services Module 210 (i.e., Trader, Market-Maker). In addition, 
the Application Services Module 210 maintains instantaneously updated views that reflect the 
prevailing state of each actor's information in the Business Services module 132.  
 
The Trader Application module 136 has the following specific responsibilities:  
 
submit, cancel, update, and cancel/replace orders;  
 
submit requests for quotes;  
 
present the current status of the trader's orders;  
 
present fill and cancel reports;  
 
present Market Best Bids and Offers for selected products;  
 
set the trader's defaults and preferences;  
 
present Book Depths for selected products;  
 
and, present underlying quotes/last sales and news alerts.  
 
The Market-Maker module 137 inherits the Trader App module's 136 responsibilities and adds 
the following:  
 
submit and modify market-maker quotes;  
 
present requests for quotes;  
 
set the market-maker's defaults and parameters;  
 
set autoquote parameters; submit autoquotes.  
 
The Clearing Firm Broker module 138 inherits the Trader App module's 136 responsibilities 
and adds the following: assume control of a trader's privileges. A Clearing Firm Broker can: 
 force the logout of a market-maker;  
 set a maximum order quantity for quotes and orders of the clearing firm's marketmakers.  
 
The BackOffice application 139 is responsible for reporting order status information. This can 
include fill reports, cancel reports and new order notifications. The Operations application 140 
has the following responsibilities:  
 
start and shutdown the SBT system;  
 
start and stop trading of a product;  
 
change the status of a product's market (pre-open, open, close, halt, etc.);  
 
present logged system events;  
 
maintain SBT-specific trader information;  
 
maintain SBT-specific product information;  
 
maintain trading parameters (minimum market-maker order default size, required 
percent of responses to a request for quote (RFQ), maximum response time to an 
RFQ, etc).  
 
The functionality of the Trader 136, Market-Maker 137, Clearing Firm Broker 138, and Back 
Office 139 modules is exposed by the Member Interface (MI) Application Programming 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
31
Interface (API) 135. The Member Interface 135 exposes different subsets of functionality 
depending on the user that logged on to the system. The intention behind sharing a common 
API among the different trader classes is to allow workstations to service all of them. 
Separate API's may alternatively be used for the different user classes.  
 
The Business Services module 132 (see appendix) contains the core functionality of the 
automated exchange system 100. It includes components that correspond to the key 
business object model entities of the automated trading system such as members, orders, 
books, products, quotes, et cetera. In addition, it includes components to administer and 
operate the system 100.   
 
CBOE's Risk Measurements and Risk Thresholds... 
 
In a preferred embodiment of the automated trading system 100 having integrated order 
modification and quote risk monitoring, the aggregate risk of a market-maker's recent trades 
is calculated after each trade. The measurement preferably includes either: 
 
calculating an equivalent stock position, i.e., a net delta (by, for example, summing 
delta values for all contracts traded by the market-maker associated with the option 
series in the class),  
 
or calculating a net gamma, theta, or vega.  
 
In particular, the aggregate risk measurement is preferably the net delta of all the trades for a 
specific market-maker or a designated group of market-makers in a given class in a given 
period of time. The quotes in a given class submitted by a market-maker (or a group of 
market-makers) are referred to herein as a quote group.  
 
The aggregate risk measurement is preferably based on the net delta for the entire class of 
options, which is the sum of all the deltas for a given market-maker's trades in all series of a 
class. The delta contribution for each trade is calculated every time a trade occurs for any 
series in the class. The aggregate risk is then calculated by summing delta contributions from 
only the most recent trades.  
 
Autoquote systems provide pricing information, and specifically theoretical delta values, using 
algorithms that utilize standard parameters. Most of the parameters associated with 
calculating an individual series delta value are objective data, such as the date, strike price, 
the price of the underlying security, etc. Other autoquote parameters have acceptable default 
values that may be used, such as using the broker loan rate for the interest rate, etc. One 
parameter that may be more subjective among individual market-makers is the volatility 
parameter.  
 
Thus, the system 100 may be designed such that each quote submitted by a market-maker 
includes a volatility field to be used by the system in determining the individual theoretical 
delta value. The theoretical delta value may then be calculated either: 
 
as part of the threshold test,  
 
or may be periodically updated at a rate sufficient to provide a fairly accurate delta 
value . 
 
In this way, the system 100 provides the market-maker with further control over the quote risk 
monitoring system.  
 
Because the exchange quote modification service is intended to address increased risks 
associated with a rapid sequence of trades, older trades need not be included because the 
market-maker has had an opportunity to manually intervene and modify his quotes.  
 
Thus, the aggregate risk measurement may be based on the last N trades, where N is a 
trading parameter specified by the market-maker, or may be based on trades occurring within 
a specific time frame. The duration of the time frame may be specified by the market-maker 
by providing a time window. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
32
Alternatively, the risk threshold and risk measurement may include an aggregate gamma 
measurement. Gamma is known to be the rate of change of the delta parameter with respect 
to the rate of change of the underlying security, such as the stock. An aggregate gamma 
measurement provides an indication of the rate at which an aggregate delta measurement will 
change. Net gamma values are negative when a market-maker is a net seller of contracts, 
and positive when a market-maker is a net buyer of contracts. As a further alternative, either 
theta, which is the rate at which option prices change over time, or vega, which is the change 
in an option contract that results from a change in its volatility, may be included.  
 
The market-maker may provide a single threshold such that if the absolute value of the 
aggregate risk exceeds the threshold, then the quotes are modified according to the rules set 
forth below. The market-maker may also provide positive and negative thresholds.    
 
In an alternative preferred embodiment, the market-maker's risk is determined by calculating 
the net contract volume traded within a specified time.  
 
The result is that the volume of each trade is treated as a positive or negative value, 
depending upon the nature of the trade selling calls and buying puts have negative 
contributions, and buying calls and selling puts have positive contributions.  
 
The sum of the trades is then calculated to provide a net difference between the number of 
short calls plus long puts and long calls plus short puts. Thus, the market-makers may specify 
a threshold in terms of a maximum net contract volume offset.  
 
The system allows be configured to also allow the market-makers to specify a time window 
parameter that specifies which trades should be included in the risk calculation. 
 
In still further embodiments, the aggregate risk measurement may be simplified by calculating 
the total number of put or call contracts (or deltas) that have been sold or bought within a 
given time frame or within that last N trades. Thus, if any of the four aggregate volume 
quantities (buying calls, selling calls, buying puts, selling puts) exceeds a threshold (within a 
certain time period, or certain number of trades), the quote modification module 340 modifies 
the quotes appropriately.  
 
Alternatively, the quote service module 240 (Market-Maker Quote Service module - see 
appendix) may calculate the total calls bought plus puts sold, and the total calls sold plus puts 
bought, and notify the quote modification module 340 (see below) if either of these aggregate 
values exceeds the threshold.  
 
As a further alternative, the quote service module may use a weighting scheme to calculate 
aggregate values described above. Specifically, in-the-money options (options with intrinsic 
value) may be weighted more heavily than at-the-money or out-of-the-money options. In one 
preferred method, the in-the-money options are weighted with a factor of two, at-the-money 
options are weighted with a factor of one, and out-of-the-money options are weighted by a 
factor of one half. These simplified risk measurement and threshold tests perform adequately 
due to the nature of trading activities that typically result in large risk exposure.  
 
It should also be noted that the market-makers may be grouped together for purposes of risk 
exposure analysis. That is, the total risk may be calculated based on the trades of one or 
more market-makers. The market-makers provide a group identification parameter(s) 
indicating which other market-makers' trades should be included in the risk calculation. In this 
manner, market-makers acting in concert on behalf of a single organization may coordinate 
their quote modification.  
 
Automatic Quote Modification... 
 
The quote service module 240 of the exchange system 100 includes a quote modification 
service module 340. The quote modification service module 340 may be implemented as part 
of the quote service module 240, or may be a separate service module. It may also take the 
form of a separate quote factory module for generating new quotes.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
33
 
The quote modification service module 340 performs quote modification by preferably 
automatically revising, canceling, or regenerating quotes. The quotes are modified by the 
exchange system in an automatic manner that does not require further input from the marketmaker in the form of quote cancellation requests and submission of new quotes by the 
market-maker or his computer.  
 
The exchange system performs 
quote 
modification 
immediately 
and 
without 
the 
transmission 
delays inherent in communication 
systems 
and 
without 
delays 
associated 
with 
processing 
queued 
cancellation 
requests 
received from a remote location.  
 
If the quote service module 240 
determines that the threshold(s) have 
been exceeded, the quote service 
module 
240 
determines 
revised 
quotes.   
 
The 
revised 
quotes 
can 
take 
numerous forms.  
 
 
In a first embodiment, the quote 
service 
module 
240 
revises 
quotes 
by 
canceling 
all 
outstanding quotes in the class, 
thereby preventing any further 
trades from executing and giving 
the market-maker time to provide 
revised 
quotes. 
In 
this 
embodiment, the quote service 
module 240 sends quote update 
messages 
in 
the 
form 
of 
cancellation messages to the 
broker service module 230 (see appendix). The broker service 230 then removes those 
quotes from the electronic book. Because the threshold test is performed by the 
exchange system 100 after each trade, the cancellation messages are therefore 
preferably processed before any further trades can be executed. This is possible 
because the cancellation requests are not sent from a remote node on a wide area 
network, such as a market-maker's computing platform, but are generated by the 
exchange system 100. This provides the advantage of eliminating a cancellation 
message queue, as would be used when sending cancellation requests from a 
remote node, thereby improving quote update times and providing risk 
management.  
 
 
In a second embodiment, the quote service module 240 revises quotes by reducing the 
quantity associated with the existing quotes in the class thereby reducing the amounts of 
potential further trades and reducing the market-maker's exposure to more risk. The 
market-maker may specify the amount of the volume decrease by way of an increment 
value. In this embodiment, the quote service module 240 sends quote updates by first 
sending quote cancellation messages to the broker service module 230, and after 
acknowledgment, sending the revised quotes to the broker service module 230 for 
execution or booking. Again, because the threshold test is performed by the exchange 
system 100 after each trade, the cancellation messages are therefore preferably 
processed before any further trades can be executed. As above, this is possible because 
the cancellation requests are not sent from a remote node on a wide area network, such 
as a market-maker's computing platform, but are generated by the exchange system 100.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
34
 
 
In a third embodiment, the quote service module 240 revises quotes by decreasing the 
bid and offer values of some quotes and increasing others in an attempt to cancel some 
of the risk already assumed by the market-maker. The quote service 240 does this by 
automatically adjusting quotes to favor trades that will tend to provide offsetting risk. 
Specifically, if the threshold has been exceeded by a high positive-valued net delta (or K), 
then the net delta (or K) may be offset by trades having a negative delta (or K). As set 
forth above, those trades would include selling calls and buying puts. Similarly, if the 
threshold has been exceeded by a high negative-valued net delta (or K), then the 
aggregate risk may be offset by trades having a positive delta (or K), or by selling puts 
and buying calls. Of course, to produce the desired trades, the lowering of offer values of 
quotes will tend to result in more selling activity by the market-maker, and the raising of 
bid values will result in more buying activity by the market-maker. In this embodiment, the 
modification increment is specified by an increment value. Again the automated risk 
monitoring system and quote modification service of system 100 provides advantages in 
that the market-maker need not cancel previous quotes and submit new quotes while still 
being exposed to the possibility of further trades being executed.  
 
The quote service 240 may also modify quotes by regenerating the just-filled quote. This may 
be performed even if the market-maker's risk threshold has not been exceeded. The marketmaker is able to specify quote regeneration parameters via client application server 210 that 
are stored in the user service module 260 (see appendix). The parameters specify which 
products are enabled for quote regeneration, and the extent to which the quotes are to be 
regenerated.  
 
The market-maker may therefore specify, on a product-by-product basis, how many times the 
quotes are to be regenerated after each quote has been filled. This is referred to herein as the 
regeneration number parameter. The market-maker may also specify whether the 
regenerated quotes are to have the same bid and offer values, or are to be backed-off from 
the previous trade. This parameter is referred to herein as the regeneration increment. That 
is, for a two-sided quote, if the market-maker has just sold a quantity of contracts at his offer 
price, the regenerated quote may have a higher offer value.  
 
Preferably the bid value is also raised accordingly to maintain a desired or required spread in 
bid and offer quotes. If, on the other hand, the market-maker has just bought a quantity of 
contracts at his bid price, the regenerated quote may have a lower bid value. The marketmaker also has the option of specifying on a per-class basis the values of the regeneration 
number parameter and the regeneration increment parameter. The quote regeneration is 
preferably not performed if the market-maker risk threshold has been exceeded, unless the 
market-maker has specifically selected quote revision in the event the risk threshold has been 
exceeded.  
 
Upon execution of a trade at step 310, the quote service module 240 at step 320 checks to 
see whether the individual market-maker's risk threshold has been exceeded. 
 
The risk measurement and threshold test may be performed using a variety of methods, and 
certain market-makers' trading activities may be combined for the purposes of risk exposure. 
If the threshold has not been exceeded, then at step 330 the quote service module 240 
preferably checks to see whether the market-maker whose quote has been executed has 
indicated the desire to have his quotes regenerated. If not, then the process has completed. 
In the event that the result of either inquiry 320, 330 is affirmative, then the quote service 240 
modifies the quotes with the quote modification module 340 as described above.  
 
Quote modification module 340 includes quote regeneration module 350 and cancel or revise 
quote module 360.  
 
In conclusion, the Chicago Board Options Exchange patent provides a useful case study on 
IT architecture to manage orders modification or cancellation. It provides useful specifications 
also regarding the "message queue" issue in a High Frequency Trading environment 
regarding the necessity to react in real-time.    
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
35
Conclusion 
 
Based on case study and regulatory guidelines, this paper analyses key specifications mainly 
on the challenges of automated trading risk monitoring.    
 
Automated trading platform and HFT need to be monitored in an individual and systemic 
approach.  
 
The end-to-end latency and the volume of orders involved by HFT have created a "shadow 
trading" where traders (including High Frequency Traders) and supervisors have currently no 
testing and monitoring tools to prevent major failures.  
 
Regulators call for the implementation of risk monitoring and testing tools. This 
implementation of automated audit trail should be able to validate algorithm prior to deploying 
its in markets. A key challenge is to define a common development and testing lifecycle 
regarding the technical specifications of HFT. Registration and audit of algorithms used in 
HFT need to be analyzed additionally to the implementation of audit trail tools.  
 
Based on the NYSE Technologies platform case study, we can observe that audit trail from 
NYSE automated platforms is limited to the timeframe of hundredth of a second (1/100sec). In 
the same time, NYSE platforms provide total end-to-end latency (including inter-process and 
inter-server communications) of approximately 70 microseconds (1/1000.000 sec). This case 
study illustrates the current gap existing between the capacity of trading and the real capacity 
of monitoring HFT; creating a "shadow trading".   
 
Regarding information analyzed in this paper, we can support the idea that stock exchange, 
as important financial hub regulated, could play an important role in the risk monitoring of 
HFT. There are worldwide around 50 major stock exchanges.  
 
Stock exchanges should be responsible to organize "Quality Acceptance" test environment to 
challenge algorithms in an individual perspective but also in a systemic approach (linked to 
the potential correlation between algorithms).  
 
A robust and flexible simulation environment is needed. This test environment (as a Quality 
Acceptance environment in IT lifecycle) could help testing and analyzing different types of 
what-if-scenarios that include policies, business models, architectures, markets, trading 
strategies, market participants, etc. This test environment needs to have a daily refresh of 
market data.  
 
This 
simulation 
environment 
could be also a useful tool to test 
potential 
correlation 
between 
algorithms coming from different 
venues. 
This 
"Quality 
acceptance" 
environment 
for 
HFT 
could 
represent 
an 
interesting 
perspective 
for 
regulators worldwide to organize 
stock exchanges as Financial Hubs of HFT.  
 
This paper underlines the key challenge to monitor risk management in the high speed 
automated trading.  Additionally, High Frequency Traders and regulators need to define how 
to register and to audit HFT algorithm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
36
Bibliography (key lectures used for the preparation of this paper) 
 
 
X. Frank Zhang, “The Effect of High-Frequency Trading on Stock Volatility and Price 
Discovery”, Yale University, Nov. 2010. 
 
“FINDINGS REGARDING THE MARKET EVENTS OF MAY 6, 2010”,  REPORT OF 
THE STAFFS OF THE CFTC AND SEC TO THE JOINT ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
ON EMERGING REGULATORY ISSUES,  SEPTEMBER 30, 2010 (www.cftc.gov, 
www.sec.gov).  
 
D. Easley, M.M. Lopez de Prado, M.O’Hara, “THE VOLUME CLOCK: INSIGHTS 
INTO THE HIGH FREQUENCY PARADIGM”, March 2012. 
 
Albert J. Menkveld, "High Frequency Trading and the New-Market Makers", August 
15, 2011, Duisenberg school of finance (TI 11-076/2/DSF 21) 
 
P. Gomber, B. Arndt, M. Lutat, T. Uhle, “High Frequency Trading”, Goethe Universitat 
- Frankfurt, 2011. 
 
Mark D. Flood,  Allan I. Mendelowitz,  William Nichols, "Monitoring Financial Stability 
in a Complex World", March 14, 2012. 
 
Matt Prewitt, "HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING: SHOULD REGULATORS DO 
MORE?", 12/12/2012. 
 
Albert J. Menkveld, "High Frequency Trading and the New-Market Makers", 
06/02/2012. 
 
David M. Serritella, 'HIGH SPEED TRADING BEGETS HIGH SPEED REGULATION: 
SEC RESPONSE TO FLASH CRASH",  University of Illinois College of Law, 2011. 
 
AFM, "High frequency trading: The application of advanced trading technology in the 
European marketplace", Amsterdam, November 2010. 
 
 Michal J. McGowan, "The rise of computerized high frequency trading: used and 
controversy",  Duke University School of Law, 2011. 
 
Babis Theodoulidis, David Diaz, "Financial Markets and High Frequency Trading: An 
Information Management Perspective" (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2178944). 
 
Diego Leis, "High Frequency Trading : Market Manipulation and Systemic Risks From 
an EU Perspective", 29/02/2012 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2108344) 
 
J Brogaard,  "High frequency trading and its impact on market quality", University 
Kellogg School of Management, 2010. 
 
Alain Chaboud, "Rise of the Machines: Algorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange 
Market", February 2013, SSNR 
(http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1501135) 
 
Robert Litzenberger, Jeff Castura, Richard Gorelick, " The Impacts of Automation and 
High Frequency Trading on market quality", Annueal Review of Financial Economics, 
October 2012 (http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-financial110311-101744?journalCode=financial) 
 
"The Future of Computer Trading in Financial MarketsAn International Perspective",  
Foresight: The Future of Computer Trading in Financial Markets, The Government 
Office for Science, London, 2012. 
 
 
Corporate & Institutions informations from: 
- ESMA 
- UPSTO (http://www.uspto.gov) - (http://appft1.uspto.gov/netacgi/nphParser?Sect1=PTO1&Sect2=HITOFF&d=PG01&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsrchnum.
html&r=1&f=G&l=50&s1=%2220020082967%22.PGNR.&OS=DN/20020082967&RS=DN/200
20082967) 
- CFTC 
- NYSE Euronex 
- Hibernia Atlantic (www.hiberniaatlantic.com 
- High Frequency Traders (http://highfrequencytraders.com) 
- High Frequendy Trading Review (http://www.hftreview.com) 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
37
Appendix I : Algorithm trading and HFT definition 
 
(source: P. Gomber, B. Arndt, M. Lutat, T. Uhle, “High Frequency Trading”, Goethe 
Universitat - Frankfurt, 2011). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
38
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
39
 
 
 
 
 
High Frequency literature Review:  
 
 
 
HFTLiteratureReview
Nov2012.pdf
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
40
Appendix II - Patent research in USPTO 
 
 
1 
20120203685 
System and Method for Dynamically Changing an Electronic Trade 
Order Quantity  
2 
20120095898 
AUTOMATED TRADING EXCHANGE SYSTEM HAVING INTEGRATED 
QUOTE RISK MONITORING AND INTEGRATED QUOTE 
MODIFICATION SERVICES  
3 
20120030087 
Automated Trading System In An Electronic Trading Exchange 
 
4 
20120030086 
Automated Trading System In An Electronic Trading Exchange 
 
5 
20120022993 
Automated Trading System In An Electronic Trading Exchange 
 
6 
20110313910 
System and Method for Dynamically Changing an Electronic Trade 
Order Quantity  
7 
20110119176 
Electronic Block Trading System and Method of Operation  
8 
20100198747 
System and Method for Dynamically Changing an Electronic Trade 
Order Quantity  
9 
20090006266 
ELECTRONIC BLOCK TRADING SYSTEM AND METHOD OF 
OPERATION  
10 
20080243709 
System and Method for Dynamically Changing an Electronic Trade 
Order Quantity  
11 
20080208734 
Automated Trading Exchange System Having Integrated Quote Risk 
Monitoring And Integrated Quote Modification Services  
12 
20070156574 
Automated trading system in an electronic trading exchange 
 
13 
20060259417 
Automated trading system in an electronic trading exchange 
 
14 
20040148242 
Method and system for intelligent automated security trading via the 
Internet  
15 
20020082967 
Automated Trading Exchange System Having Integrated Quote Risk 
Monitoring and Integrated Quote Modification Services  
 
With the additional key word « monitoring » :  4 patents 
 
1 
20120095898 
AUTOMATED TRADING EXCHANGE SYSTEM HAVING INTEGRATED 
QUOTE RISK MONITORING AND INTEGRATED QUOTE 
MODIFICATION SERVICES  
2 
20080208734 
Automated Trading Exchange System Having Integrated Quote Risk 
Monitoring And Integrated Quote Modification Services  
3 
20040148242 
Method and system for intelligent automated security trading via the 
Internet  
4 
20020082967 
Automated Trading Exchange System Having Integrated Quote Risk 
Monitoring and Integrated Quote Modification Services  
 
Due to the limited scope of this paper, It will be not possible to analyze and present the patent 
on " A method for automatically executing risk controlled trading spreads". For information, 
this patent is provided in the following document. 
patent on method 
for automaticcally exe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
41
Appendix III - Chicago Board Options Exchange patent to define how organize the IT 
architecture of the risk monitoring of automated trading. 
 
This appendix provides additional information on technical specifications provided by the 
Chicago Board Options Exchange patent and not presented in the core of this paper.  
 
******** 
 
 
The Broker Service module 230 is responsible for executing the following types of orders: 
limit, market, all or none, fill or kill, immediate or cancel, stop, stop limit, and spread.  
 
Upon trade execution, the Broker Service 230 is responsible for notifying the Trade Service 
module 143 of all the orders matched (all parties to the trade) in the trade. It is also 
responsible for notifying the Order Handling Service (i.e. Orders) 220 and Market-Maker 
Quote Service (i.e. Quotes) 240 of the fills.  
 
The responsibilities of the Order Book Service module 142 are:  
 
cooperate with the Broker Service 230 in calculating the opening price during 
a product's pre-opening period;  
 
acknowledge that an order was accepted by publishing an event consumed 
by the Trader application 136 which originated the order;  
 
cancel and cancel/replace resting orders; upon changes to the top of the 
book, publish the new Book Best Bid Offer (BBBO) and last sale.  
 
The responsibilities of the Trade Service module 143 are:  
 
receive trade notifications from the Broker Service 230;  
 
format trade reports;  
 
store trade reports;  
 
and forward trade reports to trade match (via TPF 156).  
 
The Market-Maker (MM) Quote Service module 240 is responsible for:  
 
 
receiving requests for quotes (RFQs) from traders;  
 
submitting RFQs to market-makers assigned to the product for which the 
quote was requested (by publishing in the RFQ event channel);  
 
receiving and logging market-maker responses to RFQs (market-maker 
quotes);  
 
upon receiving a market-maker quote, saving it persistently and submitting 
them to the Broker Service module 230 for execution;  
 
sending fill reports to originating market-makers upon receiving fill 
notifications from the Broker and Order Book modules;  
 
canceling or updating a Market-Maker quote upon receiving a request from 
the originating market-maker by submitting the request to the Broker/Order 
Book;  
 
canceling or updating or regenerating Market-Maker quotes upon receiving a 
fill report;  
 
upon inquiry, providing the history of the quotes submitted by a marketmaker.  
 
The Product Service module 144 maintains all product-related information. In order to perform 
its responsibilities, the Product Service module 144 downloads, and preferably caches, 
product information from TPF 156 and TIPS 157.  
 
The User Service module 260 maintains all user-related information, both specific to SBT and 
contained in the Membership System. It provides a unified interface to SBT components 
accessing user information, hiding the actual location of the maintained data, thus simplifying 
client logic.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
42
The User Service module 260 maintains the information of traders, market-makers, clearing 
firm brokers, operators, help desk personnel, back-office personnel. In one embodiment, the 
data is cached for performance reasons and the data is synchronized from the TPF 156 
source.  
 
The Trading Session Service module 145 maintains all business day and trading sessionrelated information and manages the different states of a trading session, e.g. open, closed, 
and halted.  
 
Products that are processed/traded in each trading session are also kept at this service. In 
order to perform these responsibilities, the Product Service module 144 downloads trading 
session and product information from TPF 156, as well as monitor events that affect products 
traded within a session.  
 
 
The Product State Service 146 is responsible for coordinating product state changes for all 
products, e.g. pre-opening, opening, trading, halting, closing, and post-closing. It works 
closely with the Broker Service 230 to insure that state changes occur in a timely fashion. The 
service 146 monitors events that affect products traded, such as monitoring the underlying 
market to detect when the primary exchange opens, closes or halts trading a product.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
43
The Product Configuration Service 147 is responsible for providing the location of where a 
product is processed/traded. This information is primarily used to route product-specific 
requests (e.g. orders) for processing. The Order Status Service 148 provides subscription and 
notification services related to orders (i.e., fill reports, cancel reports, order accepted by book, 
etc.).  
 
The Quote Status Service module 149 provides subscription and notification services related 
to quotes (i.e. fill reports, deletion reports, etc.) The service 149 preferably replaces the use of 
event channels for quote status reporting, providing a more secure mechanism for status 
delivery. The Market Data Service 150 maintains a current snapshot of market data, in 
addition to publishing market summary data. The module also provides an interface to clients 
to query historical market data.  
 
The Best Quote module 151 is responsible for calculating the market best (aggregate 
quantities of buy and sell orders at the best price) for each product and sending them to TPF 
156 (which in turn forwards them to the Options Price Reporting Authority) for public 
dissemination. In addition, it is responsible for calculating and disseminating the National Best 
Bid Offer (NBBO). In order to provide this information, the Best Quote module 151 subscribes 
to the event channel referred to herein as the Best of the Rest channel to obtain the current 
best quote from competing exchanges. The Best Quote module 151 then determines the 
source of the NBBO, whether it is from the present exchange or a competitor, and publishes 
the results to the Best Quote event channel, of which the TPF Adapter 152 is a subscriber.  
 
The External Integration Services module 133 includes adapters (152, 153, 154, and 155), 
that map the interaction paradigms of external systems to the ones in the system 100 
architecture. The adapter modules "adapt" (or "wrap") the native legacy interfaces to 
interfaces appropriate in the SBT environment. The TPF (Transaction Processing Facility) 
module 152 contains the adapter to allow SBT and TPF 156 to interact. TPF data is received, 
remoduled, and broadcast/delivered to the appropriate components within SBT. Conversely, 
SBT data is received, either through direct invocation or event consumption, remoduled, and 
sent to TPF 156 using its native interface.  
 
The Membership Adapter 154 translates requests for member information received from SBT 
components into requests to the Membership System 159 and returns the results after reformatting.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
44
The TIPS Adapter 155 subscribes to TIPS 157 to receive the external market data needed in 
the SBT environment, including underlying market data and the Best of the Rest of options 
listed in SBT.  
 
The Events Service notifies the TIPS Adapter 155 of consumer subscriptions so that it can 
propagate these subscriptions back to TIPS 157. Once subscribed, the TIPS Adapter 155 
reformats the market data received from TIPS 157 and publishes it for consumption by SBT 
components. Another responsibility of this adapter 155 is to publish underlying product state 
events when external markets change their states, for instance when they open, halt, close, 
etc.  
 
The Trade Match Adapter 153 receives SBT data and forwards it to TM 158. The TM Adapter 
153 handles the following data flows: Trade Report (SBT to TM) SBT reports all the parties to 
a trade to TM 158.  
Thee Infrastructure Services module 134 contains commercial "off-the-shelf" software and 
extended infrastructure services that provide enterprise-wide support to various other external 
systems. One mechanism by which the SBT system components interact with each other is 
by supplying and consuming events, implemented as a publish/subscribe pattern. The 
following list provides a brief description of the event flows/notification services (messaging 
services). 
 
In accordance with a preferred embodiment, there are four major tiers of the application 
software:  
 
 
The business services 132 handle all the SBT order matching, execution and reporting 
functionality. It provides the repository for all SBT information data.  
 
The application services 210 handle the application presentation and act as the 
application front end to the business services. Different views of the business services 
132 and collaboration of business objects are grouped together and are presented to the 
user based on logon authentication and authorization level. The two tiers communicate to 
each other by two supported tiers: the infrastructure services 134 and external integration 
services 133.  
 
The infrastructure services 134 provide a seamless integration between the application 
services 210 and business services 132.  
 
The external integration services 133 provide the access to the external system.  
 
CBOE's figure shows a sequence diagram 200 for a preferred embodiment of the automated 
exchange system 100. The system 100 includes a client application server 210, an order 
handling service module 220, a broker service module 230, a quote service module 240, a 
user service module 260, and quote objects 250 and 252. The service modules 220, 230, 
240, 260 and objects 250, 252 are preferably software modules running on clusters 102, or on 
one or more interconnected computers. The software modules are preferably written in an 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
45
object-oriented programming language and are compiled to run on the clustered computers 
102. Preferably, the software utilizes the C++ language, the Java programming language, or 
other object-oriented language. Alternatively, any suitable software language may be used to 
implement the system, as will be understood by one of ordinary skill in the art. The modules 
also interact with a database program used for storing data and other system and user 
information. In the preferred embodiment an Oracle database system is used.  
 
The client application server 210, as discussed above, runs on client servers 110, 112, and 
provides an interface to one or more clients. The client server 110, 112 may include one or 
more application modules, depending upon the intended users of the servers 110, 112. For 
example, the client servers 110, 112 preferably include at least one of a market-maker 
application, a trader application, a back-office application, or a member interface. The client 
servers 110, 112 also preferably utilize a user authentication and role-based security model to 
control access to the various application modules. 
 
The client server 110, 112 may also include modules such as a help desk application, an 
operations application, and a Clearing Firm Broker (CFB) module. The CFB module may be 
configured to allow a Clearing Firm to set maximum volume limits on a per-class basis. The 
Help Desk module is preferably enabled for use on client servers that provide connectivity to 
exchange management personnel. The Help Desk provides a utility to force a user to logout 
of the system.  
 
The order handling service 220 forwards orders to the appropriate broker service module 230 
that handles the class of options to which the individual orders relate. If the broker service 
module 230 cannot execute the order immediately, it routes it to the order book service 
module, which maintains the current state of all pending orders and quotes. The order 
handling service module 220 receives order information from various sources, including 
brokers, traders, market-makers, etc. The orders may enter the system from a client 
application server 210 or through an alternative interface such as TFP adapter 152, which is a 
connection that allows a pre-existing automated order handling system such as TPF system 
156, to access the present system.  
 
The broker service module 230 is responsible for executing various types of orders, including 
limit, market, all or none, fill or kill, immediate or cancel, stop, stop limit, and spread orders. 
Preferably, there are numerous broker service modules 230 running on the exchange server 
104, or on the interconnected computers in the cluster 102, where each broker service 
module 230 handles trades for a subset of products offered by the exchange. For example, 
there is preferably a broker service module 230 for each class of option contracts. The broker 
service module 230 thus matches incoming orders to other orders or to quotes supplied by 
market-makers to complete a trade.  
 
The broker service module 230 also receives quotes from the quote service 240, discussed 
below. The broker service module 230 attempts to execute a trade 282 by matching incoming 
quotes to orders or to other quotes stored by the order book service module 142 in the order 
book. Note that for purposes of trade execution 282, quotes are treated by the exchange 
system 100 as if they were orders. Thus, when the broker service module 230 receives a 
quote that it cannot match to an existing order or quote, it sends the quote to the order book 
for storage with other unfilled quotes and orders. Preferably, quotes differ from regular orders 
in that a quote may be two sided, having a bid and an offer price, and that each market-maker 
may only have one quote per product in the system.  
 
To facilitate the order matching process of trade execution 282, the broker service module 
230 has direct access to orders stored in the order book by the order book service module 
142. Preferably, when the incoming order is matched to an existing quote supplied by the 
quote service module 240, the broker service module 230 provides the quote service module 
240 with details of the trade.  
The quote service module 240 manages the quotes supplied by market-makers via client 
application service module 210. The quote service module 240 submits the quotes to the 
broker service module 230 for execution. The quote service module 240 ensures that each 
individual market-maker has only one quote per product in the system at any given time. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
46
When a market-maker enters a new quote on a product for which he already has an 
outstanding quote, the quote service module preferably determines whether there is already 
an existing quote in the system for that market-maker and, if so, informs the broker service 
module 230 that the pre-existing quote is to be cancelled. The quote service module 240 
submits the new quote to the broker service module 230 only after it has received 
acknowledgement from the broker service module 230 that the pre-existing quote has been 
cancelled.  
 
The broker service module 230 issues fill reports to notify various other modules, and 
ultimately the trading entities, that the trade was executed. Upon notification of a fill 284 from 
the broker service module 230 (or the order book module), the quote service module 240 
informs the quote object 250. In turn, the market-maker is notified of the fill via the exchange's 
reporting system. The quote service module 240 also cancels or updates a market-maker 
quote upon receiving a request from the originating market-maker by submitting the request 
to the broker service 230. The quote service module performs this by first informing broker 
service module 230 that the pre-existing quote has been cancelled. The broker service 
module 230 then removes the quote from the order book and confirms to the quote service 
240 that the quote has been cancelled. The quote service 240 then submits the new quote (if 
one exists) to the broker service module 230.  
 
CBOE's figure also shows a preferred sequence of events and messages. Market-Makers log 
into a client application server module 210 and access the user service module 260. The 
market-maker communicates with the user service module 260 through a terminal, such as a 
workstation or wireless handheld unit. As shown by line 270, trading parameters, or quote 
parameters, are sent to the user service module 260. Upon initialization of the quote service, 
or upon login of a new market-maker, various trading parameters are provided to the quote 
service module 240 as shown by line 271. The trading parameters may include a risk 
threshold, a quote regeneration indicator, a quote regeneration increment, a quote 
modification indicator, and a quote modification increment. The parameters may include 
numerous sets of thresholds, indicators, and increments, preferably one such set for each 
class for which the market-maker is providing quotes. 
 
The quote service module 240 receives quotes from market-makers as shown by line 272, 
and provides these quotes to the quote objects 250, 252, as shown by update lines 273, 274, 
and to the broker service module 230 as shown by line 276. As mentioned above, the quote 
service module 240 will not forward updated quotes (as opposed to new quotes) to the broker 
service module 230 before first canceling old quotes.  
 
Orders received by the client application server 210 are routed to the order handling service 
220 as shown by line 278. The order is then forwarded to the appropriate broker service 230 
as shown by line 280. The broker service module 230 attempts to execute every order or 
quote received with the best order (or quote) in the book as shown by line 282. When a trade 
is executed, a fill report is issued to the quote service module 240 as shown by line 284. The 
quote service module 240 then analyzes the trade and determines whether the marketmaker's risk threshold has been exceeded, as shown by line 286. The threshold test will be 
described in further detail below. A fill report is sent to the quote object 250 as shown by line 
288. The quote object 250 then informs market-maker of the fill through the use of a trade 
report service module.  
 
In addition, at steps 286 and 287, the quote service module may modify quotes in response to 
the trade in accordance with the market-maker's trading parameters, as discussed below. The 
quote service module then reports the new quotes to the broker service module 230 as shown 
by line 290. The broker service 230 acknowledges the quote updates as shown by line 292. If 
the broker service 230 has already processed additional trades against the original quote, 
then the broker service module 230 would respond with a "too late to cancel" message. Once 
the update acknowledge has been received, the quote service module 240 updates the quote 
objects 250, 252, as shown by lines 294, 296. The quote objects then inform the marketmaker that its quotes have been updated.  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
47
Appendix IV -  Research questions on HFT and Algorithm trading:  
 
=> Research questions listed by P. Gomber, B. Arndt, M. Lutat, T. Uhle, (“High Frequency 
Trading”, Goethe Universitat - Frankfurt, 2011). 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
48
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
49
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
50
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
51
Appendix V - Lessons learned from the Flash Crash 
 
In this appendix, I have summarized the key lessons learned from the May 6th, 2010  "Flash 
Crash".  
 
The morning of May 6 opened to unsettling political and economic news from overseas 
concerning the European debt crisis. 
 
On May 6, 2010, the prices of many U.S.-based equity products experienced a rapid decline 
(5-6%) and recovery in a matter of minutes.  
 
According to the investigation lead by the US SEC, Over 20,000 trades across more than 300 
securities were executed at prices more than 60% away from their values just moments 
before. 
 
May 6 started as an unusually turbulent day for the markets: trading in the U.S opened to 
unsettling political and economic news from overseas concerning the European debt crisis. 
 
The events of May 6 can be separated into 5 phases:  
• During the first phase, from the open through about 2:32 p.m., prices were broadly declining 
across markets, with stock market index products sustaining losses of about 3%.  
• In the second phase, from about 2:32 p.m. through about 2:41 p.m., the broad markets 
began to lose more ground, declining another 1-2%.  
• Between 2:41 p.m. and 2:45:28 p.m. in the third phase lasting only about four minutes or so, 
volume spiked upwards and the broad markets plummeted a further 5-6% to reach intra-day 
lows of 9-10%.  
• In the fourth phase, from 2:45 p.m. to about 3:00 p.m. broad market indices recovered while 
at the same time many individual securities and ETFs experienced extreme price fluctuations 
and traded in a disorderly fashion at prices as low as one penny or as high as $100,000. 
• Finally, in the fifth phase starting at about 3:00 p.m., prices of most individual securities 
significantly recovered and trading resumed in a more orderly fashion.  
 
By 2:30 p.m., the S&P 500 volatility index (“VIX”) was up 22.5 percent from the opening level, 
yields of ten-year Treasuries fell as investors engaged in a “flight to quality,” and selling 
pressure had pushed the Dow Jones Industrial Average (“DJIA”) down about 2.5%. 
 
In the course of the day, the S&P 500 volatility index (“VIX”), a measure of the expected 
volatility of the S&P 500 Index, increased by 31.7 percent, which was the fourth largest singleday increase in VIX. 
 
At 2:32 p.m., a large fundamental trader (a mutual fund complex) initiated a sell program to 
sell a total of 75,000 E-Mini contracts (valued at approximately $4.1 billion) as a hedge to an 
existing equity position. 
 
SEC report defines fundamental sellers and fundamental buyers as market participants who 
are trading to accumulate or reduce a net long or short position. Reasons for fundamental 
buying and selling include gaining long-term exposure to a market as well as hedging alreadyexisting exposures in related markets.   
 
Generally, an operator has a number of alternatives as to how to execute a large trade: 
=>First, he may choose to engage an intermediary, who would, in turn, execute a block trade 
or manage the position.  
=>Second, he may choose to manually enter orders into the market.  
=>Third, he can execute a trade via an automated execution algorithm, which can meet the 
operator’s needs by taking price, time or volume into consideration. Effectively, he must make 
a choice as to how much human judgment is involved while executing a trade. 
 
This large fundamental trader chose to execute this sell program via an automated execution 
algorithm (“Sell Algorithm”) that was programmed to feed orders into the June 2010 E-Mini 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
52
market to target an execution rate set to 9% of the trading volume calculated over the 
previous minute, but without regard to price or time. 
 
0n May 6, when markets were already under stress, the Sell Algorithm chosen by the large 
trader to only target trading volume, and neither price nor time, executed the sell program 
extremely rapidly in just 20 minutes. 
 
This sell pressure was initially absorbed by:  
• High frequency traders (“HFTs”) and other intermediaries8 in the futures market;  
• Fundamental buyers in the futures market; and  
• Cross-market arbitrageurs who transferred this sell pressure to the equities markets by 
opportunistically buying E-Mini contracts and simultaneously selling products like SPY, or 
selling individual equities in the S&P 500 Index.  
 
The combined selling pressure from the Sell Algorithm, HFTs and other traders drove the 
price of the E-Mini down approximately 3% in just four minutes from the beginning of 2:41 
p.m. through the end of 2:44 p.m. 
 
Lacking sufficient demand from fundamental buyers or cross-market arbitrageurs, HFTs 
began to quickly buy and then resell contracts to each other – generating a “hot-potato” 
volume effect as the same positions were rapidly passed back and forth. Between 2:45:13 
and 2:45:27, HFTs traded over 27,000 contracts, which accounted for about 49 percent of the 
total trading volume, while buying only about 200 additional contracts net. 
 
Buy-side market depth in the E-Mini fell to about $58 million, less than 1% of its depth from 
that morning’s level. As liquidity vanished, the price of the E-Mini dropped by an additional 
1.7% in just these 15 seconds. This sudden decline in both price and liquidity may be 
symptomatic of the notion that prices were moving so fast, fundamental buyers and crossmarket arbitrageurs were either unable or unwilling to supply enough buy-side liquidity. 
 
According to the SEC investigation, between 2:32 p.m. and 2:45 p.m., as prices of the E-Mini 
rapidly declined, the Sell Algorithm sold about 35,000 E-Mini contracts (valued at 
approximately $1.9 billion) of the 75,000 intended. During the same time, all fundamental 
sellers combined sold more than 80,000 contracts net, while all fundamental buyers bought 
only about 50,000 contracts net, for a net fundamental imbalance of 30,000 contracts. This 
level of net selling by fundamental sellers is about 15 times larger compared to the same 13minute interval during the previous three days, while this level of net buying by the 
fundamental buyers is about 10 times larger compared to the same time period during the 
previous three days. 
 
Automated trading systems used by many liquidity providers temporarily paused in reaction to 
the sudden price declines observed during the first liquidity crisis. These built-in pauses are 
designed to prevent automated systems from trading when prices move beyond pre-defined 
thresholds in order to allow traders and risk managers to fully assess market conditions 
before trading is resumed. 
 
As in many markets, after their trading systems were automatically paused, individual market 
participants had to assess the risks associated with continuing their trading: 
=>whether observed severe price moves could be an artifact of erroneous data;  
=>the impact of such moves on risk and position limits;  
=>impacts on intraday profit and loss (“P&L”);  
=>the potential for trades to be broken, leaving their firms inadvertently long or short on one 
side of the market;  
=>the ability of their systems to handle the very high volume of trades and orders they were 
processing that day. 
=>because prices simultaneously fell across many types of securities, the potential of 
occurrence of a cataclysmic event of which they were not yet aware, and that their strategies 
were not designed to handle. 
 
A second liquidity crisis occurred in the equities markets at about 2:45 p.m. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
53
 
Even though after 2:45 p.m. prices in the E-Mini and SPY were recovering from their severe 
declines, sell orders placed for some individual securities and ETFs found reduced buying 
interest, which led to further price declines in those securities. Over 98% of all shares were 
executed at prices within 10% of their 2:40 p.m. value. 
 
By approximately 3:00 p.m., most securities had reverted back to trading at prices reflecting 
true consensus values. Nevertheless, during the 20 minute period between 2:40 p.m. and 
3:00 p.m., over 20,000 trades (many based on retail-customer orders) across more than 300 
separate securities, including many ETFs, were executed at prices 60% or more away from 
their 2:40 p.m. prices. 
 
SEC investigation underlines that HFTs in the equity markets, who normally both provide and 
take liquidity as part of their strategies, traded proportionally more as volume increased, and 
overall were net sellers in the rapidly declining broad market along with most other 
participants. 
 
Result is that One that under stressed market conditions, the automated execution of a large 
sell order can trigger extreme price movements, especially if the automated execution 
algorithm does not take prices into account. Moreover, the interaction between automated 
execution programs and algorithmic trading strategies can quickly erode liquidity and result in 
disorderly markets. As the events of May 6 demonstrate, especially in times of significant 
volatility, high trading volume is not necessarily a reliable indicator of market liquidity. 
 
May 6 was also an important reminder of the inter-connectedness of derivatives and 
securities markets, particularly with respect to index products.  
 
Another key lesson from May 6 concerns the way of implement “trading pause” in extreme 
events.  While the withdrawal of a single participant may not significantly impact the entire 
market, a liquidity crisis can develop if many market participants withdraw at the same time. 
SEC investigations also underlined that market participants’ uncertainty about when trades 
will be broken can affect their trading strategies and willingness to provide liquidity. 
 
SEC investigations also underlined that E-Mini market and SPY present an inter-connection 
and differences in their patterns attributed to the domination of HFT in the E-Mini market.  
According to SEC report, a closer examination of the E-Mini order book offers additional 
evidence that in the very short term liquidity dynamics in the E-Mini differed somewhat from 
that in SPY. 
 
Between 9:30 a.m. to 10:00 a.m., the average for the E-Mini is approximately 100,000 
contracts (about $5.5 billion), and the average for SPY is approximately 2.5 million shares 
(about $275 million). By 2:40 p.m., buy-side resting orders in the E-Mini had already declined 
to less than 20% of their morning average. By way of comparison, at 2:40 p.m. buy-side 
resting orders in the SPY were about 75% of the morning average. Then, over the next few 
minutes buy-side resting orders in the E-Mini were rapidly depleted whereas resting orders in 
SPY remained at between 20% and 40% of its morning average until 2:50 p.m., when they fell 
to about 9%. In conclusion, SEC found that Buy-side liquidity in the E-Mini declined 
significantly faster than in SPY. However, buy-side liquidity in the E-Mini order book was 
quickly refilled during the 5-second pause and aggressive buy-side orders began to lift prices 
as soon as the trading resumed. In comparison, it was sell-side depth in SPY that nearly 
vanished at 2:46 p.m. while the buy-side depth remained steady. 
 
In summary, since the E-Mini and SPY both track the same set of S&P 500 stocks, crossmarket arbitrage between these two products kept their prices closely aligned during their 
rapid declines. However, in the moments before prices of the E-Mini and SPY both hit their 
intra-day lows, the E-Mini suffered a significant loss of liquidity during which buy-side market 
depth was not able to keep pace with sell-side pressure. Four minutes later, when prices in 
the E-Mini and SPY were recovering, buy-side market depth for SPY reached its daily low. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
54
In order to assess how the liquidity shock may have propagated across securities and 
markets on May 6, SEC staff spoke with 15 cross-market trading firms that collectively 
represented net buying of more than 100,000 June 2010 E-Mini contracts (approximately $5.6 
billion in notional value) between 2:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. on May 6. 
 
Cross-market strategies primarily focus on the contemporaneous trading of securities-related 
products in the futures and securities markets. The objective of these strategies is to capture 
temporary price differences between any two related products, but with limited or no exposure 
to subsequent price moves in those products. The specific nature of cross-market trading 
strategies varies widely. Some firms focus on “one-way” strategies by acting as a liquidity 
provider (i.e., trading passively by submitting non-marketable resting orders) primarily in one 
product, and then hedging by trading another product (often by submitting marketable limit or 
market orders to trade aggressively in the hedging product). Other firms run “two-way” 
strategies that provide liquidity in multiple products and then hedge as necessary in another 
product. 
 
Firms interviewed reported that the products they most consistently used for cross-market 
trading strategies on May 6 and other trading days were the E-Mini, SPY, and the basket of 
underlying stocks in the S&P 500 Index. 
 
Consistent with the E-Mini’s very high trading volume, most of the interviewed cross-market 
trading firms reported that they viewed the E-Mini as the primary price discovery product for 
the S&P 500 Index. While some firms noted that SPY has increased in importance in recent 
years as its trading volume has expanded, the firms agreed that price changes in the E-Mini 
generally lead price changes in SPY and in the basket of underlying stocks. 
 
Nearly all of the interviewed large net buyers in the E-Mini market, which were engaged in 
cross-market arbitrage strategies, reported that during the decline in prices of the E-Mini and 
SPY, the E-Mini was relatively cheaper than either SPY or baskets of individual securities. 
These same firms reported that they therefore purchased the E-Mini and contemporaneously 
sold SPY, baskets of individual securities, or other equity index products. 
 
To better understand this reduction in liquidity and how it affected market participants, SEC 
conducted a series of extensive interviews across a wide range of firms that typically provide 
market liquidity, beyond those involved in cross-market arbitrage, including:  
• traditional equity market makers;  
• high-frequency traders;  
• internalizers; and  
• options market makers.  
 
SEC defines characteristics often attributed to proprietary firms engaged in high frequency 
trading as:  
(1) The use of high-speed and sophisticated computer programs for generating, routing, and 
executing orders;  
(2) The use of co-location services and individual data feeds offered by exchanges and others 
to minimize network and other types of latencies;  
(3) The very short time-frames for establishing and liquidating positions;  
(4) The submission of numerous orders that are cancelled shortly after submission;  
(5) The ending the trading day in as close to a flat position as possible (that is, not carrying 
significant, unhedged positions overnight).   
 
Through May 10th, SEC investigation underlines that 17 HFT firms averaged 43.8% of total 
dollar volume on the public quoting markets. Their trading was divided between 51.5% 
liquidity-taking buys and sells (aggressive trading – generally taking bids and lifting offers) 
and 48.5% liquidity-providing buys and sells (passive trading – generally posting bids and 
offers). As a percentage of total market dollar volume, the activity for these 17 HFT firms 
increased in the period from 2:00 p.m. through 2:45 p.m. to a high of 50.3%, before sharply 
falling to 36.6% in the period from 2:46 through 3:00 p.m. Notably, the 17 HFT firms escalated 
their aggressive selling more significantly (reaching a total of $9.3 billion) than any other 
category of trading during the rapid price decline in the period ending 2:45 p.m. A portion of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
55
this aggressive selling could be attributable to cross-market strategies in which the firms were 
contemporaneously buying futures products. 
 
NYSE utilizes a hybrid floor/electronic trading model, unlike most other markets today which 
are fully electronic.  SEC has also analyzed the impact of the LRP’s tools on the May 10th 
events. The liquidity replenishment points (LRPs) are intended to act as a “speed bump” and 
to dampen volatility in a given stock by temporarily converting from an automated market to a 
manual auction market when a price movement of sufficient size is reached. Trading on 
NYSE in that stock will “go slow” and automatic executions will cease for a time period 
ranging from a fraction of a second to a minute or two to allow the Designated Market Maker 
(“DMM”) to solicit and/or contribute additional liquidity before returning to an automated 
market. LRP limits vary according to each security’s share price and average daily volume 
within specified ranges, generally falling between 1% and 5% of share price. Most LRPs 
either resolve themselves within a second, when additional buy or sell interest brings prices 
back within the LRP limits, or are resolved just as quickly by a DMM’s algorithm that 
automatically sets a new resumption price according to buy and sell interest. Once the LRP is 
resolved the quotes are no longer labeled as “slow” and automated executions resume. In 
some cases a DMM’s algorithm will be used to determine the resumption price at which 
automated quoting and executions can continue. In other cases, when additional liquidity is 
needed beyond what the DMM’s algorithm is programmed to supply, the resumption price is 
determined manually by the DMM in a process that can take from a few seconds to a minute 
or more. 
 
Many securities triggered LRPs multiple times on the afternoon of May 6, and though 75% of 
all events were resolved in less than 1 second. Between 2:30 p.m. and 3:00 p.m., more than 
1000 securities triggered LRP events lasting more than 1 second, compared to a “normal” day 
average of only 20-30 such events. 
 
According to the market participants interviewed by SEC, their systems are programmed to 
automatically adjust for slow quotes on NYSE and will route orders to other exchanges as 
needed. 
 
Market participants also confirmed that the fact so many LRPs were being triggered further 
underscored the severity of market conditions as they were unfolding, and that this additional 
“evidence” played into their decisions to reduce liquidity, pause trading, or withdraw from the 
markets. 
 
Regarding this information, SEC addressed two questions:  
=> First, is there evidence that a substantial percentage of trades executed elsewhere might 
have been otherwise executed against liquidity that appeared on NYSE during the LRP? 
 
=> Second, during the LRP and when other exchanges were permitted to route around the 
NYSE, is there evidence of liquidity flowing into NYSE. That is, does NYSE appear to be 
drawing away and “trapping” additional liquidity from other exchanges during the LRP? 
 
To investigate on a failure in liquidity, SEC obtained NYSE OpenBook Ultra and NYSE 
ArcaBook data, Nasdaq ModelView and similar data. These sources provided minute-byminute “snapshots” of the order book, for all listed securities. These exchanges, combined, 
reflect approximately 90% of the executions on exchanges on May 6. 
 
These data allowed SEC to calculate the number of shares represented by buy and sell limit 
orders on these exchanges at a wide range of price points. SEC also measured the price 
points in terms of the relative distance from the midpoint of the National Best Bid and Offer 
(NBBO). These data provide a detailed picture of the available liquidity for each security, 
throughout the day. NBBO is a term used in United States Securities and Exchange 
Commission regulations. Brokers are required to execute customer trades at the best 
available ask price when buying securities, and the best available bid price when selling 
securities. Order book and order audit trail data were used by SEC to look for a general 
relationship between price-changes and liquidity-changes for approximately 5,000 non-ETF 
securities. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
56
 
To look at liquidity changes, SEC sorted each of the securities into quintiles based on the 
extent to which the buy-side order book for that security contracted on May 6. As a measure 
of the extent of the contraction, SEC used the minimum buy-side depth observed in any 
minute on that day, divided by its median depth on that day. In addition, because of possible 
systematic differences between securities with typically different sized order books they 
sorted these securities into quintiles based on the respective median of their buy-side depths 
within 500 basis points (“bp”) of the mid-quote, as measured in one minute increments on 
May 6.  
 
Crossing the quintiles based on the typical depth of the order book with quintiles based on the 
contraction of the order book creates 25 categories spanning 4,920 non-ETF securities. For 
the securities in each of these categories, SEC analysis presents the average and the median 
intraday stock price drop, measured as the open to low, and the number of securities in the 
category. 
 
The results show that, except for securities in the lowest 20% of typical buy-side depth, drops 
in price become increasingly more severe with ever-larger drops in liquidity. The most severe 
average price drop of 39.8% occurred in the 22 securities that had both the greatest intraday 
average of buy-side depth and the worst decline in that depth. 
 
As SEC regarding Flash trading events of May 6, Zhang (2010) addresses two questions:  
(1) Does HFT decrease or increase stock price volatility?  
(2) Does HFT aid or hinder the market’s incorporation of news about firm fundamentals into 
stock prices? 
 
He find that high-frequency trading is positively correlated with stock price volatility after 
controlling for firm fundamental volatility and other exogenous determinants of volatility. The 
positive correlation is stronger among the top 3,000 stocks in market capitalization and 
among stocks with high institutional holdings. The positive correlation is also stronger during 
periods of high market uncertainty. Zhang also supports the conclusion that HFT hinders the 
market’s ability to incorporate information about firm fundamentals into asset prices, as highfrequency trading causes stock prices to overreact to fundamental news. 
 
In conclusion, we can underline SEC and scholar researches regarding the assumption that 
HFT seems to interfere in market’s liquidity and volatility. Moreover, HFT seems also 
represent a financial innovation by his impact in the time paradigm of the financial world (with 
probable influence on the other economics markets). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
57
Appendix VI - CFTC Audit Trail 
 
CFTC also has defined the key specification of an audit trail regarding automated trading: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
58
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
59
Appendix VII - CFTC Electronic trading analysis 
 
(source :  CFTC, Oversight of Automated Trading at CME Group, March 29,2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
60
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
61
 (source :  Oversight of Automated Trading Systems, ICE, March 29, 2012 - 
http://www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@aboutcftc/documents/file/tacpresentation032912_ice.
pdf) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
62
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
63
Appendix VIII - HFT global network and market data 
 
source: http://www.hiberniaatlantic.com/gfn.html 
 
 
24,000 Kilometers of Fiber Optic Cable. 
 
Access to over 120 key financial cities around the globe. 
 
Connection between London and New York City, with <60 ms latency, the fastest in 
transatlantic cable history. 
 
 
 
 
High Frequency Trading Locations (http://www.motherjones.com/kevindrum/2011/04/map-day-high-frequency-trading-locations) 
 
A. D. Wissner-Gross and C. E. Freer investigate where you should open a high-frequency 
trading facility given that light-speed propagation delays are a key factor in arbitraging trades 
between two exchanges. After much fiddling with partial differential equations, they come up 
with this map, which shows "Optimal intermediate trading node locations (small circles) for all 
pairs of 52 major securities exchanges (large circles)....from 2008 data reported by the World 
Federation of Exchanges. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
64
 
 
 
http://www.marketdatapeaks.com/about 
 
his site is designed to provide unique market data peak information to IT professionals. The 
message data rates presented on this site are processed and updated through a single Exegy 
Ticker Plant appliance residing in a colocation facility. The rates shown are updated every 
minute and show the actual one-second peak within that minute.  
The data rates are aggregated from the following feeds:  
 
Feed 
     
Exchange / Source 
BATS BYX 
BATS Global Markets 
 
BATS BZX 
BATS Global Markets 
 
CME Fix/Fast 
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) 
 
Direct Edge A 
Direct Edge 
 
Direct Edge X 
Direct Edge 
 
NASDAQ BBDS 
NASDAQ FINRA 
 
NASDAQ TDDS 
NASDAQ FINRA 
 
TotalView-ITCH 4.1 
NASDAQ 
 
NASDAQ GIDS 
NASDAQ OMX 
 
UQDF 
NASDAQ UTP 
 
UTDF 
NASDAQ UTP 
 
NASDAQ OMDF 
NASDAQ UTP 
 
NYSE ArcaBook for Equities 
NYSE Euronext 
 
NYSE ARCA Options 3.0 
NYSE Euronext 
 
NYSE ARCA Trades 
NYSE Euronext 
 
NYSE Ultrabook 
NYSE Euronext 
 
NYSE GIF 
NYSE Euronext 
 
NYSE Liffe US 
NYSE Euronext 
 
CQS 
Security Industry Automation Corp (SIAC) 
 
CTS 
Security Industry Automation Corp (SIAC) 
 
OPRA 
Security Industry Automation Corp (SIAC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407

 
65
Appendix IX : NYSE Technologies - Market Access Gateway Inventory (January 2013) 
 
America Inventory 
 
 
 
EMA Inventory 
 
 
 
 
APAC Inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2285407
