High Frequency Trading with Speed Hierarchies
October 4, 2019
Abstract
Traders diﬀer in speed and their speed diﬀerences matter. This paper models the competition
between fast traders (FTs) who react at varying speeds upon observing a common signal about
incoming orders placed by normal-speed traders. I ﬁnd that the outcome of competition between
FTs depends crucially on the hierarchical structure of FTs’ speed: (1) FTs’ aggregate market
power increases when their speeds are more heterogeneous, (2) entries of new FTs may increase
FTs’ aggregate market power, and (3) even when inﬁnitely many FTs compete their aggregate
market power does not vanish except in rare special cases. This paper also demonstrates the
limitations of some traditional measures of market quality: although FTs in the model increase
trading volume, trade against normal-speed liquidity demanders, accelerate price discovery, and
trade in informative directions, normal-speed liquidity demanders are worse oﬀand prices are
ultimately less informative as a result of FTs’ trading.
Keywords: information eﬃciency, liquidity, market microstructure, high frequency trading, industrial organization
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

1
Introduction
In recent years we have witnessed the emergence of high frequency traders (HFTs). Empirical studies,
such as Baron, Brogaard and Kirilenko (2012), Brogaard, Hendershott and Riordan (2014), and
Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi and Tuzun (2017), ﬁnd that HFTs typically hold inventories for very short
periods and generate high trading volume. Anecdotally, HFTs are extremely sensitive to latencies
and invest astonishing amounts of capital to be able to slightly increase their trading speed. The
Australian Stock Exchange, for example, has to ensure that every cable connecting any co-locating
HFT’s computer with the exchange’s server is of the same exact length.1 Some HFTs reportedly
invest in ﬁber optic cables—which cost about $1 billion per cable—under the Arctic Ocean to reduce
latency between London and Tokyo by 50 milliseconds.2 Why do HFTs compete on speed? How do
speed diﬀerences between HFTs aﬀect their market power? How are slower traders aﬀected by the
competition between HFTs?
To address these questions, I develop a model in which multiple strategic fast traders (FTs) are
assumed to anticipate incoming orders.3 In contrast to many studies in the literature (discussed in
Section 1.1), this paper places no constraints on FTs’ speed hierarchies—the hierarchical structures
of their relative speeds. I ﬁnd that speed hierarchies crucially inﬂuence FTs’ strategies and their
market powers.
First, relative speed matters: an FT’s trading proﬁt decays exponentially when the ranking of
her speed among FTs falls.4 Thus, a seemingly negligible speed improvement may substantially
increase an FT’s trading proﬁt if it improves her speed ranking.
Second, FTs’ speed hierarchies aﬀect their aggregate market power. In particular, FTs, who
compete against one another, in aggregate earn more proﬁts when they trade at more heterogeneous
speeds. Assuming all predators trade at the same speed, Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005) ﬁnd
that “predation is most ﬁerce if there are few predators.” In contrast, in this paper the entry of an
1Co-location is a service provided by exchanges. Traders who subscribe to this service can place their computers in
the same room as the exchanges’ servers to reduce the signal transmission latencies.
2See http://goo.gl/oDwtjm and http://goo.gl/OCBFYF for the news reports.
3This paper does not attempt to model all types of HFTs, instead focusing on HFTs who use order anticipation
strategies. Empirical studies, such as Hirschey (2013), Clark-Joseph (2013), and Sağlam (2018) ﬁnd evidence consistent
with HFTs’ use of such strategies. Anecdotally, Charlie Munger claims that HFTs practice “legalized front-running.”
(http://www.cnbc.com/id/100705820). See Lewis (2014) for more anecdotal stories.
4In this paper, trading proﬁt is simply proﬁt generated in trading. It does not equal net proﬁt because costs are
ignored.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

FT may increase FTs’ aggregate proﬁt if the entrant is much faster than all incumbent FTs. Even
when inﬁnitely many FTs compete, their aggregate market power does not vanish if the number of
fastest FTs is ﬁnite.
Moreover, the existence of order-anticipating FTs trading at varying speeds poses challenges
to some common measures of market liquidity and information eﬃciency. First, FTs in this model
endogenously choose to trade against normal-speed liquidity demanders when they arrive—FTs
buy when normal-speed liquidity demanders sell and sell when normal-speed liquidity demanders
buy. Contrary to intuition, however, liquidity demanders are worse oﬀas a result of FTs’ trading.
Second, FTs in the model trade in informative directions—they buy when prices are too low and sell
when prices are too high relative to the informationally eﬃcient level—and bring information to
the market earlier. Despite accelerating price discovery, FTs’ trading makes prices ultimately less
informative. Third, when FTs’ speeds are more heterogeneous, although the Herﬁndal index of their
proﬁt might decrease, they earn higher proﬁts and their negative impacts on market liquidity and
price informativeness are more severe.
I introduce FTs into an extended Kyle (1985) framework with trading and quoting latencies. In
addition to FTs, there are three types of normal-speed traders in the model: a strategic informed
trader, noise traders, and passive liquidity providers. The strategic informed trader privately observes
the true value of a risky asset. Noise traders trade randomly. A continuum of competitive passive
liquidity providers set prices and absorb order-ﬂow imbalance.5
Trades occur over a short trading round during which normal-speed traders lag behind FTs. At
the beginning of the trading round, passive liquidity providers post a pricing function against which
others can trade. The pricing function is ﬁxed during the trading round, reﬂecting passive liquidity
providers’ speed disadvantage. After observing the pricing function, the informed trader and noise
traders submit market orders. Before their orders arrive at the market, FTs observe a common noisy
signal about these orders because, for example, FTs can observe faster and more granular updates
of the limit-order books on various exchanges. Upon observing such a signal, FTs react at varying
5Passive liquidity providers represent the large number of traders who have no speed advantage, information
advantage, or motivation to initiate trades. I do not call them “market makers” because they are not necessarily
designated market makers or dealers. Consistent with the assumed diﬀerence between FTs and passive liquidity
providers, Kirilenko et al. (2017) ﬁnd that HFTs’ inventory patterns diﬀer substantially from those of slower
intermediaries. In particular, HFTs’ inventories are positively correlated with contemporaneous price changes—they
buy when price increases—while slower intermediaries’ inventories—like passive liquidity providers in this model—are
negatively correlated with contemporaneous price changes.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

speeds. They trade rapidly in the same direction at better prices ahead of the incoming orders.
Under reasonable assumptions on future price impact, FTs choose to reverse their early trades and
exit their positions at the slightly later moment when liquidity demanders’ orders arrive. At the end
of the trading round, passive liquidity providers update the quote.
FTs eﬀectively levy a speed tax on passive liquidity providers and passive liquidity providers
shift the tax burden to normal-speed liquidity demanders, namely the informed trader and noise
traders. Speciﬁcally, because of their speed disadvantage, passive liquidity providers cannot update
the pricing function every time an FT trades and thus suﬀer losses when trading with FTs. To
break even, passive liquidity providers have to ex ante increase the slope of the pricing function
beyond the informationally eﬃcient level to charge more for absorbing a given order-ﬂow imbalance.
Thus, the transaction price overshoots the informationally eﬃcient level when normal-speed liquidity
demanders arrive. When passive liquidity providers catch up with the market, they partially reverse
the run-up in transaction price and set the quote at the informationally eﬃcient level, thereby
resulting in a price adjustment without trading.6 FTs liquidate their positions immediately before
the price adjustment when normal-speed liquidity demanders’ orders arrive. If they were to liquidate
after the adjustment, they would receive inferior liquidating prices.
FTs’ aggregate proﬁt increases with the accuracy of their order-ﬂow signal and a parameter γ,
which summarizes their aggregate market power. For a given number of FTs, γ may vary substantially
depending on the proﬁle of FTs’ relative speeds. In general, greater speed heterogeneity among FTs
increases their aggregate market power—hence their aggregate trading proﬁt. This occurs for two
reasons. First, when FTs’ speeds become more heterogeneous, FTs in total experience more trading
opportunities, which allows them to exploit normal-speed traders’ relative slowness to a greater
extent. Second, speed diﬀerences reduce the number of FTs trading at the same moment, thereby
reducing the intensity of competition between FTs at that moment.
FTs in this model have strong incentives to shave every nanosecond oﬀtheir latencies because
an FT can at least quintuple her expected trading proﬁts by moving up one spot in the speed
ranking among FTs. Moreover, the increasingly ﬁner time granularity of modern markets opens
6Hence prices exhibit short-lived momentum and partial reversal within a trading round and do not follow a
martingale. Such short-term predictability is often reported by empirical studies using trade-by-trade-level data. As
summarized by Hasbrouck (1996), “at the level of transaction prices ... the random-walk conjecture ... is very easy to
reject in most markets.”
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

up more space for FTs to vary on speed. In a continuously operating market, no one could ever
attain zero latency and traders can always beat competitors by achieving any slight speed advantage.
Consequently, FTs engage in ﬁerce competition on speed and such competition tends to increase
speed heterogeneity between FTs, which increases their market power and the speed tax levied on
normal-speed traders.
If policymakers want to lower the market power of order-anticipating FTs, they cannot ignore
the impact of FTs’ speed diﬀerences. If, as prior studies typically assume, all FTs trade at the same
speed, then the entry of a new FT always reduces FTs’ aggregate proﬁt. If, however, FTs may trade
at varying speeds and an entrant is much faster than incumbent FTs, FTs may earn higher total
proﬁt because in aggregate they experience more trading opportunities. Similarly, if a slow FT
becomes faster but is still slower than the fastest FT, FTs’ aggregate proﬁt declines. If, however, a
slow FT becomes much faster than all other FTs, then FTs’ aggregate proﬁt may increase.
In practice, determining FTs’ speed hierarchies can be hard for policymakers. They can still,
however, design policies to limit FTs’ aggregate market power. For example, they can limit the
precision of an exchange’s timestamp and require the exchange to execute all orders with the same
timestamp at the same price. This intervention would lower FTs’ aggregate market power for
any given speed hierarchy because it would reduce speed heterogeneity among FTs. In addition,
policymakers can make all FTs equally slower relative to normal-speed traders. FTs would then
always earn lower total proﬁt.
Even when inﬁnitely many FTs compete, the fastest FTs still earn strictly positive trading proﬁts
as long as the number of fastest FTs is ﬁnite. In reality, the number of fastest FTs is very small
owing to the physical limitations of the market.7
Some traditional measures of a trader’s impact on market liquidity and information eﬃciency
are not suitable for order-anticipating FTs.
First, FTs in this model increase trading volume and apparently “provide” liquidity: they exit
when liquidity demanders’ orders arrive and their exiting trades run in the direction that is opposite
to that of liquidity demanders’ orders. Nonetheless, liquidity demanders in the model end up paying
worse prices. To resolve this puzzle, note that FTs’ trades aﬀect prices before liquidity demanders’
orders arrive. Hence FTs eﬀectively reallocate liquidity intertemporally—they consume liquidity
7For example, the number of co-location spots is limited by the space.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

when it is cheap and supply liquidity when it is expensive.8 Overall, liquidity demanders are actually
worse oﬀ.
Second, FTs in this model accelerate price discovery but ultimately make prices less informative.
In the brief time before normal-speed liquidity demanders’ orders arrive, FTs’ trades bring information
to the market.9 Nevertheless, the information value of FTs’ trades is quickly superseded when the
normal-speed traders’ orders arrive. Ultimately price informativeness is determined by the fraction
of the informed trader’s orders that appear in the aggregate order ﬂow. Because the informed trader
reduces her trading intensity in response to higher liquidity costs, the aggregate order-ﬂow becomes
less informative. Consequently, despite a speedier price discovery process, prices are ultimately less
informative after liquidity demanders have traded and FTs have exited.
An FT’s eﬀect on the informativeness of the order-ﬂow is similar to a prying messenger’s eﬀect
on the information content of a letter. Suppose that, just prior to delivering a letter, a messenger
glances at it and summarizes the letter to the receiver. Although the summary is informative, its
information value is supplanted momentarily by the letter itself. Furthermore, expecting the letter
to be pried into, the sender, worrying about privacy, is less likely to write clearly. Hence the receiver
is ultimately less informed.
Prior studies typically assume that all FTs trade at the same speed. I show that this assumption
likely results in underestimation of order-anticipating FTs’ negative impact on market liquidity and
price informativeness because this impact is more severe when FTs trade at more heterogeneous
speeds. If the negative impact of order-anticipating HFTs is severe, policymakers could improve
market quality by reducing the speed heterogeneity among traders.
1.1
Related literature
See Angel, Harris and Spatt (2011) and Menkveld (2016) for excellent surveys of the HFT literature.
This paper diﬀers from prior studies in two key respects: (1) here the structure of FTs’ relative
speeds is not restricted and (2) FTs are faster but less informed than the informed trader.
First, speed homogeneity, typically assumed in the literature, is inconsistent with extensive
anecdotal stories reported, for example, by Patterson (2013) and Lewis (2014), and ﬁndings reported
8Hendershott and Riordan (2012) ﬁnd empirically that algorithmic traders demand liquidity when spreads are
narrow and supply liquidity when spreads are wide.
9This is consistent with empirical ﬁndings, such as those reported by Brogaard et al. (2014) and Carrion (2013).
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

in empirical studies, such as Baron et al. (2012) and Baldauf and Mollner (2015). Moreover, HFTs’
massive investment in speed would be hard to explain if they all traded at the same speed. The
general speed structure allows this paper to examine the eﬀects of FTs’ speed hierarchies on their
strategies, competition, and market quality. These eﬀects are missing from the literature because only
a few special types of speed hierarchies have been considered. For example, in the models presented
in the following papers, there is only one FT or all FTs trade at the same speed: Bernhardt and
Taub (2008), Biais, Foucault and Moinas (2015), Brunnermeier (2005), Cartea and Penalva (2012),
Dugast and Foucault (2017), Foucault, Hombert and Rosu (2016), Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam and
Titman (1994), Hoﬀmann (2014), Jovanovic and Menkveld (2016), Pagano and Röell (1993), and
Yang and Zhu (2019). In Budish, Cramton and Shim (2015) and Menkveld and Zoican (2017), all
HFTs have the same speed ex ante and one is picked randomly to win ex post. A similar case is
discussed in Section 5.1. Because of the assumed speed homogeneity in these models, the number
of HFTs is suﬃcient to capture FTs’ aggregate impact, whereas in this paper speed heterogeneity
between FTs plays a central role. Martinez and Rosu (2013) do touch on a case in which FTs trade
at two speeds. Their model assumes an exogenous pricing function and does not analyze the impact
of speed hierarchies on normal-speed traders.
Second, this paper assumes that FTs are less informed than the informed trader. Because of this
information structure, FTs accelerate price discovery but ultimately make prices less informative.
This complements the ﬁndings of Budish et al. (2015) and Menkveld and Zoican (2017) because they
assume away information asymmetry between traders. Other studies, such as Bernhardt and Taub
(2008), Foucault et al. (2016), and Martinez and Rosu (2013), typically assume that FTs are also the
best informed traders about fundamentals. Information processing, however, is time-consuming. To
reach an accurate understanding of economic forces requires a time commitment that far exceeds
the time-frame in which HFTs operate. For example, it is hard to argue that HFTs understand Coca
Cola better than Warren Buﬀett does. Given their high trading frequencies, HFTs in reality most
likely trade based on rough analyses conducted quickly.
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005) and Carlin, Lobo and Viswanathan (2007) also model
predatory trading, albeit in substantially diﬀerent frameworks.
In their models, traders have
the same information, pricing functions are exogenous, and predators trade at the same speed.
Consequently, these papers do not study the impact of diﬀerences in predatory traders’ speed on the
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

pricing function or information eﬃciency.
This paper also contributes to the industry organization literature because FTs essentially play a
generalized Stackelberg game with multiple stages and multiple players at each stage. Diﬀering from
Daughety (1990), Watt (2002), and Julien, Musy and Saïdi (2012), this paper’s pricing function is
endogenous, which is pivotal to examining FTs’ impact on other traders. For example, contrary to
the conclusions of the aforementioned papers, I ﬁnd that non-FTs are worse oﬀwhen FTs’ speeds
are more heterogeneous. Finally, I show that making policies based on the Herﬁndahl index of FTs
may lead to unintended consequences.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model and the equilibrium.
Section 3 discusses the impact of FTs’ speed hierarchies on their aggregate market power and related
policy implications. Section 4 examines the impact of FTs on other traders’ strategies and the market
quality. Section 5 brieﬂy discuss several extensions. Section 6 concludes. Proofs are in the Appendix.
2
Model
In this section I introduce the model setup and presents the equilibrium.
2.1
Setup
Asset and traders. A risky asset is traded. Its true value v is normally distributed as
v ∼N(v0, σ2
v).
(1)
In this paper N(m, v2) denotes a normal distribution with mean m and variance v2.
All traders are risk neutral.10 There are three types of normal-speed traders: (1) one strategic
informed trader who knows the risky asset’s true value v; (2) noise traders who trade randomly;
and (3) a continuum of passive liquidity providers who set the pricing functions, absorb the residual
order-ﬂow imbalances, and expect to make zero proﬁts. It should be noted that passive liquidity
providers do not represent HFTs who use mainly limit-orders.11 Instead, they represent the large
number of traders who have no speed advantage, information advantage, or motivation to initiate
10We will see that FTs’ proﬁts are risk-free. Hence their risk attitude is irrelevant.
11Order types used by HFTs will be discussed later in this section.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

trades. They are the ultimate liquidity providers in this model. I do not call them “market makers”
because they are not necessarily designated market makers.12
In addition, there are N strategic fast traders (FTs). They observe a common noisy signal of
normal-speed liquidity demanders’ incoming orders and react at J speeds to establish their positions.
FTs can choose the timing of their exits. Consistent with empirical evidence, Lemma 2 will show
that FTs should liquidate when liquidity demanders arrive instead of waiting to liquidate later. By
contrast, the informed trader in this model, representing long-term investors, can wait until v is
revealed and then eﬀectively exit with zero price impact.
Clearly, the informed trader and the noise traders demand liquidity and the passive liquidity
providers provide liquidity. It is unclear a priori whether FTs enhance market liquidity. In section 4
I show that in equilibrium FTs act as if they “provide liquidity” to the informed trader and the noise
traders, and yet make them worse oﬀ.
Timeline and information structure. The timeline of events is common knowledge to all traders.
Consider one round of trading. The trading round starts at time 0 and ends at time 1+. The interval
(0, 1+) represents a short time-frame during which passive liquidity providers lag behind FTs. This
interval could last a few seconds or even less.
Event
Price
Time t =
0
t1
1
1+
0+
+
+
+
+
+
Order ﬂow
Passive
liquidity
providers set
P(·)
p0 = E[v]
FT enters position
FT: u1
pt1
Informed and
Noise Traders
arrive. FT
exits.
Informed: x
Noise: z
FT: −u1
p1
Passive liquidity
providers set
ﬁnal quote
p1+ = E[v|F1]
Figure 1.
Timeline of a trading round with only one FT.
Figure 1 illustrates the timeline for the simplistic case with only one FT, who buys u1 shares at
12By contrast, Budish et al. (2015) and Menkveld and Zoican (2017) eﬀectively assume all passive liquidity providers
are HFTs too. In practice not all intermediaries become HFTs. For example Baron et al. (2012) ﬁnd that non-HFT
market makers lose mostly to HFTs and earn proﬁts from other non-HFT traders. Kirilenko et al. (2017) ﬁnd that
HFTs’ trading activities “are clearly distinct from Market Makers.”
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

time t1 and exits the position at time 1. More generally, the timeline of events with multiple FTs is
as follows.
At time 0, passive liquidity providers set the initial quote p0 and a publicly observable pricing
function P(·). The pricing function is ﬁxed during the time interval (0, 1+), reﬂecting passive
liquidity providers’ speed disadvantage relative to FTs. Orders arriving at the same instant are
executed at the same price as determined by P(·).13
At time 0+, the informed trader, knowing v and observing P(·), submits an order for x shares.
Noise traders submit orders for z shares in total, where
z ∼N(0, σ2
z).
(2)
z is independent of the risky asset’s value v and the distribution of z is common knowledge to all.
The aggregate size of normal-speed liquidity demanders’ orders is thus
y = x + z.
(3)
These orders suﬀer from latencies and arrive in the market later, at time 1.
Immediately after time 0+, with probability ρ, FTs observe a signal Iy that perfectly reveals y.
With probability 1 −ρ, Iy is purely noise.14 The parameter ρ is a measure of the accuracy of FTs’
signal. FTs know whether Iy is informative. Hence
ˆy := E[y|Iy] =







y
with probability ρ,
0
with probability 1 −ρ.
(4)
In equilibrium FTs would not trade when Iy is pure noise. Whether Iy is informative is independent
of all other random variables in the model. To focus on the impact of speed diﬀerences, I assume
that FTs observe the same signal so that they diﬀer only with respect to speed. FTs thus trade in
the same direction.15
13Hence, as proposed by Budish et al. (2015), prices are essentially determined in uniform batch auctions held at
time tj and 1. FTs, however, still earn positive proﬁts because they are faster than passive liquidity providers.
14Alternatively, we could assume the signal is always partially informative. For example, Iy = y + ey where ey is a
noise term and corr(Iy, y) = ρ.
15Boehmer, Li and Saar (2018) and Chaboud, Chiquoine, Hjalmarsson and Vega (2014) ﬁnd that algorithmic traders
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Upon observing Iy, FTs react with varying speeds. Suppose there are J possible instants to
trade t1 < t2 < · · · < tJ between time 0+ and time 1. If an FT arrives in the interval (ti−1, ti],
she may trade at time ti, ti+1, · · · , tJ and time 1. When an FT observes y, she will not waste any
trading opportunity and trade at all these instants.16 A faster FT is able to trade earlier and more
frequently. To describe FTs’ speed hierarchies—the hierarchical structure of FTs’ relative speeds, I
deﬁne speed proﬁle as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Speed proﬁle of fast traders). The speed proﬁle {n1, n2, · · · , nJ} is a vector of
J numbers, where nj is the number of FTs who are able to trade at time tj.
Without loss of generality, assume that the fastest FTs arrive in the interval (t0, t1]. Then n1 ≥1,
nj weakly increases with j, and nJ = N.17
FTs know the speed hierarchies and trade accordingly.18 Let uj,k denote the size of the k-th
order at time tj. Time-tj orders are executed at the same price ptj depending on
uj :=
nj
X
k=1
uj,k,
(5)
the total size of the orders.19 Denote cumulative order size of FTs arriving before time tj by
Sj−1 :=
j−1
X
i=0
ui.
(6)
Let u0 = 0 and S0 = 0 for completeness.
At time 1, the informed trader’s and noise traders’ orders of y shares arrive. FTs completely
liquidate their positions. Lemma 2 will show that exiting at time 1 is optimal for FTs under
reasonable assumptions about the price impact of exiting in future trading rounds. The aggregate
order size of FTs is thus −SJ = −(u1 + u2 + · · · + uJ) shares. Passive liquidity providers execute
and HFTs tend to use positively correlated strategies.
16In equilibrium an FT always trades a non-zero quantity at every possible instant unless ˆy = 0.
17If n1 = 0, we can remove it from the speed proﬁle and reduce J by 1 without aﬀecting any result.
18The game between FTs is similar to the game between multiple informed traders in Holden and Subrahmanyam
(1992). There are two key diﬀerences. First, in this model the number of FTs is not ﬁxed but increases over time.
Second, in this model the pricing function is set by slower liquidity providers and thus does not change every time an
FT trades.
19When the timestamp is precise enough, no two orders are pooled and every order is executed at a diﬀerent price.
This is a special case in which every FT arrives at a unique instant and every FT can trade only once. All results hold
qualitatively.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

all the aggregate orders of y −SJ shares at price p1.20
At time 1+, passive liquidity providers set the quote at p1+ using all the information they learn
during the trading round. The trading round ends. This paper models only one representative
trading round. In a dynamic model of multiple trading rounds, p1+ would be the opening quote for
the next trading round.
In summary, passive liquidity providers set the opening quote p0 and the pricing function P(·)
at time 0. During the trading round, they receive orders of {u1, u2, · · · , uJ, y −SJ} shares at time
{t1, t2, · · · , tJ, 1}. They execute the orders at prices {pt1, pt2, · · · , ptJ, p1}. At the end of the trading
round, they set the closing quote p1+.
As the timeline illustrates, traders fall into speed hierarchies. First, FTs are faster than normalspeed liquidity demanders. Any FT can trade at least twice in a trading round whereas an informed
trader or a noise trader can trade only once. Second, FTs are also faster than passive liquidity
providers since FTs can enter and liquidate positions before passive liquidity providers are able to
adjust the pricing function at time 1+. Third, FTs vary in speed. Faster FTs react more quickly and
trade more frequently than slower FTs. Without FTs, the model would be equivalent to the static
model of Kyle (1985) in which traders trade at the same speed.
Discussion on FTs’ order-ﬂow information Iy.
In this paper I assume that Iy is a noisy signal of y, the aggregate order-ﬂow of normal-speed
liquidity demanders. As a result, FTs in this model do not speciﬁcally target the informed trader’s
order x or the noise traders’ orders z and proﬁt from any order they can predict, informative or
not.21 For example, the false tweet posted by hackers announcing explosions in the White House
(studied in Baldauf and Mollner (2015)) and recommendations made by Jim Cramer on his popular
TV show (studied in Engelberg, Sasseville and Williams (2012)) convey no true information but
are still valuable to FTs because such events help FTs predict the incoming order-ﬂow generated
by viewers of the show. In such situations, FTs do not need to ﬁnd out whether such events are
truly informative, which is time-consuming, because they exit before the price reverts to the right
20In practice every FT can exit at the same time because once an FT buys uj shares, she can place a limit sell order
of uj shares at the same price level p1. Then when y arrives at time 1, all FTs’ limit sell orders are executed at the
price p1. FTs may even place limit orders at many price levels before they observe y to ensure priority in execution. If
they do not observe y, they may simply cancel these limit orders.
21Consistent with this assumption, Biais and Woolley (2011) comment that “HFT ... concentrates more on the
information ... about the trading strategies or signals of other market participants.”
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

levels. Yang and Zhu (2019) assume “back-runners” (similar to FTs in this paper) cannot predict
noise traders’ orders and anticipate only the informed traders’ orders.22 Whether HFTs can better
anticipate orders of the informed trader or noise traders is a very challenging empirical question that
lies beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, it seem to be a reasonable presumption that HFTs
trade on any order they can anticipate and are able to predict some noise traders’ orders.
In practice, the order-ﬂow signal Iy may come from various sources. First, FTs may quickly
detect patterns in the limit-order book because they subscribe to exchanges’ faster and more
detailed data feeds. Hasbrouck and Saar (2013), for example, ﬁnd pronounced peaks in activities
around 10-30 millisecond into every second. Such patterns, possibly generated by less sophisticated
algorithms, are not detectable in data with second-level precision but are detectable in data with
millisecond-level precision. Sağlam (2018) presents evidence that some order-execution algorithms
leave patterns that can make it possible to predict incoming orders and, when such patterns are more
prominent, the originator of these orders suﬀers a more severe implementation shortfall. Second,
FTs react to some events, such as earnings announcements, news stories, and social media posts,
more quickly. As discussed in the previous paragraph, such events need not be truly informative
about the fundamentals. They are useful to FTs as long as they help FTs predict order-ﬂow. Third,
FTs may detect that an order is being rerouted between markets, as described in Patterson (2013)
and Lewis (2014).
The speciﬁcation of Iy also implies that FTs in this paper are faster but less informed than the
informed trader, because Iy is a noisy observation of y, which is a noisy signal of the informed trader’s
order size x. This assumption reﬂects the realistic trade-oﬀbetween trading speed and information
accuracy. In practice HFTs make decisions almost in real time and cannot conduct time-consuming,
deep analysis of “soft” information regarding the long-term value. Traders who conduct such analyses
probably cannot trade very quickly. Unlike HFTs, these traders could hold large inventories for
long durations because v is typically revealed very slowly. In addition, FTs’ information advantage
expires at time 1 because the aggregate order-ﬂow y, which is more informative than Iy, is revealed
at time 1. FTs do not lose to the more informed trader because FTs’ speed advantage allows them
to exit by the time the informed trader arrives.
22Yang and Zhu (2019) focus on how informed traders mask their trading motives by randomizing. In contrast, this
paper focuses on how FTs compete once they anticipate some incoming orders.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

FTs in this model, eﬀectively less-informed traders, make the better-informed trader trades
less aggressively, thereby making the price ultimately less informative. In contrast, in Foster and
Viswanathan (1994), the presence of a less-informed trader forces the better informed trader to trade
more aggressively on the common part of both traders’ private information. The diﬀering implication
arises from the subtle diﬀerence in information structure between the two models. In Foster and
Viswanathan (1994) the two informed traders obtain their information from two independent sources.
If one informed trader does not trade on their common information, the other informed trader would,
which renders the information less valuable in the future. Hence both informed traders trade more
aggressively. In this model, however, FTs have no independent source of information because Iy is
an noisy observation of the informed trader’s order x, not the fundamental value v. If the informed
trader does trade, the order-ﬂow is uninformative and FTs’ traders are uninformative. The informed
trader hence has no incentive to be more aggressive. Instead, she trades less aggressively due to her
higher price impact.
Discussion of FTs’ order types.
HFTs in practice deploy multiple strategies. Some HFTs use mainly market orders and others
use mainly limit orders. This paper does not attempt to model all HFTs, focusing instead on
order-anticipating HFTs who use market orders.23 Order-anticipating HFTs could also use only limit
orders. As Hasbrouck and Saar (2009) point out, a limit-order strategy may have eﬀects similar
to those of a market-order strategy. For example, HFTs who anticipate a large buy order could
cancel their limit sell orders at low prices and submit (or keep) limit sell orders at higher prices. For
liquidity demanders, these HFTs have the same eﬀects as order-anticipating HFTs who use market
orders. In the model presented in Section B, order-anticipating FTs use limit orders and their trading
results in “phantom liquidity” that sometimes disappears just before liquidity demanders arrive.
2.2
Equilibrium
I now present the symmetric linear equilibrium in which FTs arriving at the same moment follow
the same strategy and traders use linear strategies.
23Baron et al. (2012), Brogaard, Hagströmer, Nordén and Riordan (2015), and Hagströmer and Nordén (2013) all
ﬁnd that a signiﬁcant portion of HFTs trade predominantly with market orders.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Deﬁnition 2 (Equilibrium). The following conditions are satisﬁed in equilibrium:
1. Proﬁt maximization of the informed trader. Given others traders’ strategies and the asset’s
true value v, at time 0 the informed trader submit an order of x shares to maximize her expected
proﬁt E[πI] = E[x(v −p1)|v], where p1 is the transaction price at time 1.
2. Proﬁt maximization of FTs. Given other traders’ strategies and Iy, the k-th FT arriving at
time tj trades uj′,k shares at tj′ for j′ ∈{j, j + 1, · · · , J} and liquidates her inventory at ¯tj,k ≥tj to
maximize her expected proﬁt E
h
πF
j,k
 Iy
i
= E
hPJ
j′=j uj′,k(p¯tj,k −pt′
j)
 Iy
i
. I choose the symmetric
equilibrium where FTs trade the same quantity at any instant, i.e., uj,k = uj,l for all j, k, l.
3. Competitive pricing function. Given other traders’ strategies, at time 0 passive liquidity
providers commit to a pricing function P(·) they will use during the interval [0, 1] such that their
expected trading proﬁt in this trading round is zero.
4. Informationally eﬃcient opening and closing quotes. Given other traders’ strategies and the
order-ﬂow they observe, passive liquidity demanders set the opening quote p0 and the closing quote
p1+ to equal their expectation of v at time 0 and at time 1+.
I make the following simplifying assumption to obtain the equilibrium in closed form. In Section
B I discuss a diﬀerent model and present an equilibrium, solved numerically, in which all strategies
are allowed to be non-linear.
Assumption 1 (Linearity). Passive liquidity providers, upon receiving the market order of aggregate size ytj shares at tj ∈(0, 1], ﬁll the order at the average price of
ptj = ptj−1 + λIytj,
(7)
where ptj−1 is the average price of the previous trade at time tj−1. For the sake of completeness, let
pt0 be the initial quote p0. The price impact parameter λI is ﬁxed between time 0 and 1 because of
passive liquidity providers’ speed disadvantage compared with FTs. The informed trader chooses a
trade size that is linear in the pricing error
x = β(v −p0).
(8)
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

FTs choose trade sizes that are linear in the residual order size that they can anticipate:24
uj,k = αj
nj
(ˆy −Sj−1) .
(9)
Assumption 1 implies that prices during the trading round are linear in the cumulative order-ﬂow
Sj. Let ¯u = −SJ if FTs liquidate at time 1 and ¯u = 0 if FTs liquidate after time 1. Then
ptj = p0 + λISj = p0 + λI P
i≤j
Pni
k=1 ui,k and
p1 = p0 + λI(SJ + y −¯u).
(10)
Because y = x + z = β(v −p0) + z, the aggregate size of all orders traded in the interval [0, 1]
¯y := SJ + y −¯u is linear in v. Therefore, the closing quote is
p1+ = E[v|F1+] = E[v|¯y] = v0 + λP ¯y.
(11)
In Kyle (1985), market makers are fast enough to use all their information to price every trade.
Hence a single λ suﬃces to measure a market order’s immediate impact on transaction price and its
permanent impact on market makers’ belief. By contrast, in this model passive liquidity providers
are slow and cannot adjust the pricing function every time an FT trades. Thus, they need to set two
price impact parameters: the immediate price impact parameter λI and the permanent price impact
parameter λP . Speciﬁcally, at time 0, passive liquidity providers commit to pricing market orders
upon their arrivals using λI. When passive liquidity providers catch up with the market at time 1+,
they use λP to set the ﬁnal quote p1+ to equal their best estimate of v. Thus trading prices may
temporarily deviate from passive liquidity providers’ estimate of v before time 1+.25 An immediate
result is that λI cannot be lower than λP .
Lemma 1. If passive liquidity providers do not expect to lose, they set λI ≥λP ≥0.
Intuitively, in addition to losing to the informed trader, passive liquidity providers also lose
to FTs. To oﬀset the additional losses to FTs, passive liquidity providers have to charge liquidity
24This is equivalent to assuming that uj,k is linear in p1 −ptj−1.
25This is consistent with the ﬁnding of Hendershott, Jones and Menkveld (2011) that algorithmic trading increases
the informativeness of quotes relative to trades.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

demanders a higher price impact than what the information content can justify; hence λI > λP .26
In this paper only one trading round is considered and the price impact parameter λI and λP in
this trading round is endogenously determined in equilibrium. To investigate the possibility that
FTs liquidate in future trading rounds, I make the following assumption regarding λf, FTs’ expected
immediate price impact parameter in future trading rounds.
Assumption 2. (Future price impact is not signiﬁcantly lower) λf ≥λP .
It is worth noting that this assumption does not imply that λf ≥λI because λI ≥λP . The
assumption holds as long as the future immediate price impact λf is not signiﬁcantly lower than
λI.27 The assumption is suﬃcient, yet not necessary, for the next result.
Lemma 2 (FTs prefer short holding horizons). Given Assumption 2, FTs prefer to liquidate
at time 1 than before or after time 1.
Most empirical studies ﬁnd that HFTs hold close to zero inventory at the end of a trading day
and their inventory levels rapidly mean-revert to zero within a trading day.28 The overnight margin
costs or aversion to inventory risk can explain HFTs’ incentive to hold zero end-of-day inventory.29
Lemma 2 provides a possible explanation for rapid mean-reversion within a day even for risk neutral
FTs:30 the presence of order-anticipating FTs forces slower liquidity providers to charge a price
premium (λI ≥λP ). Hence the time-1 price p1 = p0 +λI ¯y must overshoot passive liquidity providers’
best estimate p1+ = p0 + λI ¯y. If FTs do not liquidate at time 1 and wait to liquidate later, they
would be liquidating starting from the inferior price p1+ and lose the price gap |p1 −p1+|.31
Theorem 1 (Linear Equilibrium). Given Assumption 1 and Assumption 2, there exists a sym26This divergence between the execution price and informationally eﬃcient price also arises in the model of Glosten
(1994), where the price schedule is non-linear. In Section B, I discuss the impact of order-anticipation in that
framework.
27Long-term investors, for example the informed trader in this model, may not need to liquidate soon because they
could hold the asset forever and collect dividends, eﬀectively achieving a zero liquidating price impact.
28See, for example, Kirilenko et al. (2017) and Biais and Woolley (2011). SEC (2010) even uses “very short
time-frames for establishing and liquidating positions” as one criterion for deﬁning HFTs.
29Adrian, Capponi, Vogt and Zhang (2017) ﬁnd that overnight inventory pressure makes the treasury market less
liquid as the end-of-day approaches.
30Risk averse FTs would have stronger incentives to liquidate sooner because the order-ﬂow in the future is riskier.
31In Foster and Viswanathan (1994) market makers are as fast as informed traders. Hence λI = λP and there is no
such predictable price gap. Consequently, the less informed trader does not unwind her position early.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

metric linear equilibrium in which all FTs liquidate at time 1 and
the initial quote p0 = v0,
(12)
the (j, k)-th FT’s order uj,k = αj
nj
(ˆy −Sj−1) for 1 ≤k ≤nj,
(13)
the informed trading size x = β (v −p0) ,
(14)
the pricing function ptj = ptj−1 + λIyj,
(15)
and the ﬁnal quote p1+ = v0 + λP y
(16)
where the strategy parameters are
β = σz
σv
r1 −ργ
1 + ργ ,
λI = σv
2σz
r1 + ργ
1 −ργ ,
λP = σv
2σz
p
1 −(ργ)2,
(17)
αi =







nJ
nJ+1
i = J
ni(ni+1−2gi+1)
ni(ni+1−2gi+1)+ni+1
1 ≤i ≤J −1
(18)
Let α0 = u0,k = S0 = 0 for completeness. FTs’ total market power starting from ti is measured by
gi :=
J
X
j=i
 
αj
1 −αj
jY
k=i
(1 −αk)2
!
=







αJ(1 −αJ)
i = J
αi(1 −αi) + (1 −αi)2gi+1
1 ≤i ≤J −1
.
(19)
In particular, FTs’ total market power over the entire trading round is represented by
γ := g1 =
J
X
j=1
 
αj(1 −αj)
j−1
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)2
!
.
(20)
Remark. Lemma A.8 in the Appendix shows that γ ∈[0, 0.5]; by deﬁnition, ρ ∈(0, 1]. Hence,
ργ ∈[0, 0.5] and β, λI, λP are well deﬁned.
Traders’ strategy parameters {αj}, β, λI, and λP are determined by the volatility of the
fundamental value σv, the volatility of noise trading σz, the quality of FTs’ information ρ, and FTs’
speed proﬁle {n1, n2, · · · , nJ}.
The next result, illustrated in Figure 2, shows that ργ fully summarizes FTs’ impact on normalspeed traders. Speciﬁcally, when ργ = 0, normal-speed traders use the same strategies as in Kyle
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

(1985): λI = λP =
1
2β = σv
2σz . When ργ increases, λI increases, λP falls, and β declines.
Corollary 1 (FTs’ impact on other traders’ strategies). Keeping σv/σz constant, when ργ
increases, passive liquidity providers charge higher price impact to execute trades(λI ↑), the informed
trader trades less aggressively (β ↓), and passive liquidity providers learn less information from the
order-ﬂow (λP ↓).
Proof. Follows directly from Theorem 1.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Immediate price impact λI
Permanent price impact λP
λ in Kyle(85)
ργ
Price impact / σv
σz
(a) Price impact and ργ
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
β in Kyle(85)
Informed trading intensity β
ργ
Trading intensity / σv
σz
(b) Trading intensity and ργ
Figure 2. Impact of ργ on normal-speed traders.
When passive liquidity providers receive an order of y shares, they mark the price up by λIy
and impose a price-impact surcharge of λIy2. In equilibrium passive liquidity providers eﬀectively
transfer a fraction ργ of the surcharge to FTs while transferring the remaining surcharge to the
informed trader. FTs eﬀectively levy a speed tax on normal-speed traders and ργ is the speed tax
rate. When ργ = 0, FTs make zero proﬁts and the equilibrium reduces to the static equilibrium
in Kyle (1985) from which FTs are absent. When ργ increases, passive liquidity providers need to
transfer a higher fraction (ργ ↑) of their price-impact surcharges to FTs. In order to break even,
passive liquidity providers have to raise the immediate price impact (λI ↑) to charge more for ﬁlling
the same order. Seeing the higher price impact, the informed trader trades less aggressively (β ↓)
in response. As a result, the ﬁnal price of the trading round is less sensitive to the cumulative
order-ﬂow of the trading round (λP ↓).
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

The impact of ρ is intuitive: FTs earn more proﬁts when they have a more accurate order-ﬂow
signal. The parameters {gi} , including γ = g1, are less transparent. Theorem 1 shows that
{gj}, together with FTs’ trading intensities {αj}, are ultimately determined by FTs’ speed proﬁle
{n1, n2, · · · , nJ}.
Proposition 1. At tj, FTs’ trading intensity αj satisﬁes 0 <
1
J−j+2 ≤αj ≤
nj
nj+1 < 1.
Intuitively, an FT chooses her trading intensity αj to balance the instantaneous proﬁt at tj and
proﬁt potential between tj and 1. At time tj, FTs’ trading intensity αj is lower than the “myopic”
level
nj
nj+1 and higher than the “patient” level
1
J−j+2. The myopic level αj =
nj
nj+1 is optimal when
the FT has only one trading opportunity left in the interval [tj, 1). The patient intensity level
αj =
1
J−j+2 is optimal if only one FT is present.32
FTs’ trading intensities {αj} then determine γ, which, as the next result shows, measures FTs’
total market power for a given signal quality ρ because FTs’ aggregate proﬁt increases with ργ.
Proposition 2. FTs’ aggregate expected proﬁt is E

πF 
=
σvσzργ
√
1−(ργ)2 and it increases with ργ.
In Section 3 I discuss how FTs’ speed proﬁle aﬀects their competition and market power γ.
3
Fast traders’ competition and market power
As Proposition 2 shows, γ can be considered a measure of FTs’ aggregate market power since
FTs’ aggregate proﬁt increases with γ. This section studies how FTs’ speed diﬀerences aﬀect their
competition, thereby inﬂuencing γ. Although in this model, as proposed by Budish et al. (2015),
prices are essentially determined by uniform batch auctions, I show that not every type of competition
between FTs reduces their aggregate market power γ when FTs may diﬀer in speed.
Roughly speaking, FTs’ aggregate market power increases when their speeds are more heterogeneous. As a result, FTs’ may earn higher total proﬁts when new FTs enter the market. Even
when inﬁnitely many FTs compete, their aggregate proﬁt in general does not vanish because, in this
model, diﬀering from most existing studies, FTs may trade at varying speeds.
32When FTs do not observe y, although αj > 0, they do not trade because ˆy = E[y] = 0.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

3.1
Fast traders’ proﬁts and their speed ranking
FTs have strong incentives to compete on speed because an individual FT’s trading proﬁt depends
crucially on her speed relative to other FTs.
Proposition 3 (FTs’ proﬁts and relative speeds). An FT arriving at time ti earns more than
5.6k times as much expected proﬁts as an FT arriving at ti+k.
An FT could more than quintuple her expected trading proﬁts by moving up one spot in the
speed ranking. Arriving earlier, even by a nanosecond, enables an FT to (1) establish larger positions,
(2) trade at better prices, and (3) enjoy more trading opportunities.33 Eﬀectively, an FT who arrives
earlier enjoys greater market power.
This result explains FTs’ obsession over speed. For example, Lou Modano, head of global
infrastructure for NASDAQ OMX, comment that there is “a lot of opportunity for new [hardware]
players” to feed a ceaseless demand for ever lower latency in electronic trading systems (http:
//goo.gl/ZNV6IJ). Although FTs are already faster than most traders, they continue to invest in
the latest speed technologies because they need to be faster than other FTs.
This result also explains why the number of FTs is very limited in every market: when the
number of FTs increases, the slowest FT’s trading proﬁts quickly approach zero. Given the high
costs of speed technologies, only a small number of FTs can survive.
3.2
An example
It is of course not surprising that having a speed advantage is valuable. More importantly, we are
interested in understanding how FTs’ strong incentives to become faster aﬀect their aggregate market
power γ. Let us consider a hypothetical example with three FTs to gain some insights regarding
FTs’ speed proﬁles and their market power. Denote by γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ} FTs’ market power γ when the
speed proﬁle is {n1, n2, · · · , nJ}.
Example: Consider a market with three FTs: A, B, and C. They anticipate that a market order
submitted by a normal-speed investor M will arrive in 1 second.
33Baron et al. (2012) that ﬁnd relative speed signiﬁcantly aﬀects an HFT’s proﬁt. Slowing other FTs down could
also improve an FT’s speed relative to that of other FTs. Consistent with this intuition, Gai, Yao and Ye (2012) and
Egginton, Ness and Ness (2016) ﬁnd evidence that some HFTs use the “quote-stuﬃng” strategy to slow other traders.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Stage 1 Initially the timestamp precision is 1 second. All three FTs arrive within 1 second. The
exchange cannot determine their arrival sequence and ﬁlls all FT’s orders at the same price.34
The speed proﬁle is {3}. Any FTs earns the same proﬁt and their market power γ{3} =
3
4
 1 −3
4

= 3
16 ≈0.188.
Stage 2 The exchange increases the timestamp precision to 0.5 second.
FT A subscribes to the
exchange’s faster data feed and upgrades her hardware. As a result, A can trade twice: once
before t = 0.5 by herself and once after t = 0.5 with the other two FTs B and C. FTs’ speed
proﬁle becomes {1, 3}. The ratio of the trading proﬁt of A, B, and C is 15 : 1 : 1. FTs’ total
market power increases to γ{1,3} ≈0.302.
Stage 3 FT B upgrades her algorithm so that she can also trade once before t = 0.5 and once after
t = 0.5. From the perspective of the exchange, A and B eﬀectively have the same speed and
FTs’ speed proﬁle becomes {2, 3}. The ratio of the trading proﬁt of A, B, and C is 15 : 15 : 1
and FTs’ market power γ{2,3} ≈0.256.
Stage 4 FT C improves her algorithm and become as fast as A and B. Every FT earns the same
trading proﬁt. FTs’ speed proﬁle becomes {3, 3} and market power γ{3,3} ≈0.214.
Stage 5 Normal-speed investor M switches to a faster broker and her order arrives earlier at t = 0.5.
FTs’ speed proﬁle becomes {3} and market power returns to γ{3} ≈0.188.
A
B
C
γ = 0.188
Expected Proﬁt
Speed proﬁle { 3 }
A
B
C
γ = 0.302
Speed proﬁle {1 3}
A
B
C
γ = 0.256
Speed proﬁle {2 3}
A
B
C
γ = 0.214
Speed proﬁle {3 3}
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
Stage 5
Figure 3. Example of FTs’ competition.
34In Section 5.1 I consider a case in which if the exchange cannot diﬀerentiate the time priority of certain orders,
the exchange executes these orders in a random sequence at diﬀering prices.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

The example, illustrated in Figure 3, shows several eﬀects when FTs trade at varying speeds: (1)
Although the number of FTs is constant, FTs’ total market power γ may vary substantially. The
number of FTs is thus not a suﬃcient statistic of their market power. (2) A ﬁner time granularity can
increase FTs’ market power: γ is higher at stages 2-4 than at stage 1. (3) An FT’s speed investment
may have an ambiguous impact on their total market power: γ increases from stage 1 to stage 2 but
decreases from stage 2 to stage 4. (4) FTs earn higher proﬁts when every FT becomes faster: γ is
higher in stage 4 than in stage 1. (5) FTs may not beneﬁt from their speed investment. FTs’ trading
proﬁt is the same at stage 1 and stage 5. Their net proﬁts decrease because they have to pay for
better speed technologies, including the exchange’s service.
In this example a ﬁner time granularity triggers an arms race in speed technology—a trader
could earn more trading proﬁt if others do not upgrade but would earn the same trading proﬁt if
everyone upgrades. Everyone, except for the speed technology vendors, would have been better oﬀif
the time granularity stayed the same.
3.3
Speed hierarchies and fast traders’ market power γ
We now examine the general relationship between FTs’ speed proﬁle {n1, n2, · · · , nJ} and their
aggregate market power γ.
First, FTs’ aggregate power γ can vary substantially depending on the speed proﬁle even when
the number of FTs N and FTs’ total number of trading opportunities J are given.
Proposition 4 (Bounds of FTs’ market power γ). Given N, the number of FTs, and J, FTs’
total number of trading opportunities, FTs’ market power γ is maximized when the speed proﬁle is
{1, 1, · · · , N} and is minimized when the speed proﬁle is {N, N, · · · , N}. Given J, γ is maximized
when there is only one FT (speed proﬁle {1, 1, · · · , 1}); given N, γ is minimized when all FTs trade
once simultaneously (speed proﬁle {N}). Formally,
N
(1 + N)2 = γ{N} ≤γ{N,N,··· ,N} ≤γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ} ≤γ{1,1,··· ,N} ≤γ{1,1,··· ,1} =
J
2J + 2 ≤0.5.
(21)
Figure 4 illustrates the results. FTs’ total market power γ is maximized when the speed proﬁle is
{1, 1, · · · , 1}. In this situation, the degree of competition between FTs at any instant is minimized
because there is only one FT. FTs enjoy the least market power when the speed proﬁle is {N}. In
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

(a) Number of FTs N = 2.
(b) Number of FTs’ trades J = 5.
Figure 4. Bounds of FTs’ market power γ.
this case all FTs trade once at the same moment and the degree of competition between FTs reaches
the highest level.
It is not surprising that FTs’ market power γ generally increases with J and decreases with N.
First, J—FTs’ total number of trading opportunities before time 1—measures the aggregate speed
advantage FTs enjoy over normal-speed traders. When J increases, FTs in aggregate are able to
exploit normal-speed traders’ speed disadvantage to a greater extent and earn higher proﬁts. Second,
N—the total number of FTs—measures the degree of competition between FTs at time tJ.
Moreover, FTs’ market power γ should also decrease with nj—the number of FTs trading at
{tj}—for any j ∈{1, 2, · · · , J} because FTs trading at the same instant engage in a Cournot like
competition. When nj increases, competition reduces the proﬁts of FTs trading at and after tj.
Therefore, FTs’ aggregate market power γ is not fully determined by N and J because {nj} for
j < J are not uniquely determined by N and J. A speed proﬁle is valid as long as 0 < n1 ≤n2 ≤
· · · nJ−1 ≤nJ = N.
As Figure 4 demonstrates, the range of FTs’ aggregate market power γ is still quite wide when
N and J are given. To assess the impact of a potential policy intervention, a regulator in general
would need to know how the intervention aﬀects the entire speed proﬁle of FTs, which can be very
costly. The next result shows one exceptional case in which regulators can reduce γ without fully
knowing the speed proﬁle.
Proposition 5 (FTs’ aggregate market power increases with their speed heterogeneity).
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Given N, the number of FTs, bunching non-empty neighboring groups in an FTs’ speed proﬁle lowers
FTs’ market power γ and splitting one group of FTs into neighboring groups increases γ.
Bunching two neighboring groups of FTs makes their speed eﬀectively the same, thereby reducing
their speed heterogeneity. FTs’ aggregate market power γ falls, for two reasons. First, bunching
reduces FTs’ aggregate number of trades from J to J −1. Second, the number of FTs at tj increases
from nj to nj+1, intensifying FTs’ competition at tj and reducing FTs’ proﬁt potential at subsequent
instants. Both eﬀects lower FTs’ market power γ.
This result suggests that weakening the time priority rule always reduces FTs’ aggregate market
power for any existing speed proﬁle of FTs. Hence, regulators can improve market quality without
knowing FTs’ speed proﬁle. For example, regulators may require an exchange to treat orders arriving
within the same 50-millisecond interval equally, despite the exchange’s capacity to timestamp at the
nanosecond-level precision. This rule would weaken FTs’ speed advantage over normal-speed traders
and intensify FTs’ competition for any speed proﬁle, thereby reducing their market power.
One might attempt to reduce FTs’ market power by encouraging the entry of new FTs. The
next result, however, shows that this intervention might not work when entrants are much faster
than incumbents.
Proposition 6 (Impact of an FT’s entry is ambiguous). Suppose a new FT enters the market
and arrives at t′. (1) If the entrant is slower than the fastest incumbent FTs (t′ ≥t1), FTs’ market
power γ decreases, and it decreases further when the entrant is faster. If the entrant trades at the
same speed as the fastest incumbents t′ = t1, γ is minimized. (2) If the entrant is faster than all
incumbent FTs (t′ < t1), FTs’ market power γ may increase or decrease.
Figure 5 illustrates the results. If the entrant is slower than the fastest incumbent (t′ ≥t1), the
total number of FTs’ trading opportunities J is unchanged whereas the degree of competition from
t′ to tJ increases. Hence FTs’ market power falls. When t′ = t1, γ is minimized because the entrant
intensiﬁes competition at every moment without increasing J.
If the entrant is faster than all incumbent FTs (t′ < t1), the entry has ambiguous impact on
FTs’ aggregate market power. On the one hand, the entrant competes with all incumbent FTs,
which tends to reduce γ. On the other hand, because the entrant is faster, she enjoys more trading
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Figure 5. Eﬀect of an FT’s entry on FTs’ market power when the incumbent FT arrives at t1 = 15.
opportunities than incumbents, thereby increasing J and γ. The ﬁrst eﬀect dominates when the
entrant is slightly faster than incumbents (t′ ∈(10, t1)) and the second eﬀect dominates when the
entrant is much faster (t′ < 10). Proposition 6 provides one explanation for the mixed empirical
ﬁndings regarding the impact of the entry of HFTs. For example, Breckenfelder (2019) ﬁnds that
HFTs’ entry hurts liquidity whereas Menkveld (2013) ﬁnds that entry improves liquidity.
Proposition 7 (Impact of an FT’s becoming faster is ambiguous). Suppose an FT arriving
at time t becomes faster and arrives at time t′. (1) If the FT is still slower than the fastest FT
(t′ ≥t1), γ decreases. (2) If the FT becomes the fastest FT (t′ < t1), γ may increase.
If an FT becomes faster but is still slower than the fastest FT, the speed improvement intensiﬁes
her competition with some FTs who were faster and reduces γ. If the FT becomes the new fastest
FT, FTs enjoy more trading opportunities in aggregate and may earn higher proﬁts in total.
The impact is unambiguous if all FTs become equally faster than normal-speed traders.
Proposition 8 (FTs’ aggregate market power increases when all FTs become equally
faster). For j ≥1, γ{n1,n2,··· ,nj−1,nj,nj,··· ,nj} ≥γ{n1,n2,··· ,nj−1,nj}.
When all FTs become equally faster than normal-speed traders, FTs enjoy more trading opportunities and earn higher proﬁts. This covers the case when the speed proﬁle changes from
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

{0, n2, n3, · · · , nJ} to {n2, n3, · · · , nJ, nJ}. Conversely, when all order-anticipating FTs become
equally slower, every FT experiences fewer trading opportunities and earns lower proﬁt. This is
another way of reducing FTs’ aggregate market power without knowing their speed proﬁle.35
In general, FTs’ aggregate market power does not vanish when their speeds diﬀer.
Proposition 9 (FTs’ market power in the limit). FTs’ market power converges to zero if and
only if inﬁnitely many FTs trade at the highest speed. Formally, if n1 of N FTs trade at the highest
speed, then limN→∞γ = 0 ⇐⇒limN→∞n1 = ∞.
When n1 is ﬁnite, even when inﬁnitely many FTs trade at the second highest speed, FTs’
aggregate trading proﬁt is not zero because the fastest FTs earn strictly positive trading proﬁts by
trading at t1. In practice, due to physical limits, for instance the number of co-location spots, only a
very limited number of FTs can be the fastest. Thus, FTs’ impact in general does not vanish even
in the limit with inﬁnitely many competing FTs. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005) ﬁnd that the
impact of predators on price vanishes in the limit because they assume all predators trade at the
same speed. Budish et al. (2015) ﬁnd that batching two HFTs together is suﬃcient to eliminate
“order sniping” because in their model the liquidity provider is one of the batched HFTs, which
is equivalent to making J = 0 in this model. This paper shows more generally that even when
the liquidity provider is strictly slower than FTs, batching is still beneﬁcial because it limits FTs’
aggregate trading opportunities J and forces FTs to compete on price. FTs’ impact, however, does
not vanish in general when J > 0.
3.4
Herﬁndahl index and FTs’ market power γ
Some empirical studies, for example Baron et al. (2012), report the Herﬁndahl index (HHI) of the
HFT sector. Nevertheless, the index might not be an appropriate measure of HFTs’ aggregate market
power because it does not always increase with γ.
For example, suppose the speed proﬁle changes from {1} to {1, 2} because of the entry of an
FT who is faster than the incumbent. The Herﬁndahl index of proﬁts of FTs falls from 1 to 0.80.
Nonetheless, FTs’ market power γ increases from 0.25 to 0.32. Intuitively, although the FT sector
becomes less concentrated, the entrant FT also crowds out some passive liquidity providers who
35Hu (2019), for example, ﬁnds that the entry of IEX, an exchange that delays all orders for 350 microseconds,
reduces trading costs.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

earn zero proﬁts. Hence, in aggregate FTs enjoy more trading opportunities and earn higher proﬁts.
A better measure is the HHI of the ﬁnancial intermediary sector, which includes HFTs and other
slow intermediaries. Such a measure would capture the crowd-out eﬀect.
3.5
Summary of policy implications regarding FTs’ speed heterogeneity
Taken together, the results reported in this section show that even when prices are determined
in uniform batch auctions, as Budish et al. (2015) advocate, one cannot fully rely on the force
of competition to limit the aggregate market power of FTs. Because FTs’ trading proﬁts decay
exponentially with their speed ranking, FTs have strong incentives to compete on speed. When they
do so, FTs’ speeds are likely to become more heterogeneous, which increases their market power.
Policies promoting the entry of FTs may not help if the entrants are faster than incumbent FTs.
Policymakers should try to lower the HHI of the ﬁnancial intermediary sector, rather than the HHI
of the HFT sector, because the entry of HFTs could displace slower intermediaries. To mitigate
the impact of FTs, regulators could introduce rules to encourage price or quantity competition and
discourage speed competition.
4
FTs’ impact on market liquidity, and information eﬃciency
This section demonstrates how FTs in this model aﬀect normal-speed traders, thereby aﬀecting
market liquidity and information eﬃciency. I also discuss how some commonly used measures of
liquidity and information eﬃciency can be misleading when FTs are present.
4.1
Market liquidity
We can directly assess the impact of FTs on market liquidity by examining the proﬁts of the natural
liquidity demanders in this model, namely the informed trader and noise traders.
Proposition 10 (Speed tax rate ργ and traders’ proﬁts). For a given σvσz, when ργ increases,
FTs earn higher aggregate expected proﬁts (E

πF 
=
σvσzργ
√
1−(ργ)2 ↑), the informed trader earns lower
proﬁts (E[πI] = σvσz
2
q
1−ργ
1+ργ ↓), and noise traders suﬀer more losses (E[πN] = −σvσz
2
q
1+ργ
1−ργ ↓).
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
−2
−1
0
1
2
Informed trader’s E(πI)
FTs’ proﬁt E(πF )
Noise traders’ proﬁts E(πN)
ργ
Expected trading proﬁt / σvσz
2
(a) Trader’s Proﬁts
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
E(πF )/E(−πN)
E(πI)/E(−πN)
ργ
Proﬁts fraction
(b) Proﬁt Ratios
Figure 6. Traders’ proﬁts and the speed tax rate ργ.
Corollary 1 shows that liquidity demanders suﬀer a higher price impact λI when FTs’ market
power γ increases. Proposition 10, illustrated by Figure 6, shows directly that, when FTs earn higher
total proﬁts, normal-speed liquidity demanders are worse oﬀand hence the market is less liquid. The
result is consistent with the empirical ﬁndings of Korajczyk and Murphy (2018) and Tong (2015).
Some other indirect measures of liquidity, such as the direction of trades and trading volume,
might be misleading when order-anticipating FTs are present. For example, as Lemma 2 shows,
FTs choose to exit at time 1 and their exiting trades run in the opposite direction of normal-speed
liquidity demanders’ orders at time 1. One might conclude based on this behavior that these FTs
enhance liquidity. To resolve the apparent contradiction with Proposition 10, note that, for FTs to
“provide liquidity” at time 1, they must take liquidity earlier at tj and these earlier trades move the
price before liquidity demanders’ orders arrive. Essentially, FTs consume liquidity at tj and provide
the liquidity back at time 1 at a proﬁt, thereby making liquidity demanders worse oﬀ.
Similarly, trading volume is not a reliable measure of liquidity.
Proposition 11 (FTs may increase trading volume while hurting liquidity). When FTs
have better order-ﬂow information (ρ ↑), they initiate a higher fraction of the trading volume and
normal-speed liquidity demanders earn lower proﬁts.
When FTs have better order-ﬂow information, they anticipate and trade ahead of normal-speed
liquidity demanders more often. Consequently, their trades account for a higher fraction of the
trading volume. Liquidity demanders, however, are worse oﬀ. Thus FTs’ high trading volume can be
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

a sign of unnecessary intermediation rather than valuable liquidity provision.
4.2
Information eﬃciency
Although FTs’ trades are informative, we cannot conclude that the presence of FTs uniformly
improves price informativeness. Many empirical studies, such as Brogaard et al. (2014) and Carrion
(2013), ﬁnd that trades of some HFTs can predict short-term price movements. Consistent with
these ﬁndings, FTs in this model trade in informative directions: when the incoming order is a buy
order, for example, FTs buy before time 1 when the price is low and sell at time 1 when the price
overshoots. Nevertheless, the next result shows that prices are ultimately less informative after FTs
have exited their positions.
Proposition 12 (FTs accelerate but ultimately hurt price discovery). Let Ft denote the
public information at time t; measure the information eﬃciency at time t with
φt := E

1 −Var[v|Ft]
Var[v]

.
(22)
Then, intermediate information eﬃciency φt1 = ρ(1−ργ)
2
increases with ρ and decreases with γ. The
ex post information eﬃciency φ1+ = 1−ργ
2
decreases with ργ.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
γ = 0
γ = 1
4
γ = 1
3
FTs’ information quality ρ
φt1
(a) Intermediate information efﬁciency
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
γ = 0
γ = 1
4
γ = 1
3
FTs’ information quality ρ
φ1+
(b) Ex post information efﬁciency
Figure 7. Equilibrium information eﬃciency.
Figure 7 illustrates the results. In this model, FTs’ trades are informative because their signal
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Iy is correlated with the informed trader’s order x. Hence, FTs’ trades bring information to the
market earlier at t1, thereby increasing φt1. Nonetheless, at the end of the trading round, prices are
ultimately less informative (φ1+ ↓) because the informed trader trades less aggressively in light of
the higher liquidity cost.36
Intuitively, an FT’s impact on the order-ﬂow is similar to a prying messenger’s impact on letters.
Suppose that a messenger glances at a letter and summarizes it to the receiver just prior to delivering
it. The summary is informative but its information value is quickly superseded by the letter itself.
Moreover, the sender, worrying about privacy, is less likely to write clearly ex ante and the receiver
is ultimately less informed.
4.3
Policy implications and discussions
To improve market quality, policymakers can try to inﬂuence FTs’ aggregate market power γ and the
accuracy of their order-ﬂow information ρ. On the one hand, a lower γ leads to better liquidity and
information eﬃciency. Hence, policymakers should reduce γ by limiting FTs’ speed heterogeneity, as
discussed in Section 3.3. On the other hand, while a higher ρ hurts market liquidity and ex post
information eﬃciency, it improves intermediate information eﬃciency. If the social beneﬁts of slightly
faster price discoveries outweighed the social costs of ultimately less informative prices, policymakers
might want to allow FTs to have access to the order-ﬂow signal Iy.37 Market quality is the best
when FTs have perfect order-ﬂow information (ρ = 1) and yet earn zero proﬁts (γ = 0): FTs bring
information to market earlier and natural liquidity demanders’ proﬁts are not aﬀected.
5
Extensions
I brieﬂy discuss some extensions in this section.
5.1
Stochastic speed rankings
Adding randomness to the sequence of order execution has been proposed as a method for weakening
the time-priority rule. Harris (2013), for example, proposes adding a random latency of between
36If information production is endogenous, the informed trader would produce less information. FTs’ information
suppression eﬀects would be ampliﬁed.
37A complete welfare analysis, which is beyond the scope of this paper, should also take into account of the beneﬁts
of better speed technologies and the impact of lower incentives to produce information.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

0 and 10 milliseconds to every order. EBS, a leading trading venue for currencies, experimented
with a similar “latency ﬂoor” rule, under which orders arriving within a short batching interval are
executed in a random sequence (http://goo.gl/30SiwH). These interventions eﬀectively makes an
FT’s speed advantage stochastic: a faster FT’s order might not be executed earlier.
Suppose N FTs fall into the same batching interval and all exit in the next batch at price p0 +λIy.
For simplicity consider the case in which every FT can trade only once.
Proposition 13 (Latency ﬂoor). In the symmetric equilibrium under the latency-ﬂoor rule, each
FT trades u =
2
N+3 ˆy shares and FTs’ market power is γ =
4N
(N+3)2 ≥γ{N} =
N
(1+N)2 .
Speed proﬁle {N}
Latency ﬂoor
0
10
20
0.2
0.4
Number of FTs
(a) An FT’s order size u
Speed proﬁle {N}
Latency ﬂoor
0
10
20
0
0.2
0.4
Number of FTs
(b) FTs’ market power γ
Figure 8.
FTs’ market power γ and each FT’s order size under the latency ﬂoor rule.
Under the latency-ﬂoor rule, FTs submit orders of the same size ex ante but receive varying
prices depending on their ex post realized positions in the queue. Figure 8 illustrates the equilibrium
when each FT can trade once under the EBS rule. When the batching interval is too short so the
number of FTs pooled together is small, FTs’ market power might even increase slightly because the
second fastest and third fastest FTs trade more aggressively knowing that they might trade ﬁrst.38
When the batching interval is long enough, the latency ﬂoor does reduce γ, albeit at a much slower
rate than is the case when all FTs have the same deterministic speed. Therefore, to improve market
quality, the platform needs to make sure enough randomness is added to the execution sequence.
38Yueshen (2013) points out a related eﬀect when positions in the queue are uncertain.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

5.2
Endogenous speed proﬁles
FTs’ speeds are given exogenously in the main model. We may endogenize speed proﬁles once the
cost C(δ) to achieve a certain latency δ is given.
When C(δ) is continuous, no two FTs would have the same speed in equilibrium. Suppose two
FTs trade at the same latency δ. As an FT’s proﬁt depends on her speed ranking, an FT can increase
her trading proﬁts by a strictly positive amount if she reduces her latency by any positive amount.
Because C(δ) is continuous, the cost of reducing the latency by an inﬁnitesimal amount converges to
zero. Hence, two FTs trading at the same speed never constitutes an equilibrium. Consequently,
FTs’ market power cannot be at the lower bound because endogenous speed proﬁles cannot be {N}
when C(δ) is continuous. One may improve market quality by adding discontinuity to the speed
cost function or the platform’s timestamps.
6
Conclusion
This paper shows that FTs’ aggregate market power depends crucially on the hierarchical structure
of their relative speeds even when prices are eﬀectively determined in uniform batch auctions. If
FTs’ order anticipation is deemed a serious threat to market quality, policymakers should explore
ways to reduce speed heterogeneity and encourage price or quantity competition between FTs.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Appendices
A
Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1. The informed trader buys when v > 0, so λP ≥0. Suppose λI < λP . Without
loss of generality, assume y > 0. If FTs trade, they trade in the same direction as y. Hence, the
total size of all market orders arriving during the trading round ¯y ≥y > 0. During the interval (0, 1]
passive liquidity providers sell shares at a price that is at most v0 + λI ¯y, which is lower than their
best estimate E[v|¯y] = v0 + λP ¯y. Hence they expect to lose.
Proof of Lemma 2. Without loss of generality, suppose that an FT anticipates a positive order
y > 0 will arrive at time 1 and purchases u shares before time 1. The total order-ﬂow excluding the
FT’s orders in the interval [0, 1] is η > 0 because all FTs observe y > 0. The FT cannot trade at
1+. Hence she may exit at time 1, before time 1, or after time 1+. (1) If she exits at time 1, her
exit price would be pAt = p0 + λI(u + η −u) = p0 + λIη. (2) If she exits before time 1, others’ total
order size is η′ ≤η −y < η. Her exit price would be pBefore = p0 + λI(u + η′ −u) < p0 + λIη = pAt.
(3) If she exits after time 1+, the closing price of the current trading round is p0 + λP (u + η)
and her exiting trade incurs a price impact of λfu.
Hence her expected exit price would be
pAfter = p0 + λP (u + η) −λfu = p0 + λP η + u(λP −λf) < p0 + λIη = pAt. Because pAt > pBefore
and pAt > pAfter, the FT is better oﬀexiting at time 1 than before or after.
Lemma A.1 (Informed trader’s strategy β). Given λI, the informed trader’s optimal trade size
is x = β (v −p0) where β =
1
2λI . Her maximized expected proﬁt at time 0+ is E

πI v, p0, λI
=
1
4λI (v −p0)2 .
Proof. Given the pricing function ptj = ptj−1+λIytj, the informed trader estimates that E[p1|v, p0, λI] =
p0 + λI E[x + z] = p0 + λIx. Her expected proﬁt is E[x(v −p1)|v, p0, λI] = x(v −p0 −λIx). Solve
the ﬁrst-order condition to ﬁnd that β =
1
2λI . Hence E[πI|v, p0, λI] =
1
4λI (v −p0)2.
Lemma A.2 (Permanent price impact λP ). Suppose the informed trader trades x = β(v −p0).
Passive liquidity providers set the ﬁnal quote at p1+ = E[v|F1] = v0 + λP (x + z) where λP =
βσ2
v
β2σ2v+σ2z .
Proof. The aggregate order-ﬂow between time 0 and time 1 is always y = x + z no matter whether
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

FTs observe y. FTs could split y into smaller orders when they trade. Their trading, however, does
not provide additional information regarding v. Hence passive liquidity providers estimate that
E[v|F1] = E[v|y = x + z] = v0 +
βσ2
v
β2σ2v+σ2z (x + z).
Lemma A.3 (FTs’ order size uj and Sj). Suppose the aggregate size of FTs’ trades at tj is
uj = αj(ˆy −Sj−1) for 1 ≤j ≤J. Then for 1 ≤j ≤J, uj = ˆyαj
Qj−1
i=0(1 −αi) and Sj = Pj
i=0 ui =
ˆy

1 −Qj
i=0(1 −αi)

.
Proof. Proof by induction. First, S0 = u0 = α0 = 0 by deﬁnition. Second, u1 = α1(ˆy −S0) = α1ˆy
and S1 = u0 + u1 = u1 = α1ˆy = ˆy (1 −(1 −α1)(1 −α0)). Third, suppose the result holds for
j ≤K. Then, uK+1 = αK+1 (ˆy −SK) = αK+1

ˆy −ˆy

1 −QK
i=0(1 −αi)

= ˆyαK+1
QK
i=0(1 −αi)
and SK+1 = uK+1 + SK = αK+1(ˆy −SK) + SK = αK+1ˆy + (1 −αK+1)SK = αK+1ˆy + (1 −
αK+1)ˆy

1 −QK
i=0(1 −αi)

= ˆy

1 −QK+1
i=0 (1 −αi)

. Hence, the result also holds for j = K+1.
Lemma A.4 (FTs’ proﬁts). Suppose the immediate price impact is λI and the aggregate size of
FTs’ trades at ti is ui = αi(ˆy −Si−1) for 1 ≤i ≤J. Conditional on Iy and Si−1, for k ≥0, the
expected proﬁt of all FTs from their trades at time ti+k is
E[πi+k|Iy] = λI (ˆy −Si−1)2
αi+k
1 −αi+k
 i+k
Y
j=i
(1 −αj)
!2
(23)
and FTs’ expected proﬁts from their trades from ti to tJ is
Vi(ˆy −Si−1) = λI (ˆy −Si−1)2 gi,
(24)
where gi := PJ
j=i

αj
1−αj
Qj
k=i(1 −αk)2
measures FTs’ market power from ti to tJ.
Proof. If ˆy = 0, FTs do not trade (uj = 0) and earn zero proﬁt.
Suppose ˆy = y̸ = 0.
The
expected proﬁt of all FTs from their trades at time ti is E[πi|Iy] = E[(p1 −pti−1 −λIui)ui|Iy] =
λI (ˆy −Si−1)2 (1 −αi)αi. Lemma A.3 implies that ˆy−Si+k−1
ˆy−Si−1
= Qi+k−1
j=i
(1 −αj). Hence,
E[πi+k|Iy] = λI (ˆy −Si+k−1)2 (1 −αi+k)αi+k = λI (ˆy −Si−1)2
αi+k
1 −αi+k
 i+k
Y
j=i
(1 −αj)
!2
(25)
Sum over k = 1, 2, · · · , J −i to ﬁnd that total expected proﬁts are λI(ˆy −Si−1)2gi.
Lemma A.5 (FTs’ strategy α). Given the signal Iy, the last traded price ptj−1, and other traders’
strategy parameters β, λI, λP , uj,−k := P
l̸=k uj,l, in the symmetric equilibrium, ui = αj(ˆy −Sj−1)
where αi =
ni(ni+1−2gi+1)
ni(ni+1−2gi+1)+ni+1 where gi is deﬁned in Eq. (19).
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Proof. At the last trading opportunity tJ, N FTs play a one-shot Cournot game. Hence, αJ =
N/(N + 1) and gJ = N/(1 + N)2. For 1 ≤i ≤J −1, by Lemma A.4, the expected proﬁt of all FTs
from time ti+1 to tJ is Vi+1(ˆy −Si) = gi+1λI (ˆy −Si−1 −ui,k −ui,−k)2, where ui,−k = ui −ui,k. At
time ti the k-th FT solves the following problem:
max
ui,k
λI (ˆy −Si−1 −ui,k −ui,−k) ui,k +
1
ni+1 gi+1λI (ˆy −Si−1 −ui,k −ui,−k)2
(26)
The second-order condition holds. The ﬁrst-order condition implies that ˆy −Si−1 −ui,k −ui,−k −
ui,k = 2gi+1
ni+1 (ˆy −Si−1 −ui,k −ui,−k). In the symmetric equilibrium, ui,−k = (ni −1)ui,k. Hence,
ui,k = αi
ni (ˆy −Sj−1), where αi =
ni(ni+1−2gi+1)
ni(ni+1−2gi+1)+ni+1 .
Lemma A.6 (Price impact parameters λI and λP ). If, at time 0, passive liquidity providers expect
to make zero proﬁt and the aggregate size of FTs’ trades at time tj is uj = αj (ˆy −Sj−1), then
λP = λI (1 −ργ) ,
γ =
J
X
j=1
 
αj(1 −αj)
j−1
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)2
!
,
α0 = 0,
(27)
Proof. The ﬁnal quote p1+ = p0 + λP y. At time 1, passive liquidity providers absorb the residual
order-ﬂow y −SJ at price p1 = p0 + λIy. By Lemma A.3, SJ = ˆy

1 −QJ
i=0(1 −αi)

. Thus, passive
liquidity providers’ expected proﬁt from the trade at time 1 is
E [(y −SJ) (p1 −p1+)] = Pr {Iy = y} E [(y −SJ) (p1 −p1+)|Iy = y] + Pr {Iy = 0} E [(y −SJ) (p1 −p1+)|Iy = 0]
= ρσ2
y(λI −λP )
 J
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)
!
+ (1 −ρ)σ2
y(λI −λP )
= σ2
y(λI −λP )
 
1 −ρ + ρ
J
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)
!
.
(28)
Because ptj = p0 + λISj = p0 + λI ˆy

1 −Qj
i=0(1 −αi)

, passive liquidity providers’ loss to FTs is
E

E

uj
 p1+ −ptj

|Iy

= E
"
uj
 
λP ˆy −λI ˆy
 
1 −
j
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)
!!#
(29)
= ρσ2
y
 
λP −λI + λI
j
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)
!
αj
j−1
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)
The last step holds because ˆy2 = y2 with probability ρ and 0 otherwise. Hence E[ˆy2] = ρ E[y2] = ρσ2
y.
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Passive liquidity providers’ total expected loss to the FTs is
J
X
j=1
ρσ2
yαj
j−1
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)
 
λP −λI + λI
j
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)
!
(30)
=ρσ2
y
 
λP −λI
J
X
j=1
αj
j−1
Y
i=0
(1 −αi) + λI
J
X
j=1
αj(1 −αj)
j−1
Y
i=0
(1 −αi)2
!
=ρσ2
y
 
λP −λI 
1 −
J
Y
j=1
(1 −αj)
!
+ λIγ
!
(31)
The last step uses Lemma A.3.
The zero-proﬁt condition implies that Equation (28) equals
Equation (31). Eliminating σ2
y > 0, we ﬁnd that λP = λI (1 −ργ).
Lemma A.7 (Decomposition of gi). gJ = αJ(1 −αJ). For l ≥1 and i + l ≤J,
gi =
i+l−1
X
j=i
 
αj
1 −αj
j
Y
k=i
(1 −αk)2
!
+ gi+l
i+l−1
Y
k=i
(1 −αk)2
(32)
In particular, gi = αi(1 −αi) + (1 −αi)2gi+1.
Proof. Easy to verify by deﬁnition.
Proof of Theorem 1. Lemma A.1 implies that λI =
1
2β. Lemma A.2 implies that λP =
βσ2
v
β2σ2v+σ2z .
Lemma A.6 implies that λP = λI(1 −ργ). Hence, β = σz
σv
q
1−ργ
1+ργ . Plug β back to ﬁnd λI and λP .
Lemma A.7 shows that we can ﬁnd αi and gi recursively from i = J to i = 1.
Lemma A.8 (Properties of gi and γ). For 1 ≤i ≤k ≤J, we have (1) 0 ≤gi ≤
J−i+1
2(J−i+2) < 0.5, (2)
∂gi
∂αk > 0 if αk ∈
h
0,
1
J−k+2
i
, (3)
∂gi
∂αk < 0 if αk ∈
h
1
J−k+2, 1
i
, (4) gi is maximized at
J−i+1
2(J−i+2) when
αk =
1
J−k+2 for all k, and (5)
∂gi
∂αk < 0 when αk ∈[0.5, 1]. γ = g1 also has above properties.
Proof. By assumption α0 = 0 and nk > 0. Hence αk ∈(0, 1) for k ≥1. When i = J, gi = αi(1 −αi).
It is maximized at 0.25 =
J−i+1
2(J−i+2) for αi = 0.5 = 1/(J −i + 2) and minimized at 0 for αi = 1. When
i < J, by Lemma A.7,
∂gi
∂αk =
 k−1
Y
j=i
(1 −αj)2
!
· ∂gk
∂αk =
 k−1
Y
j=i
(1 −αj)2
!
· ((1 −2αk) −gk+12(1 −αk))
(33)
We can verify that
∂gi
∂αk = 0 and ∂2gi
∂α2
k < 0 when α∗
k =
1
J−k+2 for all k. Given α∗(k), we can ﬁnd
g∗
k =
J−k+1
2(J−k+2) by induction. Hence, gi increases with αk when αk ∈[0, 1/(J −k + 2)] and decreases
with αk when αk ∈[
1
J−k+2, 1]. When αk =
1
J−k+2 for all i ≤k ≤J, gi is maximized at
J−i+1
2(J−i+2).
Because
1
J−k+2 ≤0.5,
∂γ
∂αk < 0 when αk ∈[0.5, 1].
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Lemma A.9. For i < J, αi increases with ni and decreases with gi+1/ni+1.
Proof. Lemma A.5 implies that αi =
1
1+ 1
ni
1
1−2gi+1/ni+1
. According to Lemma A.8, gi+1 ≤1/2 and
thus 0 ≤1 −2gi+1/ni+1. Therefore, αi increases with ni and decreases with gi+1/ni+1.
Proof of Proposition 1. First, Lemma A.9 implies that αi ≤limni+1→∞αi =
ni
ni+1. Second,
Lemma A.8 implies that gi+1 ≤
J−i
2(J−i+1). Hence, ni(1−2gi+1/ni+1) ≥ni −
ni
ni+1
J−i
J−i+1 ≥1−
J−i
J−i+1 =
1
J−i+1. Therefore, αi =
1
1+ 1
ni
1
1−2gi+1/ni+1
≥
1
1+J−i+1 =
1
J−i+2. The inequality binds when ni = ni+1
and gi+1 =
J−i
2(J−i+1). According to Lemma A.8, this is true only if αk =
1
J−k+2 for all k ≥i + 1,
which, by Equation (18), implies that ni = ni+1 = · · · = nJ = 1.
Proof of Proposition 2. Lemma A.4 on page 33 implies that, conditional on Iy, FTs’ total
expected proﬁt is V1(ˆy) = λI ˆy2γ. Hence, E [V1(ˆy)] = λIρσ2
yγ = ργλI(σ2
z + β2σ2
v) =
σvσz
√
1/(ργ)2−1,
which increases with ργ.
Lemma A.10 (gi increases with αk). For i ≤k,
∂gi
∂αk < 0.
Proof. By Proposition 1, αk ≥
1
J−i+2. Lemma A.8 then implies that ∂gi
∂αk < 0 for i ≤k.
Lemma A.11 (gi−k increases when ni decreases). Suppose ni decreases to n′
i > 0. (1) FTs’ market
power index γ = g1 increases. (2) For j > i, αj and gj are unaﬀected. (3) For j ≤i, αj decreases
and gj increases.
Proof. Prove by backward induction. (1) For j > i, all nj are unaﬀected. Using equations (18)
and Lemma A.7, we can show from j = J to j = i + 1 that all αj and gj are the same. (2) For
j = i, nj decreases. It follows from Lemma A.9 that αj falls. Lemma A.10 then implies that gj
increases. (3) For j = i −1, nj is unchanged but gj+1/nj+1 is higher. Due to Lemma A.9, αj falls.
Lemma A.10 then implies that gj increases. (4) Repeat step (3) for j = i −2, · · · , 1, we can show
that αj decreases and gj increases. In particular, γ = g1 increases.
Lemma A.12 (γ does not change after adding nJ+1 = ∞). γ{n1,··· ,nJ} = γ{n1,··· ,nJ,∞}.
Proof. For the speed proﬁle {n1, n2, · · · , nJ, ∞}, αJ+1 = 1, gJ+1 = 0. We can then show that the
two speed proﬁles have the same αi for 1 ≤i ≤J since their ﬁrst J elements are the same. Hence,
for 1 ≤i ≤J, gi are the same. In particular, they have the same γ = g1.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Lemma A.13 (γ decreases after removing n1). γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ} > γ{n2,n3,··· ,nJ} when n1 > 0.
Proof. By Lemma A.11, γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ} > γ{n2,n3,··· ,nJ,∞} since n2 ≥n1, · · · , nJ ≥nJ−1, and ∞> nJ.
By Lemma A.12, γ{n2,··· ,nJ} = γ{n2,··· ,nJ,∞}. Hence, γ{n2,n3,··· ,nJ} > γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ}.
Lemma A.14. Suppose all J elements of the speed proﬁle are equal, i.e., nj = n for all j. Then
FTs’ market power index increases with J and limJ→∞γ =
2
n+2+√
(n+2)2−8.
Proof. Let γ(J, n) denote the speed index of a speed ﬁle whose J elements are all n. By Lemma A.13
and Lemma A.8, γ(J, n) increases with J and is bounded above. Hence γ∗(n) := limJ→∞γ(J, n)
exists. Obviously γ∗(n) = limJ→∞gi = limJ→∞gi+1. By Theorem 1, for i < J, αi =
n−2gi+1
1+n−2gi+1 .
Hence, α∗= limJ→∞α =
n−2γ∗
1+n−2γ∗. Theorem 1 also implies that gi = αi(1 −αi) + (1 −αi)2gi+1.
Hence, γ∗(n) = 1−α∗
2−α∗=
1
1+
1
1−α∗=
1
2+n−2γ∗(J,n). Hence, γ∗(n) =
2
n+2+√
(n+2)2−8.
Proof of Proposition 3. Consider the case when at least one FT arrives at ti and at least another
FT arrives at ti+1. Hence ni+1 ≥2. The ratio of the two traders’ expected proﬁts
Vi(ˆy −Si−1)/ni
Vi+1 (ˆy −Si) /ni+1 = gini+1
gi+1ni
1
(1 −αi)2 = ni+1
gi+1 + ni+1
ni
−2 > ni+1
gi+1 −1 ≥
2
gi+1 −1
(34)
Lemma A.11 implies that gi+1 is maximized when ni+1 = · · · = nJ = 2.
By Lemma A.14,
gi+1 < γ∗(2) =
2
4+√
(4)2−8 ≈0.29 < 0.3. Hence,
2
gi+1 −1 >
2
0.3 −1 > 5.6. Repeat the above reasoning
k times and we see that
Vi(ˆy−Si−1)/ni
Vi+k(ˆy−Si)/ni+k > 5.6k.
Proof of Proposition 4. Given J and N, the general speed proﬁle is {n1, n2, · · · , nJ} where
nJ = N. By deﬁnition, for 1 ≤j ≤J −1, 1 ≤nj ≤nJ = N. By Lemma A.11, γ{1,··· ,1,N} ≤
γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ} ≤γ{N,N,··· ,N}. Also by Lemma A.11, given J, γ{1,··· ,1,N} ≤γ{1,··· ,1,1} =
J
2J+2 ≤0.5. By
Lemma A.13, γ{N,N,··· ,N} ≥γ{N} =
N
(N+1)2 .
Proof of Proposition 5. Suppose we start from a speed proﬁle (A) {n1, · · · , ni−1, ni, ni+1, · · · , nJ}.
If we bunch its i-th and i + 1-th elements, we obtain a speed proﬁle (B) {n1, · · · , ni−1, ni+1, · · · , nJ},
which has the same γ as another speed proﬁle (C): {n1, · · · , ni−1, ni+1, · · · , nJ, ∞} according to
Lemma A.12. As nj ≤nj+1, the k-th element of (A) is no greater than the k-th element of (C) for
1 ≤k ≤J −1. In addition, the J-th element of (A) is strictly less than the J-th element of (C) since
nJ < ∞. By Lemma A.11, γA < γC. Therefore, γA < γC = γB.
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Proof of Proposition 6. Suppose the entrant is slower than the fastest incumbents and arrives
at t1 ≤ti ≤tJ. The speed proﬁle becomes {n1, · · · , ni−1, ni + 1, ni+1 + 1, · · · , nJ + 1}. When i is
smaller, more elements of the speed proﬁle are increased by 1. Hence, by Lemma A.11, γ decreases
further when the entrant arrives earlier (but not before t1). Figure 3 shows an example in which
entry may increase γ when the entrant is much faster than all incumbents.
Proof of Proposition 7. First, suppose the FT who arrived at tj+1 now starts trading at tj
for j ≥1. The speed proﬁle then changes from {· · · nj, nj+1, · · · } to {· · · nj + 1, nj+1, · · · }. By
Lemma A.11, γ decreases. Second, suppose the speed proﬁle changes from {1, 2} to {1, 2, 2} because
the second-fastest FT becomes much faster. γ increases from 0.316 to 0.334.
Proof of Proposition 8. First, by Lemma A.12 γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ−1} = γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ−1,∞}. Second, by
Lemma A.11, γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ−1,∞} ≤γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ−1,nJ} ≤γ{n1,n2,··· ,nJ−1,nJ−1}. Hence, γ falls every time
we remove the last element and we deduce that γ{n1,n2,··· ,nj,··· ,nJ} ≥γ{n1,n2,··· ,nj}.
Proof of Proposition 9. By deﬁnition, γ = (1 −α1) (α1 + g2(1 −α1)). Lemma A.8 implies that
0 < g2 < 0.5.
First, if limN→∞n1 = ∞, then α1 =
n1
1+n1 →1 and γ →0.
Second, since
0 < α1(1 −α1) < γ, γ →0 implies that α1 →1 or α1 →0. If α1 →0, then g2 →γ →0. However,
if g2 →0, α1 =
1
1+
n2
n1(n2−2g2) →
n1
1+n1 > 0. Contradictory. Hence, γ →0 implies that α1 →1, which
implies that n1 →∞.
Proof of Proposition 10. Proposition 2 shows that FTs’ aggregate proﬁt E [V1(ˆy)] = λIρσ2
yγ =
ργλI(σ2
z + β2σ2
v) =
σvσz
√
1/(ργ)2−1. Noise traders trade z shares at price p1. Their proﬁt is E

πN
=
E [−z(p1 −p0)] = −λIσ2
z = −
q
1+ργ
1−ργ
σvσz
2
The informed trader’s trading proﬁt is σvσz
2
q
1+ργ
1−ργ −
2
√
1/(ργ)2−1

=
σvσz
2
q
1−ργ
1+ργ . Noise traders and the informed trader’s proﬁts both decrease with ργ.
Proof of Proposition 11. The normal-speed liquidity demanders’ order size y ∼N
 0, σ2
y

. When
FTs do not trade, their volume is zero. Let Ω= 1 −QJ
i=0(1 −αi). When FTs trade, they initiate
trades of 2|SJ| units, where SJ ∼N(0, Ω2σ2
y) according to Lemma A.3. We know from statistics
that E [|y|] = σy
q
2
π =
2σz
√
π(1+ργ) and E [|SJ|] = ρΩE [|y|] =
2ρΩσz
√
π(1+ργ). Therefore, the fraction of
the volume initiated by FTs is
E[2|SJ|]
E[|y|+2|SJ|] =
2ρΩ
1+2ρΩ, which increases with ρ. By Proposition 10, the
informed and noise traders earn lower proﬁts.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Proof of Proposition 12. At time 1+, the order-ﬂow y = x + z = β(v −v0) + z is revealed. Thus,
Var[v|F1+] = Var[v|y] =
σ2
vσ2
z
β2σ2v+σ2z . The ex post information eﬃciency φ1+ =
β2σ2
v
β2σ2v+σ2z = 1−ργ
2
. At
time t1, with probability ρ, FTs trade and passive liquidity providers infer y from u1 based on FTs’
strategy given in Theorem 1. In this case Var [v|Ft1] = Var[v|y] and φt1 = φ1+ = 1−ργ
2
. With
probability 1 −ρ, FTs do not trade and Var [v|Ft1] = Var[v]. In this case φt1 = 0. Thus, at time 0,
the expected intermediate information eﬃciency φt1 = ρφ1+ = ρ1−ργ
2
. Since ργ < 0.5, φt1 increases
with ρ.
Proof of Proposition 13. Suppose trader 1 chooses order size u1. In a symmetric equilibrium,
every other FT trades u shares. u1 has the same probability of being placed at each position in the
queue. Hence, the FT’s expected proﬁt is
E [u1(p1 −pu1)|ˆy] = λI
N (u1(ˆy −u1) + u1(ˆy −u −u1) + · · · + u1(ˆy −(N −1)u −u1))
(35)
= λI

ˆyu1 −u2
1 −N −1
2
uu1

Hence the optimal u∗
1 = 1
2
 ˆy −N−1
2 u

. Due to symmetry, u∗
1 = u and we ﬁnd u∗=
2ˆy
N+3. The
aggregate proﬁt of FTs conditional on Iy is PN
i=1 u∗λI(ˆy −iu∗) = λI ˆy2
4N
(N+3)2 . Therefore, FTs’
market power is γ =
4N
(N+3)2 .
B
Extension: Nonlinear pricing schedules
In the main model, I assume that traders follow linear strategies to obtain closed-form solutions
(Assumption 1). In this section I describe an alternative model in which traders’ strategies are
nonlinear and present a numerically solved equilibrium. FTs’ impact on normal-speed liquidity
demanders and market quality are similar to their impact in the main model.
For ease of exposition, I describe only the oﬀer side of the limit order book and consider the
situation in which the incoming market order is a buy order. Speciﬁcally, as in Glosten (1994), passive
liquidity providers jointly form a limit order book represented by the marginal pricing function P(q),
where q is the quantity. Upon seeing P(q), a normal-speed liquidity demander submits a market buy
order of size y. With probability µ, the trader is informed and with probability 1 −µ, the trader is
a noise trader. Passive liquidity providers are perfectly competitive. When setting P(q), they do
not observe y and know only that the limit order at q will be executed if y ≥q. Hence they set
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

P(q) = E [v|y ≥q], which is nonlinear in general.
Some FTs may anticipate normal-speed liquidity demanders’ orders. If, with probability 1 −ρ,
the incoming market order is not anticipated by FTs, the liquidity demander buys directly from
passive liquidity providers at cost
R y
0 P(q)dq. If, with probability ρ, FTs observe y before the order
arrives in the market, the FTs immediately use market orders to buy y shares from the limit order
book at the cost
R y
0 P(q)dq and place limit sell orders of size y at price P(y). An instant later, the
normal-speed liquidity demander’s order arrives and executes against FTs’ limit sell orders. The
liquidity demander eﬀectively pays yP(y) to buy y shares. FTs hold zero inventory and earn a
proﬁt of yP(y) −
R y
0 P(q)dq. FTs eﬀectively turn a discriminatory pricing schedule into a uniform
price auction for liquidity demanders. FTs’ trading results in “phantom liquidity” that sometimes
disappears right before a market order arrives.
Unlike in the main model, FTs do not levy the speed tax on passive liquidity providers. Instead,
they directly tax liquidity demanders. When FTs are absent (ρ = 0), the informed trader simply
purchases all shares priced below v in the limit order book to maximize her proﬁt. When FTs
are present (ρ > 0), the informed trader has to trade less aggressively. Consider, for example, the
extreme case when FTs always anticipate the incoming market order (ρ = 1). Suppose the informed
trader submits an order to buy shares priced below w. Due to FTs’ trades, the informed trader
would pay w for every share and earn a proﬁt of v −w per share. Hence, the informed trader has to
trade less aggressively (w < v) to earn positive proﬁts. In general, the optimal limit price w depends
on v, ρ, and P(q).
I generalize the numerical procedure of Baruch and Glosten (2017) to ﬁnd the marginal pricing
schedule P(q) and the informed trader’s highest price to buy W(v) jointly. Liquidity providers’
inference function can be represented by G(p) = W −1(p): if a limit sell order at price p is hit,
liquidity providers infer that v ≥G(p). The algorithm is as follows.
1. Guess an initial G0(p). For example, we may start with G0(p) = p, which is the correct
inference function in Baruch and Glosten (2017), where no FTs exist.
2. Given Gi(p), ﬁnd the competitive pricing schedule Pi(q). Speciﬁcally, generalizing Baruch and
Glosten (2017), we can ﬁnd Pi(q) by ﬁnding a price p that solves 0 = ¯α(p) + β(p) · Pr(z ≥q),
where ¯α(p) = µ
R ∞
Gi(p)(p −t)fv(t)dt and β(p) = (1 −µ) (p −E[v]) for every quantity q.
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

3. Given Pi(q), ﬁnd the informed trader’s order- size function Xi(v). Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd a
quantity x that maximizes vx −(1 −ρ)
R x
0 Pi(q)dq −ρxPi(x) for every v.
4. Given Pi(q) and Xi(v), we have Gi+1(p) := W −1
i
(p) = X−1
i
 P −1
i
(p)

. The informed customer
would buy up to price Pi(Xi(v)). Then, if a limit sell order at price p is hit, one can infer that the
informed customer’s highest price to buy Pi(Xi(v)) ≥p, which implies that v ≥X−1
i
 P −1
i
(p)

.
5. If Gi(p) and Gi+1(p) diﬀer signiﬁcantly, increase i by one and go back to step 2. Otherwise,
we stop the iteration and Pi(q) is considered the equilibrium pricing schedule.
Figure 9 illustrates an example. When FTs are present, although passive liquidity providers
may actually charge a lower marginal price P(q) (Panel (a)), normal-speed liquidity demanders
expect to pay a higher price for any order because FTs might anticipate their orders (Panel (b)).
Consequently, the informed trader trades less aggressively for any v (Panel (c)). A market order is
thus less likely to be informed (Panel (d)). Therefore, just like in the main model, although FTs
seemingly “provide liquidity” to normal-speed liquidity demanders when they arrive at the market
and trade in informative directions, they make liquidity demanders worse oﬀand the order-ﬂow less
informative.
The magnitude of FTs’ speed advantage is irrelevant here because we assume all passive liquidity
providers’ orders are placed before FTs start trading so that one FT can use one order to take out
all standing limit sell orders, eﬀectively assuming J = ∞. If some passive liquidity providers’ limit
orders arrive after the fastest FT starts trading, faster FTs can pick oﬀthese limit orders more
eﬃciently because of their higher trading frequencies.
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

0
1
2
3
4
5
quantity q
0
1
2
3
4
marginal price P(q)
(a) marginal price charged
by passive liquidity providers
without FTs
with FTs
0
1
2
3
4
5
trade size q
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
expected average price
(b) expected average price paid
by liquidity demanders
without FTs
with FTs
0
1
2
3
4
5
true value v
0
2
4
highest price to buy W(v)
(c) informed trader’s strategy
without FTs
with FTs
0
1
2
3
4
5
quantity q
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Pr(informed|y = q)
(d) posterior probability of informed
without FTs
with FTs
Figure 9.
Impact of FTs when pricing schedules are non-linear. True value v ∼N(0, 1). Noise
trading z ∼N(0, 1). Probability of informed trading µ = 0.2. Probability of order anticipation
ρ = 0.5.
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

References
Adrian, Tobias, Agostino Capponi, Erik Vogt, and Hongzhong Zhang, “Intraday Market Making
with Overnight Inventory Costs,” Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper DP12245, 2017.
Angel, James J., Lawrence E. Harris, and Chester S. Spatt, “Equity Trading in the 21st Century,”
The Quarterly Journal of Finance, 2011, 1 (01), 1–53.
Baldauf, Markus and Joshua Mollner, “Fast Traders Make a Quick Buck: The Role of Speed in Liquidity
Provision,” Available at SSRN 2640823, 2015.
Baron, Matthew, Jonathan Brogaard, and Andrei Kirilenko, “The Trading Proﬁts of High Frequency
Traders,” NBER Working Paper, 2012.
Baruch, Shmuel and Lawrence R. Glosten, “Tail Expectation, Imperfect Competition, and the Phenomenon of Flickering Quotes in Limit Order Book Markets,” Working paper, 2017.
Bernhardt, Dan and Bart Taub, “Front-running Dynamics,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2008, 138 (1),
288–296.
Biais, Bruno and Paul Woolley, “High Frequency Trading,” Working paper, 2011.
, Thierry Foucault, and Sophie Moinas, “Equilibrium Fast Trading,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2015, 116 (2), 292 – 313.
Boehmer, Ekkehart, Dan Li, and Gideon Saar, “The Competitive Landscape of High-Frequency Trading
Firms,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2018, p. hhx144.
Breckenfelder, Johannes, “Competition among High-Frequency Traders and Market Quality,” Working
paper, 2019.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Björn Hagströmer, Lars Nordén, and Ryan Riordan, “Trading Fast and Slow:
Colocation and Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2015, 28 (12), 3407–3443.
, Terrence Hendershott, and Ryan Riordan, “High Frequency Trading and Price Discovery,”
Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (8), 2267–2306.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., “Information Leakage and Market Eﬃciency,” Review of Financial Studies,
2005, 18 (2), 417–457.
and Lasse Heje Pedersen, “Predatory Trading,” Journal of Finance, August 2005, 60 (4),
1825–1863.
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim, “The High-Frequency Trading Arms Race: Frequent
Batch Auctions as a Market Design Response,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2015, 130 (4).
Carlin, Bruce Ian, Miguel Sousa Lobo, and S. Viswanathan, “Episodic Liquidity Crises: Cooperative
and Predatory Trading,” Journal of Finance, October 2007, 62 (5), 2235–2274.
Carrion, Allen, “Very Fast Money: High-frequency Trading on the NASDAQ,” Journal of Financial Markets,
2013, 16 (4).
Cartea, Álvaro and José Penalva, “Where is the Value in High Frequency Trading?,” Quarterly Journal
of Finance, 2012, 02 (03), 1250014.
Chaboud, Alain, Ben Chiquoine, Erik Hjalmarsson, and Clara Vega, “Rise of the Machines: Algorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market,” Journal of Finance, October 2014, LXIX (5).
Clark-Joseph, Adam D., “Exploratory Trading,” Harvard University Working Paper, 2013.
Daughety, Andrew F., “Beneﬁcial Concentration,” The American Economic Review, 1990, 80 (5), 1231–
1237.
Dugast, Jerome and Thierry Foucault, “Data Abundance and Asset Price Informativeness,” Working
Paper, Available at SSRN, 2017.
Egginton, Jared F., Bonnie F. Van Ness, and Robert A. Van Ness, “Quote Stuﬃng,” Financial
Management, 2016, 45 (3), 583–608.
Engelberg, Joseph, Caroline Sasseville, and Jared Williams, “Market Madness? The Case of “Mad
Money”,” Management Science, 2012, 58 (2), 351–364.
Foster, F. Douglas and S. Viswanathan, “Strategic Trading with Asymmetrically Informed Traders and
Long-lived Information,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 1994, 29 (4), 499–518.
Foucault, Thierry, Johan Hombert, and Ioanid Rosu, “News Trading and Speed,” The Journal of
Finance, 2016, 71 (1), 335–382.
Gai, Jiading, Chen Yao, and Mao Ye, “The Externality of High Frequency Trading,” Working Paper,
2012.
Glosten, Lawrence R., “Is the Electronic Open Limit Order Book Inevitable?,” Journal of Finance, 1994,
pp. 1127–1161.
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Hagströmer, Björn and Lars Nordén, “The Diversity of High-frequency Traders,” Journal of Financial
Markets, 2013, 16 (4).
Harris, Larry, “What to Do about High-Frequency Trading,” Financial Analysts Journal, 2013, 69 (2).
Hasbrouck, Joel, “Modeling market microstructure time series,” Handbook of Statistics, 1996, 14, 647–692.
and Gideon Saar, “Technology and Liquidity Provision: the Blurring of Traditional Deﬁnitions,”
Journal of Financial Markets, 2009, 12 (2), 143–172.
and
, “Low-latency Trading,” Journal of Financial Markets, 2013, 16 (4).
Hendershott, Terrence and Ryan Riordan, “Algorithmic Trading and the Market for Liquidity,” Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Forthcoming, 2012.
, Charles M. Jones, and Albert J. Menkveld, “Does Algorithmic Trading Improve Liquidity?,”
Journal of Finance, 2011, 66 (1), 1–33.
Hirschey, Nicholas H., “Do High-Frequency Traders Anticipate Buying and Selling Pressure?,” Working
Paper, 2013.
Hirshleifer, David, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Sheridan Titman, “Security Analysis and Trading Patterns when Some Investors Receive Information before Others,” Journal of Finance, 1994, 49 (5),
1665–1698.
Hoﬀmann, Peter, “A Dynamic Limit Order Market with Fast and Slow Traders,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2014, 113 (1), 156 – 169.
Holden, Craig W. and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, “Long-lived Private Information and Imperfect
Competition,” Journal of Finance, 1992, pp. 247–270.
Hu, Edwin, “Intentional Access Delays, Market Quality, and Price Discovery: Evidence from IEX Becoming
an Exchange,” SSRN Working Paper, 2019.
Jovanovic, Boyan and Albert J. Menkveld, “Middlemen in Limit-order Markets,” Working Paper, 2016.
Julien, Ludovic A., Olivier Musy, and Aurélien W. Saïdi, “On Hierarchical Competition in Oligopoly,”
Journal of Economics, 2012, 107 (3), 217–237.
Kirilenko, Andrei, Albert S. Kyle, Mehrdad Samadi, and Tugkan Tuzun, “The Flash Crash:
High-Frequency Trading in an Electronic Market,” The Journal of Finance, 2017, 72 (3), 967–998.
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121

Korajczyk, Robert A and Dermot Murphy, “High-Frequency Market Making to Large Institutional
Trades,” The Review of Financial Studies, 07 2018, 32 (3), 1034–1067.
Kyle, Albert S., “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading,” Econometrica, November 1985, 53 (6),
1315–1336.
Lewis, Michael, Flash Boys, W. W. Norton & Company, 2014.
Martinez, Victor and Ioanid Rosu, “High Frequency Traders, News and Volatility,” Working Paper,
2013.
Menkveld, Albert J., “High Frequency Trading and the New Market Makers,” Journal of Financial Markets,
2013, 16 (4), 712–740.
, “The Economics of High-Frequency Trading: Taking Stock,” Annual Review of Financial Economics,
2016, 8 (1).
Menkveld, Albert J and Marius A Zoican, “Need for speed? Exchange Latency and Liquidity,” The
Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (4), 1188–1228.
Pagano, Marco and Ailsa Röell, “Front-running and Stock Market Liquidity,” Financial Markets’
Liberalisation and the Role of Banks, 1993, 178.
Patterson, Scott, Dark Pools: The Rise of the Machine Traders and the Rigging of the U.S. Stock Market,
Crown Business, 2013.
Sağlam, Mehmet, “Order anticipation around predictable trades,” Financial Management, 2018, 0 (0).
SEC, “Concept Release on Equity Market Structure,” Release No. 34-61358; File No. S7-02-10., 2010.
Tong, Lin, “A Blessing or a Curse? The Impact of High Frequency Trading on Institutional Investors,”
Available at SSRN 2330053, 2015.
Watt, Richard, “A Generalized Oligopoly Model,” Metroeconomica, 2002, 53 (1), 46–55.
Yang, Liyan and Haoxiang Zhu, “Back-running: Seeking and Hiding Fundamental Information in Order
Flows,” Review of Financial Studies, 2019.
Yueshen, Bart Zhou, “Queuing Uncertainty,” Working Paper, 2013.
47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2365121
