High-Frequency Trading Competition∗
Jonathan Brogaard†
Corey Garriott‡
February 16, 2018
ABSTRACT
Theory on high-frequency traders (HFT) predicts that market liquidity for a security decreases in the number of HFT trading the security. We test this prediction by
studying a new Canadian stock exchange, Alpha, that experienced the entry of 11 HFT
ﬁrms over four years. Bid-ask spreads on Alpha converge to those at the Toronto Stock
Exchange as more HFT trade on Alpha. Eﬀective and realized spreads for nonHFT
improve as HFT ﬁrms enter the market. To explain the contrast with theory, which
models HFT as a price competitor, we provide evidence more consistent with HFT
ﬁtting a quantity competitor framework.
JEL classiﬁcation: G20, G14, L10
Internet Appendix
∗We are grateful to Michael Brolley, David Cimon, Thierry Foucault, Bjorn Hagstromer, Terry Hendershott, Albert Menkveld, Pamela Moulton, Christopher Parsons, Talis Putnins, Ryan Riordan, Gideon Saar,
and Joshua Slive for advice and suggestions; to seminar participants at the Canadian Economic Association,
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Financial Risks International Forum, Ontario Securities Commission, SFS Cavalcade, Stockholm Business School, Vienna HFT: Curse or Blessing, and the Western Financial
Association; and to Adrian Eng and Faith Chin for their research assistance. This article is an extension of
the Bank of Canada working paper by the same name. All errors are our own.
†Foster School of Business, University of Washington. E-mail: jbrogaard@uw.edu.
‡Bank of Canada, Financial Markets Department. E-mail: cgarriott@bankofcanada.ca.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Competition in equity markets was once quite restricted. In the past, traders could access
markets such as the NYSE only by purchasing seat membership, a privilege that has cost
millions of dollars. Membership allowed a trader to work on the exchange ﬂoor, watching
the market directly and reacting immediately. As Ho and Stoll (1980) put it: “Because of
his proximity to the market, the dealer would generally be expected to oﬀer better prices
than an ordinary investor faced with higher communication, waiting, and transfer cost.”
Membership thus limited competition to those who could pay.
Exchanges had to limit competition because they could accommodate only so many
people on the premises. With the development of low-cost microelectronics, physical space
is no longer a binding constraint. Space near a computer server is far less scarce than space
on a trading ﬂoor, and accordingly many exchanges oﬀer electronic access to markets at much
lower prices.1 The chief beneﬁciaries of this democratization of competition have been the
community of high-frequency traders (HFT), private trading companies that now compete
with major ﬁnancial institutions (Jones 2013).
One might expect fanfare associated with a decline in costs that opened markets to a new
kind of trader. Instead, ﬁnancial institutions have expressed concern about HFT, in part
due to frequent “ﬂash crash” events.2 In the academic literature as well, existing theory has
negative conclusions on high-frequency competition in markets. A common concern is that
HFT trade mostly to “snipe” other market participants before they can remove stale prices.
Menkveld and Zoican (2017) and Budish et al. (2015) predict that as the number of HFT
rises, bid-ask spreads get no better or worse.3
In this paper we test the theoretical predictions using a sample of data uniquely suited to
document what happens as the number of HFT increases. The dataset comes from Alpha, a
new Canadian stock market that started the sample with no HFT presence and experienced
1For example, NYSE charges an initial co-location fee of $5,000 per cabinet with a monthly fee depending
on electricity usage. See the current NYSE price list, page 21.
2See “Market Participants’ Concerns” in remarks by Fischer (2016).
3Proposition 2.2 of Menkveld and Zoican (2017) predicts that bid-ask spreads get worse in the number
of HFT; proposition 1.i of Budish et al. (2015) predicts that HFT competition creates a nonzero spread but
one invariant to the number of HFT.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

the arrival of multiple HFT ﬁrms over four years. The scenario enables us to observe the
impact on liquidity at a market as its industrial organization transitions from no HFT to
many HFT. The datasest includes complete order-book data with counterparty information.
To identify the impact of competition on liquidity, we use a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event
study on markets for 279 stocks that saw a steady, staggered entry of 11 HFT ﬁrms during
the four-year sample.
We ﬁnd HFT competition improves liquidity. For the ﬁrst ﬁve months of the sample,
bid-ask spreads on Alpha were worse than its larger rival, the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Then, a series of HFT ﬁrms began trading on Alpha and brought its spreads in line with the
larger market. Using the event study, we ﬁnd HFT entry leads to better liquidity metrics for
nonHFT trading on Alpha. The result contrasts with theory, and we explain the contrast
by showing the data are not easy to reconcile with an assumption underpinning the theory,
which is that HFT is a price competitor. We conclude that wider electronic access to equity
markets is good for liquidity, whereas barriers to entry could limit the beneﬁt.
Our data come from Alpha, one of the ﬁrst equity alternative trading systems (ATS)
in Canada. As an ATS founded in 2008, Alpha was a member of the wave of new trading
venues that launched in the 2000s in the United States, Europe, and Canada after regulatory
changes allowed for more trading outside of the primary stock exchange. Alpha was the most
successful Canadian ATS by volume, exceeding a 20% volume share in January 2010. Since
Alpha was a successful ATS, its data can provide a good test of the importance of industrial
organization within a single market.
The data contain complete order-book information and an anonymous counterparty code
that distinguishes unique direct-access members. The counterparty codes on Alpha enable
the empirical identiﬁcation of HFT ﬁrms using the ﬁrms’ inventory and trading behaviour.
The ﬁrms in the sample have an advantageous sequence of entry for the study. There were
no HFT ﬁrms during the ﬁrst ﬁve months, and then 11 ﬁrms steadily enter during the time
period, November 2008 to September 2012.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

The essence of our results can be seen in Figure 1, which compares bid-ask spreads on
Alpha to the TSX as sequential HFT ﬁrms start trading stocks on Alpha. In the ﬁgure, if
a ﬁrm is the second to arrive, bid-ask spreads on Alpha tighten but do not reach the level
of the TSX. The same is true if the ﬁrm is the third to arrive. It takes four ﬁrms before
Alpha bid-ask spreads resemble the TSX. We interpret the graph as prima facie evidence
that liquidity improves in the number of HFT ﬁrms trading at a market.
FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE
To establish identiﬁcation, we run a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on HFT entry
events. An HFT entry event is the ﬁrst day an HFT ﬁrm trades material volume (1,000
shares) of a stock. To focus on permanent changes in the industrial organization, we select
entry events in which the entrant continues trading the stock through a three-month study
window. To control for any liquidity trends on Alpha, given it was a growing stock market,
we match Alpha stocks to other Alpha stocks.
Event-study methodology requires the events to be exogenous to the variables of interest
during the event window of the study. This is likely in our scenario as HFT ﬁrms were
attracted to Alpha because of the wide spreads and low competition compared to other markets, meaning they were attracted by long-term proﬁt opportunities. Indeed, we can predict
how many HFT eventually enter a stock on Alpha using the stock’s long-term characteristics.
However, we ﬁnd little evidence that the timing of entry can be explained during the event
windows of the study, meaning that HFTs are not apparently timing their entry based on
short-term market conditions. Entry cannot be predicted using daily, weekly and monthly
levels and diﬀerences of spreads, volatility and volumes from Alpha and the TSX. While
entry is endogenous to the long-term industrial organization, the evidence does not suggest
HFTs enter due to temporary variation in liquidity conditions.
We evaluate passive and aggressive HFT separately so we can distinguish between the
eﬀect we expect each type to have. Passive HFT strategies, those that use primarily limit or3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

ders, are associated with liquidity supply strategies (A¨ıt-Sahalia and Saglam 2013; Hoﬀmann
2014). Therefore we expect that as passive HFTs enter and compete with each other liquidity
will improve. Aggressive HFT strategies, those that use primarily marketable orders, are
associated with short-lived arbitrage opportunities (Biais et al. 2015). If liquidity takers are
merely aggravating frictions associated with delays in information dissemination, we expect
liquidity to deteriorate.
Our highlighted results are as follows. We begin with graphical evidence. In Figure 1,
shown above, spreads on Alpha converge to those at the TSX as more HFT trade. In a
second graph, spreads also improve in the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index of HFT competition.
Having presented graphical evidence, we next use the event study to estimate the impact
of HFT entry on execution costs for nonHFT traders. For entrants who use mostly passive
orders we ﬁnd costs improve. For entrants who use mostly aggressive orders we ﬁnd minor
evidence of improvement. Unlike with dealers in Ellis et al. (2002), HFT competition has
meaningful long-term impact. In separate regressions on the ﬁrst, second and third months
after entry, entrants who use passive orders improve liquidity through time.
Our results use data from the Canadian Alpha exchange and an empirical deﬁnition of
HFT, so we cannot infer they apply universally. Still, the ﬁndings contrast with models
of HFT competition. In the models, HFT ﬁrms who use passive orders have no impact on
liquidity, and HFT ﬁrms who use aggressive orders make liquidity worse. We ﬁnd instead that
passive HFT entry improves liquidity and that aggressive HFT entry leads to no identiﬁable
harm.
In our view, the models make predictions contrasting with the data because of their
assumptions on the industrial organization. Liquidity supply is assumed to be price competitive, meaning that successive HFT entrants have nothing to contribute to liquidity by
deﬁnition. An alternative tradition in market microstructure assumes that competition can
have a positive role because the industry is quantity competitive (Kyle 1989; Subrahmanyam
1991; Biais et al. 2000; Bondarenko 2001). We ﬁnd the data are more consistent with HFT
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

being a quantity competitor. The data support three predictions about ﬁrm entry that are
typical of quantity competition but that are inconsistent with simple price competition: entry
enlarges the market; entrants seize market share from incumbents; and entry leads incumbents to lower prices. Since we lack data on costs at HFTs, we cannot reject conclusively
the assumption of price competition, but we can show the data are easier to explain from a
perspective of quantity competition.
The ﬁndings contribute to empirical work on HFT and competition. Breckenfelder (2013)
and Boehmer et al. (2016) study variation in HFT presence in an equilibrium setting, in markets that have the equilibrium number of HFT. We diﬀer by focusing on long-term changes
to the market structure, which allows us to focus on conclusions regarding industrial organization rather than those on HFT’s response to market conditions. Our paper compliments
Menkveld (2013), who studies a single HFT entry event in detail. While Menkveld (2013)
focuses on liquidity supply following the entrant of one HFT, we investigate how existing
HFT respond as new HFT entrants arrive to the market.
A related study by Baron et al. (2016) also studies the implications of HFT competition.
While our paper argues that HFT competition is good for market liquidity, Baron et al.
(2016) argues that the environment that generates HFT competition is fragile.
In this
paper, we conclude that HFT competition can reduce HFT revenues, whereas Baron et al.
(2016) argues that competition among HFT is limited by relative speed, and as a result
HFT proﬁts remain high. Baron et al. (2016) would suggest that when the Alpha market
has matured that HFT proﬁts would still be higher than one would predict if Alpha were a
perfectly competitive marketplace.
I.
Data
The data for this study come from the Canadian stock exchange Alpha. Alpha opened
for trade November 2008. In January 2009, Alpha grew to host the second-largest share of
trading volume in Canada, and in January 2010, it hosted 20% of Canadian trading volume.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Alpha was an ATS until April 2012, when it became a listing exchange. It was independently
operated until merging with the TMX Group as part of the Maple transaction in August
2012.
Alpha provided order-book data from its ﬁrst day of business, 7 November 2008, to 25
September 2012. The data contain all limit-order inserts, updates, ﬁlls, and cancels with
millisecond timestamp, side, and initiation. To focus on larger stocks we sample only stocks
that have both more trading volume and a higher market capitalization than the least-traded
and least-capitalized stock in the S&P TSX 60 index as of September 2012. Figure 2 displays
the time-series distribution of overall equity trading volume for the 279 stocks sampled in
this study.
FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE
Each order contains an anonymous counterparty ﬁeld populated by an Alpha employee on
an ad hoc basis based on Alpha’s internal knowledge of its customer base. The ﬁeld consists
of numerical codes giving three pieces of counterparty information: a code identifying orders
from known smart-order routers, a code identifying the known brand of order-management
system used to disseminate an order, and an anonymous code identifying a known unique
direct-access market participant (distinguished from its broker).
The code allows us to
identify the date each direct-access market participant begins trading.
Our counterparty identiﬁcation is conﬁned to Alpha, so we do not track the activities
of an HFT ﬁrm across markets. Although questions about cross-market competition are
interesting, the instrument of increasing HFT participation in one market is suﬃcient for
our research question. In equity markets, the trading platform is the basic market structure
at which open trading occurs. To provide a market-wide view, we draw additional data
on TSX prices, volumes and bid-ask spreads from Bloomberg, and we compare liquidity
conditions on Alpha to the TSX as HFT ﬁrms enter.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

A.
Identifying HFT ﬁrms
To identify HFT ﬁrms we ﬁrst exclude smart-order routers and ﬁrms that use ordermanagement systems. For the remainder we use criteria from the literature to distinguish
HFT ﬁrms from other algorithmic traders (Kirilenko et al. 2017). An HFT ﬁrm must carry
less than 15% of its daily volume overnight and must switch sign at least 40% of the time for a
contiguous two weeks of trading days. The ﬁrst criterion distinguishes HFT from algorithmic
execution, as HFT ﬁrms should not build a position. The second criterion distinguishes HFT
from strategies that bear substantial price risk overnight. A ﬁrm code marked as an HFT
for any stock is marked as an HFT for every stock. The criteria identify 11 HFT ﬁrms.
The inventory threshold is above 0% because there are multiple markets for the stocks
traded on Alpha. An HFT ﬁrm may open a position on one venue and close it on another,
resulting in what would appear to be an inventory position from the researcher’s perspective
even if the trader is net neutral.
Theory on HFT competition distinguishes between HFTs that trade passively and HFTs
that trade aggressively. In the models, at most one HFT engages in a price-competitive
strategy of market making, and the others choose to adversely select market makers using
aggressive trades. To address the theory, we study both strategies separately. Passive HFT
strategies, namely those that use primarily limit orders, are associated with liquidity supply
strategies (A¨ıt-Sahalia and Saglam 2013; Hoﬀmann 2014). We identify an entrant as passive if
it trades passively two-thirds of the time. We expect that as passive HFTs enter and compete
with each other that liquidity will improve. Aggressive HFT strategies, namely those that use
primarily marketable orders, are associated with short-lived arbitrage opportunities (Biais
et al. 2015).
We identify an entrant as aggressive if it trades aggressively two-thirds of
the time. If liquidity takers merely aggravate frictions associated with delays in information
dissemination, we expect liquidity to deteriorate. The identiﬁcation of passive and aggressive
is done on a stock-entry basis, so the same ﬁrm can be a diﬀerent type on two diﬀerent stocks.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

B.
Identifying HFT entry dates
An HFT ﬁrm stock-entry date is the calendar date on which a ﬁrm ﬁrst trades at least
ten lots (1,000 shares) on Alpha and does not stop trading for three months, the size of
our post-period treatment window. The threshold of 10 lots is greater than the trade-size
minimum of one lot to exclude days on which the participant is merely testing its connection.
HFT ﬁrms in the data that delay their next day of trade in a stock do so by a median of six
days; of the ﬁrms that delay, all of them trade only 100 shares on their ﬁrst day. We study
only ﬁrst entries.
Entry events are speciﬁc to the stock and HFT ﬁrm, so the same HFT ﬁrm can have
diﬀerent entry dates for diﬀerent stocks. There is variation in how many stocks an entrant
begins trading or stops trading at a time. Most entrants start trading several stocks on the
same day. The day a HFT ﬁrm begins trading it starts trading a median of seven stocks and
a mean of 20.6 stocks. The largest number of stocks a ﬁrm begins trading on the same day
is 81. Figure 3 gives more information on variation in HFT presence in the sample.
FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE
Panel A of the ﬁgure plots the average number of HFT per stock during the sample. The
statistic remains at zero during the ﬁrst ﬁve months and then increases at a linear rate to
the sample end. We interpret this as evidence that the industrial organization on Alpha is
evolving during the sample, and the number of HFT does not reach an equilibrium during
the sample period. Panel B of the ﬁgure gives a histogram of the entry dates in bins of
one day. Entries are distributed throughout the four-year window, providing a time-series
control. Some HFT ﬁrms choose to enter multiple stocks on the same day, whereas others
stagger their entries to a few stocks at a time.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

C.
Summary statistics
Table 1 provides summary statistics for the HFT entries. Each row of the table gives the
average, standard deviation, 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile statistics of various
measures. Daily volume is the average number of shares the entrant traded daily. Daily
trades is the average number of trades the entrant executed daily. Percent daily volume is
the average percent of total daily volume the entrant contributed. Percent volume overnight
is the average percent of its own daily volume the entrant held at the end of day. Switching
rate is the percentage of the entrant’s trades for which the entrant switched the direction
of its trade—the percent of the time it bought after it had sold or sold after it had bought.
Percent passive is the percentage of the entrant’s trades for which the entrant initiated the
trade. Events is the number of HFT events.
TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE
There are 1121 HFT entries, of which 641 are passive and 368 are aggressive. 112 HFT
entries ﬁt neither the passive nor the aggressive deﬁnition. During the month after entry,
entrants trade on average 20,991 shares a day, which is 6.7% of daily volume. Passive HFT
trades more than aggressive, with 24,208 shares (9.1% of volume) compared to 12,135 shares
(3.8%).
This ﬁts the nature of aggressive strategies, which are more opportunistic than
continuous. A majority of entrants hold less than 16% of their volume overnight and switch
their trade sign at least 41% of the time.
Table 2 reports summary statistics by the number of incumbents present at entry. The
columns report means and standard deviations of various statistics, and the rows segment
the measures by the number of incumbents present at entry. Events are grouped by the
median daily number of HFTs incumbent during the month before entry.
TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Entrants to stocks with few incumbents generate more daily volume than entrants to
stocks with many incumbents. Entrants to stocks with no incumbents trade on average
31,023 shares (16.9% of daily volume), while entrants to stocks with six or more incumbents
trade on average 10,365 shares (1.5%). The statistics are consistent with a market growing
crowded. Entrants become more aggressive in the number of incumbents, though stocks with
six or more HFTs still experience passive entrants. The table shows a contrast with theory,
in which one HFT acts as a market maker and all subsequent HFT are aggressive.
II.
Methodology
This paper uses the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (DiD) event study methodology. For each
HFT event we collect daily averages of data for variables of interest for the treatment stock
during a pre-event window of one month before the event and during three successive onemonth windows after the event. These are the treatment stock observations.
For each treatment stock observation we include contemporaneous observations from a
matched control stock not experiencing an HFT event. The eligible control stocks are other
stocks trading at Alpha. We match Alpha stocks to Alpha stocks rather than to the same
stocks at the TSX because it might be argued there are trends on Alpha, a growing exchange.
When matching controls to treatments, we remove candidate controls that experience an
HFT event in a one-month centered window around the treatment-stock event date. This
excludes stocks experiencing a contemporaneous HFT entry by any HFT ﬁrm. Since there
are so many entries we do not exclude control stocks experiencing HFT entry in the second or
third month after the treatment-stock event date as it would eliminate all candidate control
stocks for certain events. This renders our results more conservative.
The control observations are selected by the Mahalanobis distance from the treatment
stock’s log average market capitalization, log average trading volume, average closing price,
average 10-day daily price volatility and average absolute bid-ask spread, all measured during
the month preceding the entry event date. Any match assignments in which the same control
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

would be assigned to more than one treatment stock with the same event date are resolved
using the Gale-Shapley algorithm. To eliminate outliers, observations are winsorized within
each one-month window at three standard deviations from the window average.
The DiD regression model is:
measurei,j,t = βHFTi,j,t + γafteri,t + δXi,j,t + θFEi,j + ϵi,j,t.
(1)
where i is an index marking the HFT event, j is an index marking the treatment stock
or the control stock for that event, t is the index for the date in event time (days before or
after the event), HFT is the variable of interest and is an indicator variable equaling one
for treatment stock-dates after the new HFT ﬁrm entered and zero otherwise, after is an
indicator variable equaling one after the date of the HFT entry for HFT event i, X is a
vector of control variates, and FE is a vector of stock-event level ﬁxed eﬀects. There is a
unique ﬁxed eﬀect for each event-stock interacted, not one for each event and each stock.
The ﬁrst diﬀerence is time, before and after the entry, and is captured by the after
variable. The second diﬀerence is treatment versus control stock. The interaction, which
is the liquidity change in the treatment stock after HFT entry, is captured by HFT. The
control variates are known determinants of liquidity: Market capitalization is the number of
shares outstanding for the stock multiplied by its share price. TSX volume is the stock’s
daily trading volume on the Toronto Stock Exchange obtained from Bloomberg. Price is the
average daily midquote for the stock on Alpha. Volatility is the 10-day moving average of
the standard deviation of the closing price, also obtained from Bloomberg.
To distinguish the entry eﬀect of an HFT ﬁrm from the entry eﬀect of any ﬁrm unconditionally, we include a control for the industrial organization (O’Hara et al. 2015). In each
regression speciﬁcation we include the variable Number of traders, which captures the number
of unique participants trading stock j on day t. By including the variable we disentangle the
impact of an HFT entrant from the unconditional eﬀect of adding any participant.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

As this is a study on HFT competition we do not study what happens when an HFT
begins trading a stock that is otherwise devoid of HFT on the Alpha exchange (and hence
exhibits no HFT competition). This has the beneﬁt of eliminating entry events from the
early part of our sample period, the ﬁrst half of 2009, during which Alpha was growing
quickly. The emphasis on competition distinguishes this study from Menkveld (2013), which
focuses on how the market as a whole responds to a a single HFT entrant.
The regression is conducted two ways. First it is carried out using ordinary least squares.
Second we use a weighted least squares regression speciﬁcation. The latter choice is because
we expect more active entrants to have a greater eﬀect. The weight is based on the ex-ante
expected size of the entrant. The ex-ante weighted approach predicts HFT volume share
using the levels of the stock characteristics before entry. The predictive model is a regression
of the log HFT percentage share on the average log volume, stock volatility and a stock
ﬁxed eﬀect, and it achieves an R-squared of 0.384. We use the predicted HFT percentage
share from this model as the observation weight. The weighting diminishes the inﬂuence of
HFT events for which the HFT is not expected to contribute much volume and therefore
would have a weaker inﬂuence on stock liquidity. Standard errors are double-clustered by
stock-event and by calendar date (Bertrand et al. 2004; Petersen 2009; Thompson 2011).
We estimate three treatment eﬀects, one for each month after the entry: the immediate
month after, the time period one to two months after, and the time period two to three
months after. The diﬀerent periods of time provide evidence on whether the observed ﬁnding
is transitory or permanent.
III.
Does HFT competition improve liquidity?
A.
Suggestive evidence
We begin with graphical evidence that HFT competition is positively associated with
liquidity. In two charts, greater competition is associated with tighter Alpha bid-ask spreads,
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

which converge to contemporaneous levels at the TSX. We interpret this as prima facie
evidence that HFT competition beneﬁts liquidity.
Figure 1, from the introduction, compares the average bid-ask spreads of Alpha stocks
to the same stocks trading on the TSX during a two-month window centered on HFT entry
events. In the ﬁrst two columns, the entry of a second HFT liquidity supplier tightens spreads
on Alpha but not to the levels of the more liquid TSX. In the second two columns, spreads
on Alpha after the third ﬁrm enters are still on the order of 175 basis points, compared to
100 basis points at the TSX. The third set of columns shows it takes three HFTs before
bid-ask spreads on Alpha converge to the TSX, averaging around 50 basis points.
If HFT competition did not beneﬁt liquidity one would expect that a second HFT on
Alpha would have no eﬀect on Alpha’s spreads. Instead, we ﬁnd many are necessary. To
conﬁrm the observed positive relationship between competition and liquidity, in Figure 4 we
plot average Alpha spreads in the deciles of an HFT competitiveness measure. The measure
is the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index, the sum of the squared volume share of each HFT ﬁrm. A
smaller index value implies greater competition. As in the previous ﬁgure, each competition
decile is associated with tighter Alpha spreads.
FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE
B.
Identiﬁcation conditions of the DiD event study
To identify the eﬀect of competition on liquidity we implement a DiD event study using
the HFT entry dates as the events. Event-study methodology requires that the events are
exogenous to the variables of interest within the time frame of the event study. We test
this condition by attempting to explain the timing of HFT entry using variables that are
empirically related to HFT entry decisions.
While HFT presence in our sample can be
explained in the long term by variables related to the proﬁtability of market making, the
timing of entry cannot be explained at time frames relevant to the study. This reduces
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

concerns that a latent trend during the event window is co-determining both HFT entry and
shifts in market quality.
HFT entry is not random, as HFT choose to trade stocks because they expect to make
a proﬁt. Using an Ordered Probit model we show that variables related to the proﬁtability
of market making can be used to predict the number of HFT trading a stock.
We use
variables on volume, liquidity, and price volatility, as HFT proﬁts are related to the amount
of round-trip trades they expect to complete, their ability to enter and exit positions, and
the movement in the price. To ensure we are measuring the long-term or permanent characteristics of a stock, we model the number of HFT trading an Alpha stock at the end of the
sample (in either 2011 or 2012) as a function of the averages of the variables on the TSX at
the beginning of the sample (in either 2009 or 2010), using the Ordered Probit model:
Pr (NumHFTi,t = i|Xi,t) = Pr (αi−1 < βXi,t + ϵi ≤αi)
(2)
where i indexes the stock; t indexes the year; NumHFT is the median number of HFT
trading the stock on Alpha in year t; Xt are the predictive variables, namely the stock’s
average TSX Volume, average TSX Relative Bid-Ask Spread, and daily return Volatility in
year t; and are assumed to be normally distributed. We truncate NumHFT at three HFT
ﬁrms to reduce the size of the reported table. Therefore the dependent variable can take the
values 0, 1, 2 and 3; statistical signiﬁcance improves if NumHFT is untruncated. Variables
are scaled by multiples of 10 so that the coeﬃcients of regression are of order one. The
results are reported in Table 3.
TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE
We ﬁnd HFT entry to Alpha is not random. Levels of volume, liquidity and price volatility
on the TSX in 2009 can predict 23.9% of the variation in the number of HFT on Alpha stocks
in 2012 with statistical signiﬁcance; in the best speciﬁcation, 40.6% of the variation in 2011
can be explained using the variables from 2010. The results are consistent with ﬁndings from
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

other markets, in which HFT are found to trade higher-volume stocks that have frequent
price movements (Brogaard et al. 2014). When HFT expand to Alpha, they most frequently
enter stocks that have the long-term characteristics known to be good for HFT proﬁtability.
We apply an expanded set of variables at higher frequencies to try to predict the timing of
the HFT entry dates. If HFT time their entry to take advantage of short-term opportunities
or as a response to recent changes in markets, then the experimental design would be less
able to distinguish an entry eﬀect from related trends. We model the timing of entry using
a Probit model, and we attempt to predict the entry events three ways: with daily, weekly
and monthly variation in predictive variables. We enlarge the set of predictive variables to
include both levels and ﬁrst diﬀerences, and we include values both from Alpha and from
the TSX. The model is:
Pr (Eventi,t = 1|Xi,t−1) = Φ (βXi,t−1 + ϵi,t)
(3)
where i is the stock index, t is the time index, Φ is the normal CDF, X is the matrix of
predictive variables, and ϵ is the error term. Entry takes the value one for a stock-period in
which at least one HFT enters, and zero otherwise. We use both one-period lagged levels as
well as one-period lagged ﬁrst diﬀerences of each variable. The level variables are averaged
over the previous day, week or month. The ﬁrst diﬀerences subtract the average value of the
level variable from the previous average level.
The variables are: Canadian volume, the log daily Canadian trading volume for the stock
(divided by 100) obtained from Compustat; Alpha volume, the log daily trading volume for
a stock on Alpha (divided by 100); Volatility, a 10-day moving average of the standard deviation of a stock’s closing price obtained from Bloomberg; Alpha relative bid-ask spread, the
time-weighted average diﬀerence between the best bid and ask price divided by the midquote
on Alpha (multiplied by 10,000); and TSX relative bid-ask spread, the time-weighted average
diﬀerence between the best bid and ask price divided by the midquote on TSX (multiplied
by 10,000). The results are reported in Table 4.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE
HFT entry in our sample is not apparently driven by the predictive variables at frequencies relevant to the study window (which compares the one month before entry to one
of three months after entry). The best speciﬁcation predicts just 4% of the variation in
HFT entry dates. A few speciﬁc estimates stand out. The level of the TSX relative bid-ask
spread is predictive, with HFT more likely to enter lower-spread stocks. The ﬁrst diﬀerence
of volatility is predictive for entries at a monthly frequency, meaning entry to stocks that
have increasing volatility is less likely. Since the R-squared is so low we regard the model
as failing to oﬀer a material explanation of the timing of entry. In our interpretation this
is because ﬁrms are entering for long-term reasons and not short-term reasons. The sample
begins with no HFT ﬁrms, and ﬁrms enter to take advantage of a relatively less-developed
industrial organization.4
The lack of time-series predictability reduces concerns that entry is driven by a trend in
a latent variable that at the same time inﬂuences stock liquidity. Of course, the evidence
cannot eliminate every concern as it is challenging to prove a negative. However, by ruling
out likely sources of endogeneity we make the set of alternatives more implausible. For a
trend in an omitted variable to be consistent with our evidence it would have to cause both
HFT entry and a liquidity change during HFT entry; cause them via movements that bear
a poor relation to levels and ﬁrst diﬀerences in spreads, volume and volatility at a daily,
weekly or monthly frequency; bear poor relation to the control variables in the DiD model;
and be present during a four-year sample of 1121 entry events over 279 stocks on Alpha.
C.
Results of the DiD event study on market liquidity
In this section we present results on the change in market liquidity after a new HFT
entrant begins trading a stock, by the number of HFT incumbents already in the stock, and
4In the internet appendix we perform a similar analysis using a hazard model. One disadvantage of the
tradition of hazard models is that it does not easily permit use of the time series to predict entry.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

for the ﬁrst, second, and third months after entry. We use the DiD event study speciﬁcation
deﬁned in Part II. We run the event study on three liquidity measures: Eﬀective spread for
nonHFT trades, Realized spread for nonHFT trades, and Price impact for nonHFT trades.
We choose to measure eﬀective and realized spreads since we are interested in realized trading
costs, and we choose to measure liquidity for nonHFTs to ensure the nonHFT clients of
Alpha beneﬁt. We choose to include the third measure of price impacts to check whether
the change in the realized spread, which is partially a function of price impact, can be
explained by changes in the price impact.
Eﬀective spread for nonHFT trades is twice the volume-weighted, signed diﬀerence between a trade’s price and the prevailing midquote, in basis points, for aggressive trades
not initiated by an HFT. It represents the transaction costs incurred by a nonHFT when
trading aggressively. Realized spread for nonHFT trades is twice the volume-weighted, signed
diﬀerence between a trade’s price and the midquote in ﬁve seconds in basis points from the
prevailing midquote for aggressive trades not initiated by an HFT. It is a proxy for marketmaker proﬁts net of price impact to providing liquidity to a nonHFT. Markets with lower
eﬀective spreads and lower realized spreads indicate greater realized liquidity. Price impact
for nonHFT trades is the volume-weighted, signed diﬀerence between the midquote prevailing contemporaneous to a trade and the midquote in ﬁve seconds, in basis points from the
original midquote, for aggressive trades not initiated by an HFT. Price impact represents the
informational and inventory-bearing costs of a trade that are loaded on liquidity suppliers,
and markets with lower price impact indicate fewer of these costs.
Figure 5 graphs the time series for the treatment and control stocks in a ﬁgure of parallel
trends. This is useful to verify visually that the control stocks do not exhibit trends that
distinguish them from the treatments.
FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

A dotted line shows the daily metric average, and a solid line presents the window average
before and after the event. A black line is for treated stocks, and a gray line is for control
stocks. The x-axis represents days relative to the event. The y-axis is the level of the spread
in basis points. The graph of each average shows there is virtually no change in the liquidity
of the control stocks, whereas liquidity improves for the treatment stocks following entry.
Next, we present the event-study results. The following tables report impacts on spread
metrics as the second, third, and fourth and later HFT ﬁrms enter a market, and they report
the impacts during the ﬁrst, second and third month after entry. Events for the second and
third entrant are reported separately; events for the fourth or greater entrants are combined.
The immediate one-month entry results are reported in the full table; the second-month
entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the third-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is
reported in Panel C. The OLS results are in the ﬁrst three columns. The WLS results are
in columns 4 - 6.
Table 5 reports the estimated impact of passive HFT entry on nonHFT eﬀective spreads.
TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE
So as to avoid redundant discussion, we discuss the OLS ﬁndings for this and all remaining
tables. We note that the WLS results are economically similar. In fact, they are consistently
stronger, which is consistent with (ex-ante) larger HFT entries having a larger impact. Table
5 shows that a second HFT leads to tighter spreads by 38 basis points during the ﬁrst month
after entry, and the third HFT does the same by 4 basis points, both statistically signiﬁcant.
The second HFT has a long-lived impact on liquidity: the eﬀects retain their order and
signiﬁcance during the second and third month after entry. In every month, the impact is
largest for the market with the fewest incumbents, and smallest for the market with the most
incumbents. The fourth and later HFT ﬁrms do not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect in any month,
which is consistent with limits to price competition on an order book due to the minimum
tick size.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 6 reports the estimated impact of aggressive HFT entry on nonHFT eﬀective
spreads.
TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE
Out of the nine OLS speciﬁcations, only three give a statistically signiﬁcant impact. For
stocks with three or more incumbents, aggressive entry decreases the nonHFT eﬀective spread
by 2 basis points in the second month and 4 basis points in the third month; for stocks with
one incumbent, aggressive entry improves it by 11 basis points in the second month. Our
interpretation is that there is either no impact or perhaps a minor improvement in liquidity.
Neither interpretation is consistent with aggressive HFT competition harming liquidity by
trading only to adversely select market makers. The results are more consistent with aggressive HFT pursuing many strategies that are on average neutral or slightly beneﬁcial to
the market. Aggressive HFT may be competing to contribute to price eﬃciency, for example
by using news arbitrage or by monitoring market conditions.
The results are consistent
with Brogaard et al. (2014), which ﬁnds that aggressive HFT trading contributes to price
discovery. As the results for aggressive HFT entry are nearly all statistically insigniﬁcant we
report them in the internet appendix and focus on the passive HFT entries for the remainder
of the paper.
Table 7 reports the estimated impact of passive HFT entry on nonHFT realized spreads.
TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE
For the ﬁrst month after entry, the second HFT leads to tighter spreads by 27 basis points,
and the third HFT by 5 basis points. Both results are statistically signiﬁcant. The second
HFT has a long-lived impact on liquidity: the eﬀects retain their order and signiﬁcance
during the second and third month after entry. In each month the impact is largest for the
market with the fewest incumbents and smallest for the market with the most incumbents.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

The fourth and later HFT ﬁrms do not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect in any month, which is
consistent with limits to price competition on an order book due to the minimum tick size.5
One circumstance that could confound the result in Table 7 is if price impacts are increasing contemporaneous to HFT entry. The realized spread is composed of the eﬀective
spread minus the price impact, so it is possible the observed decrease in realized spreads
could derive from a contemporaneous increase in price impacts. Such an increase in price
impacts could be the result of an increase in the informational content of trading on Alpha
that is unrelated to HFT, or it could even be due to HFT. To check for the possibility, we
estimate the change in price impacts around HFT entry events.
TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE
We fail to ﬁnd much evidence of a change in price impacts. There are only two statistically
signiﬁcant eﬀects, and rather than increases they are both decreases: Price impacts decrease
after the second entrant by 10 basis points in the ﬁrst month and by 13 basis points in the
third month. The evidence is consistent with the decline in realized spreads being driven
by lower spreads, not by larger price impacts on Alpha. The observed decreases in price
impacts can be explained by the known tendency for HFT to trade against price movements,
as in Brogaard et al. 2014.
Table 9 reports the estimated impact of passive HFT entry on the inside depth.
TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE
Unlike the spread measures, the depth results are nearly all statistically signiﬁcantly no
diﬀerent than zero. The results suggest the role of competition among HFTs on the Alpha
exchange is on the bid-ask spread, not on the number of shares available.
5Another measure of liquidity we can evaluate is the quoted spread. We report the quoted spread results
in the internet appendix. They are qualitatively similar to the eﬀective and realized spreads.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

In summary, Section III shows that HFT competition improves liquidity. If HFT competition did not beneﬁt liquidity, one would expect the entrance of a second or third passive
HFT would have no eﬀect on spreads. However, we ﬁnd the second and third passive HFTs
do improve spreads. Moreover, we ﬁnd the impact of competition is long-lived, that the
relationship is strongest when there are fewer incumbents, and that the eﬀect diminishes
as the number of incumbents grows, consistent with intuition about diminishing returns to
competition. In general, the result is consistent with nonHFTs beneﬁting by accessing the
lower spreads induced by HFT competition.
IV.
Is HFT competition consistent with price or quantity
competition?
In the previous section, we presented evidence that HFT competition on Alpha improves
liquidity. In this section, we give an explanation for why. We argue it is because HFT
competition is a form of quantity competition, an industrial organization that is characteristic
of many markets (Bresnahan 1989).6 Under quantity competition, ﬁrms use their market
power to raise prices, but competition can erode their market power. Many microstructure
models use a basis of quantity competition, such as Kyle (1989), Subrahmanyam (1991),
Biais et al. (2000) and Bondarenko (2001). Although these models were not written with
HFT speciﬁcally in mind, we see this as an advantage. The consistency of the data suggests
it can be useful to model HFT with the assumptions found in these traditional models.
In recent theory, HFT competition instead is assumed to be price competition (Budish
et al. 2015; Menkveld and Zoican 2017). Under price competition, ﬁrms lack market power,
so they bid prices down to marginal cost. Price competition is a tractable assumption for
theorists because it ﬁxes the quantity output. However, since ﬁrms have no market power,
price competition has the strong consequence that increased competition among similar ﬁrms
brings no beneﬁt (though it can still have costs). While we cannot test for price competition
6For more on the role of competition in industrial organization, see Tirole (1988).
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

directly, since we lack data on the ﬁrms’ marginal costs, we can show that the Alpha market
responds to ﬁrm entry in ways that are diﬃcult to explain via price competition but that
are natural outcomes of quantity competition.
Speciﬁcally, we draw three hypotheses inspired by Kyle (1989) that are also identical
with the predictions for the Cournot model, the classic model of quantity competition, with
the standard features of linear cost, linear demand, and identical ﬁrms.7 As the number of
ﬁrms N increases:
1. Market size: total volume increases in N/(N + 1),
2. Market share: the volume of incumbents decreases in 1/N,
3. Liquidity: the price of liquidity decreases in 1/N.
These predictions are implausible in a model that assumes price competition—particularly
the ﬁrst. The ﬁrst is implausible because, in price competition, the quantity output is ﬁxed.
The second and third are also diﬃcult for price competition because, under that assumption, only the ﬁrms with the lowest marginal cost produce. However, for predictions two
and three, it is possible that strictly cost-improving ﬁrms could progressively enter Alpha
in increasing numbers, which could generate the same observable consequences. We cannot
test this because we lack data on ﬁrms’ marginal costs.
To demonstrate robustness, we also study how the magnitude of each result changes in
the number of ﬁrms. We ﬁnd the magnitude of the results on volume, incumbent volume, and
liquidity all attenuate in the number of ﬁrms N. This is consistent with our interpretation
that the HFT environment is characterized by quantity competition, as a diminishing return
in the number of ﬁrms N is also implausible in a model with price competition.
To test the hypotheses, we compute one data series for each of the three predictions and
run the event study on the variable. For the ﬁrst prediction, we compute the volume share of
7Prediction 3 is equation (40) in Kyle (1989). Prediction 2 draws from equation (44) in Kyle (1989), in
which the residual supply curves attenuate in the number of like participants, and prediction 3 is the same
equation summed over the participants.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

all HFT ﬁrms as a proportion of total volume. For the second, we compute the volume share
of only the HFT incumbents as a proportion of total volume. For the third, we compute
the eﬀective spreads of trades on which an HFT incumbent was the passive counterparty.
We estimate the treatment eﬀects on these three variables using the same DiD event-study
methodology described in Part II. Events for the second and third entrant are reported in
separate columns, and events for the fourth or greater entrant are combined. The immediate
one-month entry results are reported in the full table in Panel A; the second-month entry
HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the third-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported
in Panel C. The OLS results are in the ﬁrst three columns. The WLS results are in columns
4–6.
A.
Market share of the industry and of incumbents
To test the predictions of quantity competition on total output and incumbent output
we compute volume shares of HFT trading Alpha stocks. HFT volume share is the percent
of trading volume (HFT shares traded / 2x total shares traded) executed by HFT ﬁrms for
stock i on day t. HFT incumbent volume share is the percent of trading volume (incumbent
HFT shares traded / 2x total shares traded) executed by incumbent HFT ﬁrms (i.e. all
HFTs except the entrant) for stock i on day t. The treatment coeﬃcient is the percentage
point change in HFT activity in stock i following a new HFT entry.
Table 10 reports the results of the DiD event study on the volume share of the HFT
industry.
TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE
Consistent with quantity competition, HFT entry increases the HFT share of volumes.
After the second HFT arrives the impact is largest: ﬁve percentage points. The impact of
entry lasts through the event window of three months and retains its magnitude. As with
the one-month results, the largest impact in the third month is after the second HFT arrives,
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

still at ﬁve percentage points. Consistent with quantity competition, there are diminishing
returns in the number of ﬁrms.
The entry impact is smallest after the fourth or later
entrant, at two percentage points. In each of the three separate months we study the impact
decreases in the number of HFT incumbents. The results on volume share are some of the
most statistically signiﬁcant in our study; quantity competition holds even in the case of
four or more HFTs.
Table 11 reports the results of the DiD event study on the volume share of incumbent
HFT ﬁrms only.
TABLE 11 ABOUT HERE
HFT entry has the reverse eﬀect on incumbent volume share as it does on total volume
share. Consistent with quantity competition, entry decreases incumbent volumes. In the
ﬁrst month the second HFT to arrive takes ﬁve percentage points of volume share from
incumbents.
As before, the impact of entry for the second entrant is long-lived, being
statistically signiﬁcant in each month of the event study. In the third month the second
HFT to arrive takes six percentage points from incumbents. The impacts decline in the
number of HFT incumbents. The second entrant is more successful at capturing market
share than the third entrant, and the third entrant is more successful than the fourth and
later entrants. The third and higher entrants do not exhibit statistical signiﬁcance after the
ﬁrst month.
Overall, the results on volume shares are consistent with an increasing competitiveness of
HFT in markets with more ﬁrms. Based on Tables 10 and 11, HFT entry tends to increase
total HFT volumes and at a decreasing rate. It seizes trading volume from incumbents, again
at a decreasing rate. Output increases more in markets with few HFTs; losses to incumbents
are larger for stocks with few HFTs. The results and their diminishing returns are consistent
with quantity competition as in quantity competition, as ﬁrms produce diﬀerent amounts
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

of quantity depending on the industrial organization. They are not consistent with price
competition, in which output does not increase in the number of ﬁrms.
B.
Prices quoted by incumbents
To further test the predictions of quantity competition on prices we compute the eﬀective
spread oﬀered by HFT incumbents. This measure is not the market eﬀective spread but
the eﬀective spread for trades in which incumbent HFTs take the passive side. We do not
compute the measure for all trades for two reasons—we have already studied a similar metric
in Tables 5 and 6, and moreover we wish to verify speciﬁcally that incumbents react in a
way consistent with quantity competition. Incumbent HFT eﬀective spread equals twice the
distance from the midquote to the execution price in which an HFT incumbent ﬁrm is the
passive counterparty, divided by the midquote and multiplied by 10,000 so that the measure
is in basis points.
Table 12 reports the impact of passive HFT entry on the eﬀective spreads oﬀered by
incumbent HFT ﬁrms only (not the entrant).
TABLE 12 ABOUT HERE
Consistent with quantity competition, after a passive entry event HFT incumbents supply
tighter eﬀective spreads. They do so after the second and after the third entrant: they tighten
their spreads by 37 basis points after the second and by 3 basis points after the third. There
is no statistically signiﬁcant impact for the fourth and later entrants, which is consistent
with limits to price competition on an order book due to the minimum tick size. These
impacts are long-lived during the three months of the study. In fact, the impact intensiﬁes
in the third month for the second and third entrants.
The results on incumbent pricing are consistent with beneﬁcial competitive pressure in
markets with more HFT ﬁrms. Entry tends to lead incumbents to improve prices. As Table
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

10 shows entrants seize trading volume from incumbents, the behavior of incumbents is
consistent with a competitive response to losses in market share.
V.
Conclusions
This paper presents three streams of evidence that HFT competition improves liquidity
on stocks. First, we provide graphical evidence that suggests the eﬀect. As competition
intensiﬁes, the bid-ask spread at an alternative equity market improves and converges to the
spread at the national stock market. Second, we use a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event-study
methodology to identify the treatment eﬀect of HFT competition. The event study compares
liquidity metrics on the stock market before and after dates on which HFT ﬁrms begin trading
a stock, and for control observations we use contemporaneous stocks that experienced no
HFT entry. We ﬁnd the eﬀective and realized spreads for nonHFT participants (the “clients”
of HFT) improve after passive HFT entry dates and weakly improve after aggressive HFT
entry dates.
Our results are based on the Canadian Alpha exchange and our empirical
deﬁnition of HFT; we leave it to future research to determine whether the results hold true
in other settings.
The evidence contrasts with some predictions found in theoretical models that feature
HFT competition. For instance, some models predict that HFT competition creates illiquidity (Menkveld and Zoican 2017; Budish et al. 2015). To explain the contrast, we examine
the models’ assumptions on competition. A tractability assumption of these models is that
HFT is a price competitor. The assumption is key to model results because it eliminates
beneﬁts to competition beyond the second ﬁrm, leaving to additonal HFT ﬁrms only costs to
contribute. We ﬁnd that quantity competition is a better assumption for HFT competition
by testing three predictions of quantity competition that are implausible outcomes from the
perspective of a model assuming price competition.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

REFERENCES
A¨ıt-Sahalia, Y. and M. Saglam (2013). High frequency traders: Taking advantage of speed.
Working Paper.
Baron, M. D., J. Brogaard, B. Hagstr¨omer, and A. A. Kirilenko (2016). Risk and return in
high-frequency trading.
Bertrand, M., E. Duﬂo, and S. Mullainathan (2004). How much should we trust diﬀerencesin-diﬀerences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 249–275.
Biais, B., T. Foucault, and S. Moinas (2015). Equilibrium fast trading. Journal of Financial
Economics 116(2), 292–313.
Biais, B., D. Martimort, and J. C. Rochet (2000). Competing mechanisms in a common
value environment. Econometrica 68(4), 799–837.
Boehmer, E., D. Li, and G. Saar (2016). Correlated high-frequency trading. Working Paper.
Bondarenko, O. (2001). Competing market makers, liquidity provision, and bid–ask spreads.
Journal of Financial Markets 4(3), 269–308.
Breckenfelder, J. H. (2013). Competition between high-frequency traders, and market quality.
Working Paper.
Bresnahan, T. F. (1989). Empirical studies of industries with market power. Handbook of
industrial organization 2, 1011–1057.
Brogaard, J., T. Hendershott, and R. Riordan (2014). High-frequency trading and price
discovery. Review of Financial Studies 27(8), 2267–2306.
Budish, E. B., P. Cramton, and J. J. Shim (2015). The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions as a market design response. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(4),
1547–1621.
Ellis, K., R. Michaely, and M. O’Hara (2002). The making of a dealer market: From entry
to equilibrium in the trading of nasdaq stocks. Journal of Finance 57(5), 2289–2316.
Fischer, S. (November 15, 2016). “is there a liquidity problem post-crisis?”. Speech at the
Initiative on Business and Public Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Ho, T. and H. R. Stoll (1980).
On dealer markets under competition.
Journal of Finance 35(2), 259–267.
Hoﬀmann, P. (2014). A dynamic limit order market with fast and slow traders. Journal of
Financial Economics 113(1), 156–169.
Jones, C. M. (2013). What do we know about high-frequency trading? Working Paper.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Kirilenko, A., A. S. Kyle, M. Samadi, and T. Tuzun (2017). The ﬂash crash: The impact of
high frequency trading on an electronic market. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Kyle, A. S. (1989). Informed speculation with imperfect competition. Review of Economic
Studies 56(3), 317–355.
Menkveld, A. and M. Zoican (2017). Need for speed: Exchange latency and liquidity. Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Menkveld, A. J. (2013). High frequency trading and the new market makers. Journal of
Financial Markets 16(4), 712–740.
O’Hara, M., G. Saar, and Z. Zhong (2015). Relative tick size and the trading environment.
Working Paper.
Petersen, M. A. (2009). Estimating standard errors in ﬁnance panel data sets: Comparing
approaches. Review of Financial Studies 22(1), 435–480.
Subrahmanyam, A. (1991). Risk aversion, market liquidity, and price eﬃciency. Review of
Financial Studies 4(3), 417–441.
Thompson, S. B. (2011). Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both ﬁrm and
time. Journal of Financial Economics 99(1), 1–10.
Tirole, J. (1988). The theory of industrial organization. MIT press.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Figure 1: Bid-ask spreads on Alpha and the TSX, before and after HFT entry
This ﬁgure compares the average bid-ask spreads for stocks on Alpha and the TSX averaged during the one
month before and after HFT entry dates for the stocks. An HFT entry date for a stock is the ﬁrst day an
HFT trades at least 1000 shares of the stock on Alpha. Bid-ask spreads for Alpha stocks were computed
using order-book data granted by Alpha; for the same stocks, TSX bid-ask spreads were computed using
Thomson Reuters Tick History. The chart shows the stock-event averages before and after the second HFT
to enter the market enters; before and after the third; and before and after the fourth or greater.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Figure 2: Trading volume in Canada and Alpha’s share
This ﬁgure plots the monthly dollar-volume market share of Alpha for the sample stocks during the sample
period and, on the same ﬁgure, the total dollar volume of the sample stocks on all Canadian exhanges
including Alpha. The data were computed using Bloomberg daily trading volumes for the stocks.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Figure 3: HFT presence on Alpha
The panels of this ﬁgure show two measures of HFT presence on Alpha: the average number of HFT per
stock in the sample, and a histogram of entry dates. Panel A plots the average number of HFT ﬁrms that
traded a stock per stock, for each day in the sample. Panel B plots a histogram of the number of HFT entry
dates with bins of size one day. There are 1121 entry events, of which there were 1008 events in which there
was at least one incumbent HFT ﬁrm.
Panel A: Average number of HFT ﬁrms per stock
Panel B: Distribution of HFT entry events
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Figure 4: Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index and bid-ask spreads
This ﬁgure plots the average daily bid-ask spread prevailing on Alpha stocks by sample deciles of the
Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index for HFT ﬁrms trading the stocks. The Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index is a measure
of competition and is equal to the sum of the ﬁrms’ squared market shares of daily trading volume (double
counted). Bid-ask spreads were computed using order-book data granted by Alpha and were computed once
per calendar date and averaged by decile.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Figure 5: Parallel trends
This ﬁgure plots two liquidity metrics for treatment and control stocks, averaged daily over all treatments
and controls during the one month before the HFT entry dates and the three months after the entry dates.
Dashed lines are daily metrics, and solid lines are pre- and post-period averages. Treated stocks are in
black, and control stocks are in gray. Eﬀective spread for nonHFT trades is twice the volume-weighted,
signed diﬀerence between a trade’s price and the prevailing midquote in basis points for aggressive trades
not initiated by an HFT. Realized spread for nonHFT trades is twice the volume-weighted, signed diﬀerence
between a trade’s price and the midquote in ﬁve seconds in basis points from the midquote for aggressive
trades not initiated by an HFT.
Panel A: Eﬀective spread for nonHFT trades
Panel B: Realized spread for nonHFT trades
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 1: Summary statistics for HFT events
This table gives sample summary trading data for the entrants during the month after their entry. Daily
volume is the average number of shares the entrant traded daily. Daily trades is the average number of trades
the entrant executed daily. Percent daily volume is the average percent of total daily volume the entrant
contributed. Percent volume overnight is the average percent of its own daily volume the entrant held at
the end of day.
Switching rate is the percentage of the entrant’s trades for which the entrant switched
the direction of its trade—buying after it had sold or selling after it had bought. Percent passive is the
percentage of the entrant’s trades for which the entrant initiated the trade (either through a market order
or a marketable limit order).
All HFT entries
Mean
Std.
25%
Med.
75%
Daily volume
20,991
80,761
1100
4200
16,300
Daily trades
79
153
7
24
79
% daily volume
6.7
10
0.8
2.6
7.5
% volume overnight
30
34
3.4
16
45
Switching rate
39
23
25
41
52
% passive
55
45
0
75
100
Events
1121
Passive HFT entries
Daily volume
24,208
90,876
1100
4100
17,700
Daily trades
72
144
7
21
68
% daily volume
9.1
13
0.9
3.3
11
% volume overnight
30
32
5.9
17
42
Switching rate
37
20
26
41
50
% passive
93
16
93
100
100
Events
641
Aggressive HFT entries
Daily volume
12,135
26,139
1200
3900
12,000
Daily trades
74
134
8
27
79
% daily volume
3.8
4.9
0.7
2.1
5.1
% volume overnight
30
35
1.4
12
50
Switching rate
42
27
23
43
59
% passive
3.4
15
0
0
0
Events
368
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 2: Summary statistics for HFT events, by number of incumbents
This table gives summary trading statistics for the entrants during the month after their entry, grouped by the number of incumbent HFT ﬁrms
trading the stock when the entrant arrived. Daily volume is the average number of shares the entrant traded daily. Daily trades is the average number
of trades the entrant executed daily. Percent daily volume is the average percent of total daily volume the entrant contributed. Percent volume held
at end of day is the average percent of its own daily volume that the entrant held at the end of day. Switching rate is the percentage of the entrant’s
trades for which the entrant switched the direction of its trade—the percent of the time it bought after it had sold or sold after it had bought. %
passive is the percentage of the entrant’s trades for which the entrant initiated the trade (either through a market order or marketable limit order).
Daily volume
Daily trades
% daily volume
% volume overnight
Switching rate
% passive
#HFT
Events
Mean
Std.
Mean
Std.
Mean
Std.
Mean
Std.
Mean
Std.
Mean
Std.
0
113
31,023
125,785
74
165
16.9
17.7
25.1
28.7
37.7
17.8
69.7
41.9
1
189
24,938
123,910
56
140
7.9
11.0
29.2
30.2
36.8
18.2
69.6
41.2
2
176
9445
26,619
26
58
3.2
5.6
34.4
34.1
32.0
20.9
67.0
41.7
3
188
11,347
35,708
43
92
2.6
4.3
34.4
35.6
34.9
22.5
53.4
43.7
4
135
10,748
25,448
53
126
2.6
4.3
27.4
34.6
43.4
24.2
51.9
44.4
5
139
12,352
23,284
91
178
3.0
3.9
29.2
35.0
41.0
24.0
50.5
45.2
6+
181
10,365
23,533
68
156
1.5
2.6
30.0
35.7
45.8
26.8
29.8
43.4
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 3: Prediction of number of HFT ﬁrms
This table gives the coeﬃcients obtained from an Ordered Probit regression of the number of HFT ﬁrms
trading an Alpha stock in 2011 or 2012 on its characteristics in 2009 or 2010. The dependent variable takes
the value zero for zero HFT ﬁrms trading the stock, one for one, two for two, and three for three or more
HFT ﬁrms. TSX volume is the daily average trading volume for a stock trading on the TSX (divided by ten
million so that the coeﬃcient has order one) obtained from Bloomberg. TSX spread is the daily average bidask spread for a stock trading on the TSX (divided by 1000) obtained from Thomson Reuters Tick History.
Volatility is daily average return volatility for a stock trading on the TSX (multiplied by 10) obtained from
Bloomberg. *, **, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Number of HFT in
2011
2012
2011
2012
2009 TSX volume
17.98***
8.74***
(5.01)
(3.00)
2009 TSX rel. bid-ask spread
-0.757***
-1.10***
(2.73)
(3.77)
2009 volatility
2.04**
1.89**
(2.55)
(2.23)
2010 TSX volume
29.15***
10.00***
(6.07)
(3.39)
2010 TSX rel. bid-ask spread
-5.72***
-5.14***
(7.46)
(7.59)
2010 volatility
0.08
-0.11
(0.37)
(0.49)
Threshold 1
-1.47
-1.66
-2.31
-2.53
Threshold 2
-0.44
-0.99
-0.86
-1.56
Threshold 3
0.36
-0.37
0.11
-0.89
Observations
212
212
244
244
Pseudo-R2
0.289
0.239
0.406
0.306
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 4: Prediction of timing of HFT entry
The columns of this table give the coeﬃcients and one-standard deviation marginal eﬀects obtained from
Probit regressions. The dependent variables take the value one for an HFT and zero otherwise. Column 1
uses stock-day observations; column 2 uses stock-week observations; column 3 uses stock-month observations.
The level variables are averaged over the previous day, week or month. The ﬁrst diﬀerences subtract the
average twice-lagged value of the level variable from the ﬁrst-lagged value. Canadian volume is the log daily
Canadian trading volume for the stock (divided by 100) obtained from Compustat. Alpha volume is the log
daily trading volume for a stock on Alpha (divided by 100). Volatility is a 10-day moving average of the
standard deviation of a stock’s closing price obtained from Bloomberg. Alpha Relative spread is the timeweighted average diﬀerence between the best bid and ask price divided by the midquote on Alpha (multiplied
by 10,000). TSX Relative spread is the time-weighted average diﬀerence between the best bid and ask price
divided by the midquote on TSX (multiplied by 10,000). First diﬀerence variables are denoted with a ∆. *,
**, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The marginal eﬀect is
reported below the t-statistic.
HFT entry events
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Canadian volume
5.841***
4.772**
4.263
(3.70)
(3.07)
(1.81)
0.097
0.289
0.732
Alpha volume
1.424
0.718
0.689
(1.15)
0.63)
(0.41)
0.024
0.044
0.119
Volatility
-2.134
0.368
5.301**
(-1.86)
(0.30)
(2.73)
-0.035
0.022
0.911
Alpha rel. bid-ask spread
0.751
-0.224
-0.301
(1.27)
(-0.33)
(-0.30)
0.012
-0.014
-0.052
TSX rel. bid-ask spread
-11.99***
-18.04***
-34.02
(-4.82)
(-6.77)
(-7.61)
-0.199
-1.094
-5.847
∆Canadian volume
-0.043
8.709**
9.086
(-0.02)
(2.42)
(1.48)
-0.001
0.528
1.562
∆Alpha volume
3.448
-3.227
7.270
(1.42)
(-1.05)
(1.86)
0.057
-0.196
1.250
∆Volatility
9.422**
-2.323
-6.558**
(2.59)
(-1.20)
(-2.73)
0.157
-0.141
-1.127
∆Alpha rel. bid-ask spread
-1.079
-0.447
2.250
(-1.00)
(-0.40)
(1.72)
-0.018
-0.027
0.387
∆TSX rel. bid-ask spread
2.776
5.991
-0.953
(1.21)
(1.55)
(-0.12)
0.046
0.363
-0.164
Constant
-3.315***
-2.480***
-1.722***
(-21.67)
(-15.80)
(-7.21)
Observations
97,970
36,204
7597
Pseudo-R2
0.019
0.023
0.044
Events
1121
1121
1121
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 5: Passive HFT competition and nonHFT eﬀective spreads
The table reports a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on nonHFT eﬀective spreads comparing the month
before a stock-entry date of a passive HFT to the ﬁrst, second and third months after the date, run separately
for the second, third and fourth-and-greater HFT ﬁrms to begin trade. The eﬀective spread for nonHFT
trades is twice the volume-weighted, signed diﬀerence between a trade’s price and the prevailing midquote in
basis points for aggressive trades not initiated by an HFT. Passive HFT is an HFT that uses predominantly
limit orders to trade. For each treatment stock, a control is matched by Mahalanobis ranking on log market
cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility and absolute bid-ask spread during the month before the
event. The regressors are HFT, the treatment dummy; after, the post-period dummy; controls for log market
cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility, and number of traders; and stock-event ﬁxed eﬀects. The
event study is ﬁt once using OLS and once using WLS in which the weighting is the HFT entrant’s volume
share during the month. The immediate one-month entry results are reported in the full table; the secondmonth entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the third-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported
in Panel C. The *, **, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Standard errors
are double-clustered by stock-event and calendar date.
OLS
WLS
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
Panel A: Treatment eﬀect, month 1
HFT
-38.39***
-4.49***
-0.83
-53.54***
-6.27**
-0.24
(-5.19)
(-2.60)
(-1.04)
(-4.61)
(-2.23)
(-0.20)
Trend
7.77
1.7
1.73**
10.04
1.6
1.35
(1.26)
(1.39)
(2.10)
(1.23)
(0.90)
(1.10)
Market cap
40.47
-37.94
-19.53
64.54
-19.46
-11.93
(0.85)
(-1.01)
(-0.95)
(0.91)
(-0.93)
(-0.77)
TSX volume
2.56
-0.46
-3.83***
4.02
-0.02
-4.17***
(0.69)
(-0.64)
(-2.90)
(0.82)
(-0.02)
(-2.65)
Price
-0.56
-0.63***
-0.24**
-1.55
-0.63**
-0.19*
(-0.62)
(-2.61)
(-2.06)
(-1.07)
(-2.24)
(-1.77)
Volatility
-3.02**
1.38
1.37**
-4.62**
1.21
1.80**
(-2.10)
(1.58)
(2.31)
(-2.01)
(1.05)
(2.42)
# ﬁrms
-2.20***
-0.18
0.06
-2.87***
-0.16
-0.04
(-4.21)
(-1.39)
(0.99)
(-4.21)
(-0.70)
(-0.32)
FEs
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
R2
0.295
0.582
0.636
0.274
0.487
0.640
Events
140
122
298
140
122
298
Panel B: Treatment eﬀect, month 2
HFT
-42.22***
-4.01*
-1.02
-59.44***
-5.39**
-0.13
(-3.85)
(-1.89)
(-0.69)
(-3.61)
(-2.21)
(-0.07)
Panel C: Treatment eﬀect, month 3
HFT
-34.54***
-4.47
-1.35
-44.76***
-7.96*
0.36
(-4.06)
(-1.45)
(-1.20)
(-3.30)
(-1.89)
(0.21)
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 6: Aggressive HFT competition and nonHFT eﬀective spreads
The table reports a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on nonHFT eﬀective spreads comparing the month
before a stock-entry date of an aggressive HFT to the ﬁrst, second and third months after the date, run
separately for the second, third and fourth-and-greater HFT ﬁrms to begin trade. The eﬀective spread for
nonHFT trades is twice the volume-weighted, signed diﬀerence between a trade’s price and the prevailing
midquote in basis points for aggressive trades not initiated by an HFT. Aggressive HFT is an HFT that uses
predominantly marketable orders to trade. For each treatment stock, a control is matched by Mahalanobis
ranking on log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility and absolute bid-ask spread during
the month before the event. The regressors are HFT, the treatment dummy; after, the post-period dummy;
controls for log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility, and number of traders; and
stock-event ﬁxed eﬀects. The event study is ﬁt once using OLS and once using WLS in which the weighting
is the HFT entrant’s volume share during the month. The immediate one-month entry results are reported
in the full table; the second-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the third-month entry
HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel C. The *, **, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock-event and calendar date.
OLS
WLS
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
Panel A: Treatment eﬀect, month 1
HFT
-0.14
1.83
-0.95
2.15
2.55
-0.22
(-0.05)
(1.05)
(-1.15)
(0.29)
(1.18)
(-0.21)
Trend
0.6
-1.5
2.20**
3.33
-2.98*
1.55
(0.22)
(-1.00)
(2.43)
(0.84)
(-1.73)
(1.34)
Market cap
-5.62
-87.56***
7.69
-20.04
-90.36***
-2.45
(-0.33)
(-2.66)
(0.83)
(-0.88)
(-3.04)
(-0.17)
TSX volume
-1.17
1.17
-1.76
-1.57
0.7
-2.27**
(-1.11)
(1.08)
(-1.54)
(-1.11)
(0.41)
(-1.97)
Price
(0.93)
(-1.70)
(0.15)
(-0.40)
(-1.08)
(-0.49)
(-0.62)
(-2.61)
(-2.06)
(-1.07)
(-2.24)
(-1.77)
Volatility
3.13
0.61
0.31
3.26
1.06
0.26
(1.02)
(0.86)
(1.38)
(0.88)
(1.38)
(0.97)
# ﬁrms
-0.75***
-0.16*
0.10*
-0.85***
-0.16
0.13**
(-2.74)
(-1.93)
(1.73)
(-2.70)
(-1.34)
(1.99)
FEs
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
R2
0.303
0.451
0.682
0.261
0.408
0.667
Events
39
35
267
39
35
267
Panel B: Treatment eﬀect, month 2
HFT
-11.29*
0.46
-2.33*
-18.48*
0.52
-2.29
(-1.92)
(0.18)
(-1.96)
(-1.94)
(0.13)
(-1.57)
Panel C: Treatment eﬀect, month 3
HFT
-7.49
-3.56
-4.10**
-7.95
-5.76
-3.74*
(-1.48)
(-1.18)
(-2.37)
(-1.01)
(-1.35)
(-1.95)
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 7: Passive HFT competition and nonHFT realized spreads
The table reports a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on nonHFT eﬀective spreads comparing the month
before a stock-entry date of a passive HFT to the ﬁrst, second and third months after the date, run separately
for the second, third and fourth-and-greater HFT ﬁrms to begin trade. The realized spread for nonHFT trades
is twice the volume-weighted, signed diﬀerence between a trade’s price and the midquote in ﬁve seconds in
basis points from the midquote for aggressive trades not initiated by an HFT. Passive HFT is an HFT that
uses predominantly limit orders to trade. For each treatment stock, a control is matched by Mahalanobis
ranking on log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility and absolute bid-ask spread during
the month before the event. The regressors are HFT, the treatment dummy; after, the post-period dummy;
controls for log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility, and number of traders; and
stock-event ﬁxed eﬀects. The event study is ﬁt once using OLS and once using WLS in which the weighting
is the HFT entrant’s volume share during the month. The immediate one-month entry results are reported
in the full table; the second-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the third-month entry
HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel C. The *, **, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock-event and calendar date.
OLS
WLS
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
Panel A: Treatment eﬀect, month 1
HFT
-26.62***
-5.16**
0.02
-36.20***
-7.58*
-0.22
(-4.61)
(-2.11)
(0.02)
(-4.44)
(-1.81)
(-0.19)
Trend
5.07
3.86
1.69*
5.7
6.49
2.49**
(0.94)
(1.50)
(1.90)
(0.79)
(1.48)
(2.01)
Market cap
21.73
-34.35
-11.18
38.11
-38.14
-5.4
(0.70)
(-1.21)
(-0.54)
(0.79)
(-1.47)
(-0.32)
TSX volume
-2.12
-3.83***
-7.13***
-1.41
-4.49**
-7.16***
(-0.55)
(-3.56)
(-4.93)
(-0.29)
(-2.57)
(-4.50)
Price
-0.74
-0.49*
-0.1
-1.52
-0.45
-0.03
(-0.98)
(-1.76)
(-0.82)
(-1.31)
(-1.20)
(-0.30)
Volatility
-2.59*
0.25
1.11**
-3.83*
0.62
1.49**
(-1.90)
(0.14)
(2.32)
(-1.74)
(0.24)
(2.48)
# ﬁrms
-1.21**
-0.01
0.09
-1.64**
0.26
0.05
(-2.56)
(-0.05)
(1.10)
(-2.57)
(0.66)
(0.63)
FEs
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
R2
0.165
0.18
0.404
0.146
0.108
0.402
Events
140
122
298
140
122
298
Panel B: Treatment eﬀect, month 2
HFT
-32.99***
-3.88**
0.85
-44.47***
-3.91*
1.61
(-3.78)
(-2.03)
(0.67)
(-3.62)
(-1.70)
(1.01)
Panel C: Treatment eﬀect, month 3
HFT
-23.22***
-4.38
0.1
-27.35***
-7.5
2.31
(-3.79)
(-1.22)
(0.08)
(-3.09)
(-1.32)
(1.17)
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 8: Passive HFT competition and nonHFT price impacts
The table reports a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on nonHFT price impacts comparing the month
before a stock-entry date of a passive HFT to the ﬁrst, second and third months after the date, run separately
for the second, third and fourth-and-greater HFT ﬁrms to begin trade. The price impact of nonHFT trades
is the volume-weighted, signed diﬀerence between the midquote prevailing contemporaneous to a trade and
the midquote in ﬁve seconds, in basis points from the original midquote, for aggressive trades not initiated by
an HFT. Passive HFT is an HFT that uses predominantly limit orders to trade. For each treatment stock, a
control is matched by Mahalanobis ranking on log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility
and absolute bid-ask spread during the month before the event. The regressors are HFT, the treatment
dummy; after, the post-period dummy; controls for log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price
volatility, and number of traders; and stock-event ﬁxed eﬀects. The event study is ﬁt once using OLS and
once using WLS in which the weighting is the HFT entrant’s volume share during the month. The immediate
one-month entry results are reported in the full table; the second-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported
in Panel B and the third-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel C. The *, **, *** represent
statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock-event
and calendar date.
OLS
WLS
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
Panel A: Treatment eﬀect, month 1
HFT
-10.03**
0.31
-0.83
-15.09**
0.13
-0.01
(-2.18)
(0.11)
(-1.09)
(-2.01)
(0.03)
(-0.01)
Trend
1.40
-0.96
0.15
2.42
-2.54
-0.84
(0.44)
(-0.54)
(0.18)
(0.60)
(-0.83)
(-0.68)
Market cap
37.52
-7.53
-15.75
56.95
8.43
-17.03
(1.20)
(-0.36)
(-1.22)
(1.30)
(0.37)
(-1.05)
TSX volume
3.32*
2.12*
4.46***
3.25
2.49
4.34***
(1.71)
(1.70)
(4.46)
(1.04)
(1.20)
(4.31)
Price
0.15
-0.25
-0.27***
0.17
-0.21
-0.28**
(0.32)
(-1.14)
(-2.85)
(0.23)
(-0.71)
(-2.47)
Volatility
-0.37
2.18**
-0.11
-0.84
2.14*
-0.13
(-0.42)
(2.38)
(-0.39)
(-0.70)
(1.76)
(-0.31)
# ﬁrms
-0.82***
-0.10
-0.11
-0.95***
-0.23
-0.20*
(-3.56)
(-0.54)
(-1.57)
(-3.03)
(-0.65)
(-1.66)
FEs
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
R2
0.156
0.161
0.287
0.165
0.139
0.275
Events
140
122
298
140
122
298
Panel B: Treatment eﬀect, month 2
HFT
-7.25
-2.17
-1.40
-10.91
-5.53
-1.52
(-1.29)
(-0.96)
(-1.15)
(-1.23)
(-1.46)
(-0.81)
Panel C: Treatment eﬀect, month 3
HFT
-13.30**
-2.43
-2.05
-17.09*
-4.91
-4.02
(-2.20)
(-1.17)
(-1.52)
(-1.88)
(-1.53)
(-1.46)
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 9: Passive HFT competition and inside depth
The table reports a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on inside depth comparing the month before a
stock-entry date of a passive HFT to the ﬁrst, second and third months after the date, run separately for the
second, third and fourth-and-greater HFT ﬁrms to begin trade. Inside depth is the sum of the quantity of
limit orders outstanding at the best-bid and best-ask prices. Passive HFT is an HFT that uses predominantly
limit orders to trade. For each treatment stock, a control is matched by Mahalanobis ranking on log market
cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility and absolute bid-ask spread during the month before the
event. The regressors are HFT, the treatment dummy; after, the post-period dummy; controls for log market
cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility, and number of traders; and stock-event ﬁxed eﬀects. The
event study is ﬁt once using OLS and once using WLS in which the weighting is the HFT entrant’s volume
share during the month. The immediate one-month entry results are reported in the full table; the secondmonth entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the third-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported
in Panel C. The *, **, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Standard errors
are double-clustered by stock-event and calendar date.
OLS
WLS
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
Panel A: Treatment eﬀect, month 1
HFT
1958.67
-1066.41
1393.02
1028.23
40
840.55
(1.49)
(-0.61)
(1.16)
(1.46)
(0.06)
(1.04)
Trend
781.51
-835.27
682.95
492.91
-509.01
1167.07**
(1.13)
(-0.94)
(0.87)
(0.93)
(-1.14)
(2.05)
Market cap
1354.63
4981.1
2988.86
310.33
2768.64
-4232.02
(0.35)
(0.52)
(0.14)
(0.09)
(0.32)
(-0.22)
TSX volume
1160.30***
1948.67***
2963.25***
1059.66***
1252.84***
2380.02***
(2.88)
(4.28)
(8.07)
(2.89)
(4.74)
(7.09)
Price
204.7
-132.48
137.05
223.79*
32.25
59.22
(1.29)
(-0.30)
(0.79)
(1.77)
(0.24)
(0.62)
Volatility
64.57
-1247.13***
434.79
158.42
-681.27***
209.23
(0.16)
(-2.95)
(1.45)
(0.60)
(-3.29)
(0.83)
# ﬁrms
232.16***
47.95
-15.43
238.16***
64.61*
31.19
(3.70)
(0.67)
(-0.25)
(4.26)
(1.80)
(0.60)
FEs
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
R2
0.81
0.842
0.861
0.798
0.838
0.844
Events
140
122
298
140
122
298
Panel B: Treatment eﬀect, month 2
HFT
4143.81*
1133.56
-150.12
2095.66
831.35
16.63
(1.77)
(0.54)
(-0.14)
(1.18)
(0.81)
(0.02)
Panel C: Treatment eﬀect, month 3
HFT
3191.03
2177.86
393.82
166.92
1336.19
882.9
(1.22)
(1.39)
(0.34)
(0.11)
(1.26)
(1.05)
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 10: HFT competition and HFT’s share of volume
The table reports a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on HFT’s volume share comparing the month before
a stock-entry date of an HFT to the ﬁrst, second and third months after the date, run separately for the
second, third and fourth-and-greater HFT ﬁrms to begin trade. HFT share of volume is the percentage of
daily volume for which an HFT ﬁrm is one counterparty. For each treatment stock, a control is matched
by Mahalanobis ranking on log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility and absolute
bid-ask spread during the month before the event. The regressors are HFT, the treatment dummy; after, the
post-period dummy; controls for log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility, and number
of traders; and stock-event ﬁxed eﬀects. The event study is ﬁt once using OLS and once using WLS in
which the weighting is the HFT entrant’s volume share during the month. The immediate one-month entry
results are reported in the full table; the second-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the
third-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel C. The *, **, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock-event and calendar date.
OLS
WLS
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
Panel A: Treatment eﬀect, month 1
HFT
4.94***
3.30***
2.36***
6.19***
3.72***
2.33***
(5.77)
(6.22)
(9.92)
(5.22)
(5.65)
(8.29)
Trend
-0.57
-0.25
-0.23
-0.94*
-0.22
0.05
(-1.26)
(-0.67)
(-1.16)
(-1.65)
(-0.51)
(0.20)
Market cap
6.47
21.26***
-0.47
9.97
20.31***
0.37
(1.00)
(6.95)
(-0.31)
(1.58)
(6.12)
(0.18)
TSX volume
0.31
-0.07
-0.62***
0.45*
0.17
-0.39**
(1.51)
(-0.29)
(-3.60)
(1.85)
(0.71)
(-2.03)
Price
0.1
0.15
-0.08**
0.1
0.2
-0.05
(0.82)
(1.21)
(-2.10)
(0.69)
(1.47)
(-0.86)
Volatility
-0.27*
-0.46**
-0.17***
-0.17
-0.67**
-0.13**
(-1.70)
(-2.11)
(-3.61)
(-0.99)
(-2.52)
(-2.29)
# ﬁrms
-0.02
0.13***
0.18***
-0.01
0.06
0.10***
(-0.55)
(2.59)
(6.10)
(-0.15)
(1.46)
(3.72)
FEs
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
R2
0.679
0.707
0.66
0.657
0.703
0.664
Events
189
176
643
189
176
643
Panel B: Treatment eﬀect, month 2
HFT
4.52***
3.78***
2.60***
4.43***
3.87***
2.50***
(4.78)
(5.82)
(8.70)
(3.68)
(5.25)
(7.31)
Panel C: Treatment eﬀect, month 3
HFT
5.31***
4.51***
2.77***
6.03***
5.14***
2.67***
(5.63)
(6.17)
(7.96)
(4.81)
(5.92)
(6.37)
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 11: HFT competition and HFT incumbents’ share of volume
The table reports a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on the volume share of HFT incumbents comparing
the month before a stock-entry date of an HFT to the ﬁrst, second and third months after the date, run
separately for the second, third and fourth-and-greater HFT ﬁrms to begin trade. HFT incumbents’ share
of volume is the percentage of daily volume for which an incumbent HFT ﬁrm (i.e. not the entrant in the
treatment stock) is one counterparty. For each treatment stock, a control is matched by Mahalanobis ranking
on log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility and absolute bid-ask spread during the
month before the event. The regressors are HFT, the treatment dummy; after, the post-period dummy;
controls for log market cap, log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility, and number of traders; and
stock-event ﬁxed eﬀects. The event study is ﬁt once using OLS and once using WLS in which the weighting
is the HFT entrant’s volume share during the month. The immediate one-month entry results are reported
in the full table; the second-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the third-month entry
HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel C. The *, **, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level. Standard errors are double-clustered by stock-event and calendar date.
OLS
WLS
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
Panel A: Treatment eﬀect, month 1
HFT
-5.13***
-0.93*
-0.41*
-5.89***
-1.10*
-0.71***
(-6.78)
(-1.91)
(-1.82)
(-6.18)
(-1.84)
(-2.74)
Trend
-0.52
-0.76**
-0.50**
-0.68
-1.04***
-0.2
(-1.22)
(-2.11)
(-2.56)
(-1.23)
(-2.71)
(-0.87)
Market cap
2.05
20.26***
-0.3
5.71
20.39***
-0.18
(0.35)
(6.32)
(-0.18)
(0.99)
(6.09)
(-0.09)
TSX volume
0.60***
0.18
-0.62***
0.86***
0.49*
-0.35*
(2.88)
(0.76)
(-3.63)
(3.45)
(1.95)
(-1.81)
Price
0.08
0.09
-0.04
0.06
0.1
-0.04
(0.61)
(0.79)
(-0.82)
(0.34)
(0.88)
(-0.89)
Volatility
-0.12
-0.36*
-0.18***
-0.07
-0.42*
-0.16***
(-0.80)
(-1.72)
(-3.03)
(-0.43)
(-1.72)
(-2.72)
# ﬁrms
-0.01
0.13**
0.18***
0
0.05
0.10***
(-0.37)
(2.52)
(5.89)
(-0.04)
(1.19)
(3.65)
FEs
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
R2
0.704
0.698
0.665
0.681
0.701
0.673
Events
189
176
643
189
176
643
Panel B: Treatment eﬀect, month 2
HFT
-6.64***
0.14
-0.27
-8.56***
-0.05
-0.53
(-6.20)
(0.22)
(-0.93)
(-6.23)
(-0.06)
(-1.57)
Panel C: Treatment eﬀect, month 3
HFT
-6.01***
0.45
-0.41
-7.54***
0.78
-0.69*
(-5.17)
(0.64)
(-1.24)
(-5.17)
(0.92)
(-1.74)
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999

Table 12: Passive HFT competition and HFT incumbent eﬀective spreads
The table reports a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on the eﬀective spreads of HFT incumbents comparing the month before a stock-entry date of a passive HFT to the ﬁrst, second and third months after the
date, run separately for the second, third and fourth-and-greater HFT ﬁrms to begin trade. HFT incumbent
eﬀective spread is the eﬀective spread of trades in which an incumbent HFT ﬁrm (i.e. not the entrant in the
treatment stock) is the passive counterparty. Passive HFT is an HFT that uses predominantly limit orders
to trade. For each treatment stock, a control is matched by Mahalanobis ranking on log market cap, log
TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility and absolute bid-ask spread during the month before the event.
The regressors are HFT, the treatment dummy; after, the post-period dummy; controls for log market cap,
log TSX volume, price, 10-day price volatility, and number of traders; and stock-event ﬁxed eﬀects. The
event study is ﬁt once using OLS and once using WLS in which the weighting is the HFT entrant’s volume
share during the month. The immediate one-month entry results are reported in the full table; the secondmonth entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported in Panel B and the third-month entry HFT coeﬃcient is reported
in Panel C. The *, **, *** represent statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. Standard errors
are double-clustered by stock-event and calendar date.
OLS
WLS
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
2nd HFT
3rd HFT
4th+
Panel A: Treatment eﬀect, month 1
HFT
-36.61***
-3.02**
-0.2
-52.81***
-4.04*
0.62
(-4.52)
(-2.14)
(-0.31)
(-4.53)
(-1.84)
(0.61)
Trend
5.93
1.17
0.62
8.28
0.75
0.4
(0.73)
(0.91)
(0.88)
(0.76)
(0.40)
(0.38)
Market cap
-12.67
-38.71
-3.62
-25.4
-23.18
-3.99
(-0.52)
(-1.08)
(-0.82)
(-0.53)
(-1.13)
(-0.82)
TSX volume
1.14
1.65
-0.46
0.44
2.17
0.38
(0.41)
(1.32)
(-0.40)
(0.10)
(1.05)
(0.24)
Price
-1.07
-0.60***
-0.14**
-2.09
-0.66**
-0.07
(-1.06)
(-2.87)
(-2.07)
(-1.48)
(-2.50)
(-0.71)
Volatility
-1.84
2.37***
0.77**
-2.31
2.45**
1.36**
(-1.32)
(2.65)
(2.07)
(-1.06)
(2.14)
(2.27)
# ﬁrms
-2.43***
-0.37**
-0.21***
-3.25***
-0.43*
-0.39***
(-4.39)
(-2.52)
(-3.51)
(-4.21)
(-1.83)
(-2.94)
FEs
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
R2
0.364
0.605
0.607
0.35
0.527
0.608
Events
140
122
298
140
122
298
Panel B: Treatment eﬀect, month 2
HFT
-38.20***
-5.14**
-1.66
-52.08***
-7.85**
-1.29
(-3.30)
(-2.33)
(-0.97)
(-3.13)
(-2.44)
(-0.58)
Panel C: Treatment eﬀect, month 3
HFT
-30.83***
-4.70*
-1.11
-44.32***
-7.00**
-0.97
(-3.61)
(-1.89)
(-0.99)
(-3.13)
(-2.41)
(-0.66)
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435999
