High-frequency trading and institutional trading costs∗
Marie Chen†
Corey Garriott‡
October 17, 2019
ABSTRACT
Using data on Canadian bond futures, we examine how high-frequency traders
(HFTs) interact with institutions building large positions. In contrast to recent ﬁndings, we ﬁnd HFTs in the data act as small-sized liquidity suppliers, and we reject the
hypothesis that they engage in back running, a predatory trading strategy. Using a
quasi-experiment in November 2011, in which a number of HFTs started trading the
bond future, we run a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study and ﬁnd more competition
among HFTs improves implementation shortfall, eﬀective spreads, and short-term price
impacts for institutional trading in Canadian bond futures.
JEL classiﬁcation: G20, G14, L10
Keywords: High-frequency trading, institutional trading, predatory trading
∗We are grateful to participants at the Telfer School of Business, the 2018 European Capital Markets
Conference, the 2017 Canadian Annual Derivatives Conference, and the Ontario Securities Commission, as
well as to Jason Allen, David Cimon, Jean-S´ebastien Fontaine, Sophie Lefebvre, Darcey McVanel, Loriana
Pelizzon, Ryan Riordan, Harri Vikstedt, and Jonathan Witmer for advice and suggestions.
This paper
represents the opinions of the authors and does not reﬂect the views of the Bank of Canada.
†Bain Capital. email: marie.chen@bain.com
‡Financial Markets Department, Bank of Canada. email: cgarriott@bankofcanada.ca
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

I.
Introduction
High-frequency trading (HFT) has expanded its reach, moving beyond its traditional
base in equity markets and into markets for ﬁxed income. HFT ﬁrms are now the largest
participants on US trading platforms for bonds (Fleming et al. 2018) and are active on a
variety of ﬁxed-income derivatives on the CME. It is natural that HFT would seek new
opportunities, as its trading proﬁts from equity markets have tapered since 2009 (Tabb
2017). However, the ﬁxed-income market is not like the equity market, and while HFT is
well-suited for equity, it is not obvious how it can play a substantial role in ﬁxed income.
HFT ﬁrms are capital-light and hence prefer to trade in small sizes. That works well for the
small retail traders common in equity markets (Malinova et al. 2018). But, in ﬁxed income,
the retail presence is scant. Rather, most of the participants in ﬁxed income are institutional
investors, such as big banks or funds, that move positions sized in the millions of dollars.
HFT ﬁrms lack the capital to be counterparty to these positions, so it is unclear what role
HFT is playing in ﬁxed income.
Since HFT’s role is unclear, it is worth examining whether high-frequency traders (HFTs)
behave the same way in ﬁxed-income markets as they have been found to behave in equity
markets. This can deepen our understanding of HFT’s role in general, by showing how it
adapts (or stays the same) in diﬀerent circumstances. The literature on HFT in equity has
identiﬁed a drawback to HFT, namely that it can use predatory trading to raise costs for
institutional investors (Yang and Zhu 2018). Since ﬁxed-income markets are distinguished
by an even greater presence of institutional investors, we re-examine recent ﬁndings in a
ﬁxed-income context to see if the results intensify. Speciﬁcally, we take a second look at
some of the ﬁndings in van Kervel and Menkveld (2019) and also Korajczyk and Murphy
(2019), which ﬁnd evidence pointing to HFT predation on institutions. In contrast to these
papers, our data reject the hypothesis of predation. Instead, we ﬁnd limited evidence of an
improvement in institutional trading costs attributable to HFT.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

In this paper, we ask whether HFTs in a ﬁxed-income dataset can be found to prey on
institutional trading using back running (Yang and Zhu 2018), the mechanism that has motivated recent empirical work. In addition, we also look for corroborating evidence of a change
in liquidity metrics attributable to HFT. To study the research question, we sample orderbook data on Government of Canada bond futures 2009–2015 from the Canadian derivatives
exchange, the Montr´eal Exchange (MX). We identify HFTs empirically as participants that
satisfy three standard criteria taken from the literature (Kirilenko et al. 2017; Weller 2017): a
high switching rate, a zero overnight inventory four days out of ﬁve, and an average order
lifetime of less than one minute. We also identify institutional trading empirically by ﬁnding
sequences of trades that likely represent the objective of an agency to build a large position.
Speciﬁcally, we locate “trade strings” by a participant: sequences of trades that are nearby
in time, are all in the same direction, and are for a position size of at least CAD $2 million.
The MX data are advantageous to study the research question. The sample is long and
comes from a prominent ﬁxed-income market: The front bond future is the most-traded
single security in Canada by value and provides the leading price for price discovery on the
Canadian yield curve (Campbell and Hendry 2008). Moreover, the data are advantageous
particularly for studying HFTs because HFTs have no other electronic access to markets
for Canadian ﬁxed income. There are no other electronic derivatives markets in Canada;
there is no electronic access to the underlying bond market in Canada; the CME in the
US does not list any ﬁxed-income derivatives on Canadian underlying; and there is no ETF
focusing on the Canadian 10-year government sector or even the 5 to 10 sector. So, there is
no possibility of cross-market netting or cash-and-carry arbitrage outside of the data sample,
meaning the HFT positions we observe are likely to represent their entire exposure to the
10-year Canadian sector.
Using the data, we reject the hypothesis that HFTs prey on institutional investors. Across
a cross-section of positions being built by institutions, we ﬁnd that HFTs hold aggregate
positions in the opposite direction of the positions—i.e., they are short the future during
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

institutional buying, and they are long the future during selling. This is the opposite sign
of the position predicted by theory on back running, in which a back runner strategically
builds a position in the same direction as its prey. To the contrary, while we do observe HFTs
trading large quantities with institutional traders, HFTs hold on aggregate the counterparty
position. This is the behaviour of a theoretical (albeit short-term) liquidity provider and not
a predator.
Importantly, the rejection of back running holds across three cross-sections of the positions built by institutions: by size, by duration (time to completion), and by long-term
price impact.
The result is important because, in the theory, the back-runner trader is
assumed to observe the trading of an investor who is fundamentally informed. Therefore,
strictly speaking, the theory only predicts predation to occur when the institutional trader
is informed.1 To test speciﬁcally the case of an informed institutional trader, we look at
trade strings with large size and long duration, for which the price impact after ﬁve days is a
statistically signiﬁcant three basis points. Due to the long-lasting and large price impact (for
ﬁxed income), this cross-section of trade strings likely derives from informedness. We reject
back running for this group of strings, and we also reject it for a group of strings selected
for large ex post ﬁve-day price impact.
To provide some identiﬁcation, and to corroborate the result, we exploit a quasi-experiment
in late 2011. In November 2011, at least one HFT in the data exited the market and more
HFTs entered the market, creating a sudden increase in HFT competition as measured by the
Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index.2 Using this plausibly exogenous variation in HFT competition,
we ﬁt a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (DiD) event study to estimate a treatment eﬀect on three
liquidity metrics: the implementation shortfalls of the trade strings; and the eﬀective spreads
and per-trade price impacts of the trades composing the trade strings. The control group
1Older theory on predation does not limit its prediction to the case of informed trading. Brunnermeier
and Pedersen (2005), for example, applies to all cases in which an institutional trader has motivation to
construct a position in a limited amount of time. The older theory also applies to our case and makes the
same prediction about the sign of the predator’s position. Still, to ensure the newer theory applies, we focus
on informed trading nonetheless.
2To protect the interests of its clients, MX asked that we not disclose the exact numbers of HFTs.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

for the study is the interest-rate future listed on the MX, which is a good control because
it has a market structure inimical to HFT, thus attracting almost no HFT volume, yet
otherwise it shares risk factors and the clientele with bond futures. Similar to other work
on HFT competition (Brogaard and Garriott 2019), but in contrast to ﬁndings on HFT and
institutions, we ﬁnd HFT competition improved implementation shortfall, eﬀective spreads,
and certain per-trade price-impact metrics in the bond future relative to the interest-rate
future. This is consistent with HFT acting as an eﬃcient short-term market intermediary
and an enforcer of short-term price eﬃciency, as it has be found to act elsewhere (Brogaard
et al. 2014; Menkveld 2013; Hendershott et al. 2011).
Taken as a whole, the results shed light on the role of HFT in ﬁxed income. They are
consistent with the interpretation of HFT as a short-term, low-inventory liquidity supplier.
We ﬁnd HFTs in the data supply liquidity because, as mentioned, they hold the counterparty
position to institutional trading in the data. However, the “good news” is quite limited. We
also ﬁnd that the inventory they bear is small in size and held only brieﬂy, as they lay oﬀ
the inventory almost immediately after acquiring it, almost always maintaining an inventory
position of less than $100K—even when trading with trade strings for positions of $100M
and more. Thus, HFT’s beneﬁt to the market is going to be limited, since it does not take
on signiﬁcant risk. The results from the event study conﬁrm the interpretation, as the HFTs
only improve shorter-term price impacts: The price is delayed from going where it will, but
it goes there eventually. Again, this is consistent with the activity of a market intermediary
that agrees to take the counterparty position but lays it oﬀquickly to another counterparty,
possibly one with long-term risk-bearing capacity, such as a bank.
The results stand in contrast to recent work on HFT and institutions. In our view, this
could be due to the setting of ﬁxed income, but it also might be due to a diﬀerent mix of
advantages and disadvantages in our dataset. The obvious disadvantage of our data is the
empirical identiﬁcation of both HFT and institutional trading. The advantage of van Kervel
and Menkveld (2019) and Korajczyk and Murphy (2019) is their ex ante knowledge of both
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

HFT status and of institutional status.
However, as a trade-oﬀ, we are able to view a
consolidated market rather than a fragmented market, as the HFTs we identify are unable
to oﬀset their exposures in other markets because there are no related markets for related
assets, such as the large cross-border market in Korajczyk and Murphy (2019) or the other
exchanges in van Kervel and Menkveld (2019). As van Kervel and Menkveld (2019) comment,
“An important caveat of this study is that we do not observe the trades by HFTs on these
alternative markets.” HFTs could be hedging in one market by trading in another market
or for another asset. The observed “with-the-ﬂow” trading is quite possibly enabled by a
hedge. Indeed, as Menkveld (2013) found, HFTs do more of their activity between markets
than within them. Our data do not have the caveat, and we reach an opposite conclusion,
suggesting the caveat may be a material impediment.
We contribute to the literature by providing more evidence on HFT and institutions
but from a ﬁxed-income market rather than an equity market. In a manuscipt, Tong (2014)
found warning signs that HFT presence is correlated with institutional costs. Hirschey (2019)
documents that HFTs apppear to have the ability to anticipate short-term order ﬂows and
trade ahead of them. Korajczyk and Murphy (2019) and van Kervel and Menkveld (2019)
study datasets in which both HFTs and institutional traders are ex ante identiﬁed and ﬁnd
evidence that HFTs may be back running as described by Yang and Zhu (2018).
Last,
Garriott and Riordan (2019) study an empirically identiﬁed set of long-term investors and
ﬁnd they adversely select other traders, including a set of shorter-term traders.
II.
Data and summary statistics
The data come from Montr´eal Exchange (MX), Canada’s derivatives exchange.
The
MX’s major ﬁxed-income products are the CGB contract, the future on the Government of
Canada 10-year bond; and the BAX contracts, a set of futures on the Canadian Banker’s
Acceptance rate (the rate used for the CDOR index). The contract size for the CGB is par
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

value $100,000; for the BAX, par value $1 million. We refer to the CGB contract as the
bond future and to the BAX contracts as the rates futures.
The underlying Government of Canada bonds trade OTC via telephone and chat room
and also via three interdealer brokers: Shorcan, Freedom, and Tullet Prebon. There is no
direct electronic access to the brokers, and there are no derivatives on speciﬁcally Canadian
bonds or rates listed on other exchanges, such as the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, and there
are no ETF products covering the 10-year Government of Canada sector (nor a “mid-range”
sector such as a 5-10). For more on Government of Canada securities market structure, see
Berger-Soucy et al. (2018).
For every trading day 2009–2014, the data contain one report on every quotation, update,
ﬁll and cancel for bond and rates futures. Each report contains ﬁelds such as price, quantity,
millisecond timestamp, side (buy or sell), initiation (buyer or seller), and information suﬃcient to distinguish the counterparty as required by Section 1.A and Section 1.B. We drop
early-hour and after-hour activity, deﬁned as activity prior to the 8:20 a.m. market open and
after the 4:00 p.m. market close. For bond futures, only one expiry has material volume, so
we keep data on only the front contract. For rates futures, there is ample volume through
the curve. To choose a good comparison contract, we keep whichever of the ﬁrst three rates
futures by expiry has the highest daily volume.
Figure 1 plots the trading volume of the bond futures and the ﬁrst three rates futures by
expiry. In the ﬁgure, bond-future volumes grow through the sample period, whereas volumes
for rates futures are level after 2011. The two series begin to diverge after 2012, which is
after many HFTs begin trading the bond future.
FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE
Using the data, we compute daily series on: Volatility, the two-week rolling standard
deviation of the daily close price log return, annualized; Time to change, the number of
minutes until a change in the bid or ask price; Order lifetime, the number of minutes the
average limit order rests; Percent ticklocked, the percent of the time the bid-ask spread is
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

equal to the tick size; Inside depth, the sum of the quantities of visible limit orders at the bid
and ask prices; Trades, the number of trades; and Trade size, the size (in millions of dollars)
of the trades.
A.
The rates futures are a good control for the bond futures
Table 1 gives summary statistics on these metrics by year. These statistics are useful for
understanding why HFTs are attracted to bond futures but not rates futures.
TABLE I ABOUT HERE
Compared to the bond future, the rates-futures market is a tick-locked market with minimal
price volatility and enormous depth at the inside quotes. For example, in the ﬁrst year of
the sample, the rates future was tick-locked 90% of the time compared to 29% for the bond
future. The rates future had a price volatility of 0.46, an order of magnitude below the
volatility of 7.1 of the bond future and two orders of magnitude below the volatility of a
typical stock on the TSX (around 40). The same year, the depth at the inside quote was
around CAD $2 billion, three orders of magnitude above the depth of the bond future ($3.3
million) and four orders of magnitude above the depth of a typical TSX stock ($700K). The
inside depth at the bid and ask of the rates future could be described as two walls of liquidity
that, given the low volatility, hardly budge. Anecdotally, “if you place an order for the BAX
on Monday, it might ﬁll on Tuesday.” Indeed, the average time to a average price change of
the rates future was more than 30 minutes, compared to around nine seconds for the bond
future, and less than four seconds for the typical stock on the TSX.
As other studies have found, HFTs prefer lower-depth, higher-volatility markets (Cox
et al. 2019). It is not proﬁtable for HFTs to trade a contract such as the BAX because they
are unable to exit a position quickly except by crossing the spread. Again, for the rates
future, HFTs must wait 30 minutes for a typical queue (set of limit orders at the same price)
to clear. Rather, HFTs make proﬁts from volatile markets with frequent price changes and
ample opportunity to quote orders (Baron et al. 2019). Since the rates future is a market
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

with poor structure for HFT, yet a market that otherwise shares interest-rate risks (exposure
to the level factor of the yield curve) and otherwise shares the same clientele (big Canadian
banks and funds), we argue it is an eﬀective control for liquidity trends in the bond future.
B.
The HFTs are identiﬁed empirically
To identify participants as HFTs, we draw from the literature three criteria that their
behaviour must satisfy throughout the sample (Kirilenko et al. 2017; Weller 2017): criteria
on overnight inventory, on switching, and on order lifetime. We take these criteria from work
largely on equity markets. Therefore, we are assuming that HFTs in ﬁxed income are not
fundamentally diﬀerent from those in equity in terms of their willingness to bear inventory,
their lack of a preference between buying and selling, and their tendency to adjust their
position on the order book at a high frequency.
The overnight inventory criterion requires the participant to carry zero inventory during
four days out of ﬁve through the sample. This criterion is meant to ensure the participant is
reluctant to take risk at term, a deﬁning feature of HFTs. The switching criterion requires
the participant to follow buy trades with sells or sell trades with buys at least a fourth of
the time. This is meant to ensure the participant does not trade directionally on average,
another deﬁning feature of HFTs (versus, e.g., algorithmic order execution).
The order
lifetime criterion requires the participant to leave its average limit order on the book for less
than one minute. This is meant to ensure the participant rapidly adjusts its position on the
order book in response to new information, a ﬁnal deﬁning characteristic of HFT.
Our set of empirically identiﬁed HFTs is robust to the relaxation of any one of the three
criteria.
If we were to remove the criterion on either the inventory, switching, or order
lifetime, we would still identify the same participants as HFTs. Figure 2 plots the volume
share of HFTs in the bond and rates futures.
FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

As the market-structure statistics in Table I would predict, HFTs have a signiﬁcant presence
in the bond future but lack presence in rates futures. For the bond future, HFTs’ volume
share increases from around 5% in 2009 to around 30% in 2014. In contrast, HFTs’ volume
share in rates futures is zero in the beginning and peaks at around 3% in 2012. HFTs’
presence in the bond future may explain the continued growth in its volume relative to rates
futures in Figure 1.
Table II gives summary statistics on the behaviour of participants split in two groups: HFT
and nonHFT. The statistics are averaged over members of the two groups once per year of
the sample. The statistics are the previously deﬁned order lifetime, switching rate, overnight
inventory, and number of trades, plus two new statistics: Quotes, the average daily number
of new limit orders inserted on the order book; and Cancels, the average daily number of
canceled limit orders (orders removed from the order book).
TABLE II ABOUT HERE
The HFT group exhibits markedly diﬀerent characteristics from the nonHFT group. The
order lifetimes of HFTs are two orders of magnitude less than the nonHFTs. For example,
in 2012, the average lifetime was 45 seconds compared to 22 minutes. The switching rates
are also larger, being twice to three times those of nonHFTs; 27% compared to 9% in 2012.
And, the overnight inventories are two orders of magnitude greater than those of nonHFTs;
in 2012, only 2 contracts compared to 541. These statistics are the ones used to select the
groups, so perhaps it is not surprising that they diﬀer so greatly. They could be said to
diﬀer by construction. However, as mentioned, the identiﬁcation of HFTs is robust to the
removal of any one of the three criteria. So, for example, even if only the order lifetime and
switching rate criteria were used to distinguish HFTs, the overnight inventories would diﬀer
in the exact same way.
Moreover, there are diﬀerences in the numbers of quotes, trades, and cancels. The statistic
on quotes shows the largest diﬀerence: 7647 new orders a day for HFTs compared to 1930
for nonHFTs (in 2012), a diﬀerence of four times. Still, these three statistics do not diﬀer
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

as starkly between the groups as they do in equity markets. For example, in equities data,
HFTs can trade upward of 10 times as often as the average nonHFT, whereas in this sample
the HFTs trade more frequently but not, say, 10 times more frequently. In this it is helpful to
remember that the median account in equities data would come from a small investment ﬁrm,
whereas the median account in ﬁxed-income data is a large institutional trader (since they
are practically all large traders), and institutions are sophisticated and active on markets.
HFTs in ﬁxed income diﬀer more by their low-risk, frequently modiﬁed trading strategy than
by the raw number of trades.
C.
The institutional trading is also identiﬁed empirically
To study HFTs’ activity as large participants build large positions, we identify apparent
instances of an agency building a large position empirically.
Our strategy is to identify
series of trades located nearby in time, that are unidirectional, and that amount to a “large”
position.
A “trade string” is deﬁned as at least four consecutive unidirectional (all buy
or all sell) trades in which one participant builds a net position at least $2 million in size
and with no more than a 20-minute gap between the participant’s trades.3 The gap allows
us to distinguish trade strings that derive from potentially diﬀerent trading intentions or
perhaps from diﬀerent parent orders.4 Furthermore, we allow for attempts at misdirection
by participants, often called “tape-colouring,” by allowing trade strings that have 5% of their
volume in violation of unidirectionality.5
We consider the identiﬁcation strategy conservative. There are many accounts that mix
buy and sell orders from clients who may, individually, be trying to build large positions. Our
identiﬁcation strategy will discard these trades since they will appear to be bidirectional.
To examine cross-sections of the strings, we bin them by their size in volume; time to
completion in duration; and “informedness” in permanent price impact. Volume is the total
3For example, a participant that purchases $25 million from 9:00 a.m. to 9:10 a.m. and another $25 million
from 10:00 a.m. to 10:10 a.m. conducts two separate strings of $25 million and not one of $50 million.
4We have tried the analysis for gap sizes of 10 minutes and 30 minutes, and it does not change the results.
5We have tried the analysis for a 0% violation of unidirectionality, and it does not change the results.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

size of the position constructed by the end of the trade string. The volume bins are $2–$10
million, $10–$25 million, $25–$100 million, and $100+ million. Duration is two times the
volume-weighted trade times (the measure is multiplied by two because raw duration is a
half life). The duration bins are 0–10 min., 10–60 min., and 60+ min. “Permanent” or
long-term price impact is the change in the midquote price observed some increment of time
after the last trade in the trade string. There is one price-impact bin: price impacts of 3+
cents after ﬁve days.6
There are interesting correlations among the bins. As one would expect, the size and
duration are correlated with informedness. In general, the larger the string and the longer
it is worked, the greater its long-term (ﬁve day) price impact. Figure 4 shows price impacts
observed at many lags after the strings terminate. The price impacts are observed at: string
termination, end-of-day, and ﬁve 24-hour increments after the string termination. The panels
of Figure 4 give the impacts in four panels for four selected cross-sections of trade strings:
(a) $2–25M; (b) those of size $25M–$100M and of duration at least 10 minutes; (c) those of
size $100+ and of duration at least 60 minutes; and (d) those of long-term price impact of at
least three basis points. These were chosen to give examples of uninformed, less-informed,
and more-informed strings as well as high-impact strings. For the interested reader, in the
Bank of Canada working paper version of this paper, we give the charts for all cross-sections
of strings.
FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE
For the $2–$25M strings, the immediate price impact is small, almost zero, and quickly
vanishes into insigniﬁcance by the next day. For the $25–100M strings lasting more than 10
minutes, the immediate price impact is moderate (one basis point) and stays signiﬁcant for
two days. Even after the impact becomes insigniﬁcant, it is only barely insigniﬁcant, and
the estimated impact remains one basis point even ﬁve days out. Arguably, these strings
6The long-term or ﬁve-day price impact is not the per-trade price impacts of individual trades in the trade
strings. We also study the per-trade price impacts, but when we write long-term (ﬁve-day) price impacts,
we mean the price movement after the entire trade string is ﬁnished, not after individual trades in the string.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

are mildly informed, and are moderately useful for testing Yang and Zhu (2018). Last, for
the $100+ strings worked for longer than an hour, the immediate price impact is three basis
points, and it is statistically signiﬁcant at the maximum interval of ﬁve days. This is a large,
permanent price impact for ﬁxed income due to the size of the notionals. Arguably, these
are among the most informed strings in the sample and are the most useful for testing Yang
and Zhu (2018).
III.
HFTs do not back run on aggregate in the data
Before studying whether HFTs back run institutions that are building a large position,
we ﬁrst check whether HFT engages at all with institutions while they are trading. This is
to check whether HFT is materially interacting with institutions in the spirit of Korajczyk
and Murphy (2019). We compute the HFT counterparty share of trade strings as the percent
of volume in the trade string transacted with any of the HFTs. In Figure 3, we report this
counterparty share during four segments of a trade string: during the ﬁrst quartile of volume,
the second, the third, and the fourth. To see whether HFT’s share varies by the size of the
position an institution is building, we report the counterparty shares for our cross-sections
of trade strings by volume: $2–10M, $10–25M, $25–100M and $100M+.
FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE
Institutions transact 26% to 35% of their volume with HFTs depending on the size of
the position they are building and the amount of the position they have already built. This
conﬁrms HFTs are interacting with institutions as they build large positions. HFTs are
counterparty to 35% of the volume of trade strings $2–$10M, 30% of the $10–25M, 27% of
the $25–100M, and 26% of the $100M+. Clearly, HFTs trade less with larger strings, so HFTs
are in some sense aware of when large ﬂows are passing through the market and attempt to
reduce their exposure to these ﬂows. HFTs also reduce their participation during the life
of a trade string, as is visible in the ﬁgure: HFTs reduce participation for each subsequent
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

quarter of the four volume groupings of trade strings. Still, the largest withdrawal is just
seven percentage points (out of 35) for the $2–$10 million bin. In contrast to Korajczyk and
Murphy (2019), we ﬁnd a smaller withdrawal overall, and we ﬁnd the withdrawal is smallest
in percentage points for the largest institutional positions.
Next, we move to ask whether HFTs in our data behave consistent with theory on back
running. In theory on back running and on predation more generally (Yang and Zhu 2018;
Brunnermeier and Pedersen 2005), a predator trader buys while a “victim” participant is
buying (or sells when the “victim” is selling). The predator’s intention is to build a sizeable
position before the victim is ﬁnished trading. This impacts the price, but since the victim
has a need to trade, the victim has no choice but to pay the impacted price. When the
victim is ﬁnishing its trading, the predator moves to divest its position. The strategy is
proﬁtable because the predator divests at an impacted price. Drawing from the theory, we
test whether HFTs are engaging in predation by testing whether they buy during buy trade
strings and sell during sell trade strings and whether they reverse this behaviour near the
end of a trade string.7
To perform the test, we ﬁrst compute the cumulative order ﬂow of three trading groups: the
participant working a string; all HFTs in the market; and all others in the market. The cumulative order ﬂow of a group is the cumulative sum of securities bought or sold by the group
starting at the timestamp when the trade string began. We observe the cumulative order
ﬂows at ten moments during the lifetime of each trade string: at each one-tenth volume
increment of the string (so at one-tenth complete by volume, at two-tenths complete by
volume, and so on), and then we also observe it thirty minutes after the string ﬁnishes.
To normalize sell trade strings with buy trade strings, all trades for a sell trade string are
reversed in sign. The three order ﬂows aggregate to zero since by deﬁnition there is a buyer
for every seller.
7We do not test whether HFTs begin trading before the trade string as this would be a test for illegal
front running, not back running, which presumes the HFT learns of a trade ﬂow contemporaneous to the
ﬂow, as in Yang and Zhu (2018) or Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005).
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 5 displays the cumulative order ﬂows in blue (the trade string), red (all HFTs)
and green (all others), observed at the stated moments during a trade string, averaged for
four selected cross-sections of trade strings: those of size $2–25M; those of size $25M–$100M
and of duration at least 10 minutes; those of size $100+ and of duration at least 60 minutes;
and those of long-term price impact of at least three basis points. These are the same as in
Figure 4 and were chosen to give examples of uninformed, less-informed, and more-informed
strings as well as high-impact strings. For the interested reader, in the Bank of Canada
working paper version of this paper, we give the charts for all cross-sections of strings. The
result is the same for all of them.
FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE
HFT trading does not satisfy the theoretical prediction. HFT cumulative order ﬂow is always
in the opposite direction of the trade string, meaning HFTs, in net, are sellers to buy trade
strings and buyers from sell trade strings. They take the counterparty position. This is
consistent with a strategy of liquidity supply and not consistent with one of predation as in
Yang and Zhu (2018) or in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005).
While HFT trading is more consistent with liquidity supply, HFTs do not bear a material
quantity of a trade string as a counterparty. They do not take positions of much more than
$100K in notional of the trade string, even when trading with strings of size $100 million and
greater. This is a contrast between the results in this paper and van Kervel and Menkveld
(2019). In van Kervel and Menkveld (2019), HFTs take risky, long-term positions that are
borne for many hours, even in the placebo sample. One explanation for the diﬀerence is that
equity-market HFTs or perhaps European HFTs are distinguished from others by being
capital-deep and bearing investment inventory, behaving like mutual funds and insurance
companies. Another explanation is that the observed positions may not precisely represent
the positions of the HFTs, who are oﬀsetting the risk at unobserved alternative, foreign,
ETF, or derivative markets.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Importantly, there is no back running observed even for the “more-informed” group
of strings, namely the ones sized $100M+ and worked for durations longer than an hour.
Similarly, there is no back running observed for the group of high-impact strings, which are
also likely to be informed. In the recent theory (Yang and Zhu 2018), the back-runner trader
is assumed to observe the trading of a fundamentally informed investor. Thus the theory
only predicts predation to occur when the institutional trader is also an informed trader. We
check this case in panels three and four of Figure 5. In panels three and four, the hypothesis
is rejected the same way, as it is in every cross-section of the trade strings.
IV.
HFT leads to greater liquidity in a quasi-experiment
As Figure 2 showed, participants that behave like HFTs have been present on MX since
at least 2009. This is conﬁrmed by the “Approved Participant” list on the MX website, which
lists the names of ﬁnancial companies approved to directly access MX and clear derivatives.
Several of them are well-known proprietary electronic trading ﬁrms.8 Whenever a ﬁnancial
company joins or leaves the MX as an Approved Participant, the MX is required by regulation
to issue a public release called a circular that gives the name of the company that joined or left
the exchange community. Using these releases and four lists of “well-known” HFT companies
given by The Wall Street Journal, Investopedia, Quora, and Medium, we construct a graph
of the net entry or exit on MX of ﬁnancial companies that the popular media identify as
“HFT.”
FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE
As the graph shows, 2011 saw the largest number of net new Authorized Participants
that are popularly regarded as HFTs (at least by sources such as The Wall Street Journal).
It is common for members of an industry to move to a new market when proﬁts from other
markets taper, and Tabb (2017) ﬁnds US equity HFT proﬁts tapering from 2009.
2011
8See the MX Approved Participant list.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

could be a logical year for HFTs to move to nearby foreign and derivatives markets, such
as the Canadian, given that it takes some time for HFTs to transfer operations across an
international border.
Therefore, we search for some event in 2011 to use as a plausibly
exogenous shock to the industrial organization.
In Figure 7, we graph a common measure of competition in a market’s industrial organization, the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index, during the years 2011–2012. The HHI index is
computed as the daily sum of the squared market shares of the HFTs, where market shares
are the daily volumes of each HFT divided by the total volume over all HFTs.
FIGURE 7 ABOUT HERE
In the graph, we observe what appears to be a shakeout event in the industrial organization.
In November 2011, the industry becomes substantially less competitive than it was before,
moving from a pre-November index average of around 0.35 to a sudden maximum of 0.53.
Then, the index rapidly falls to 0.30 in January 2012 and continues to reach a new low of
0.19 later in 2012. One logical cause would be the exit of one or more incumbent HFTs and
the entry of more entrant HFTs, which is likely given Figure 6. In summary, Figure 7 reveals
a likely mechanism that could drive a change in liquidity: increased competition.
We take Figures 6 and 7 as motivation to perform an event study using November 2011
as a plausibly exogenous shock to HFT competition. To provide prima facie evidence of an
impact on liquidity, we graph the number of empirically identiﬁed HFTs against a popular
metric used to evaluate institutional trading performance, implementation shortfall (Harris
1998). The measure proxies the all-in price of buying or selling a security compared to a
“market” or “fair” price for the security. The ﬁgure graphs the implementation shortfall for
the smallest group of trade strings, $2–10M, against the number of HFTs in inverted scale.9
FIGURE 8 ABOUT HERE
9At MX’s request, to guard the business interests of its clients, we remove the y-axis label of the number
of HFTs.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

The inverted scale of the number of HFTs makes clear that there is a high correlation
between the two metrics, 0.83. Both the number of HFTs and the implementation shortfall
of trade strings sized $2–10M are shocked in November 2011, which is the same month that
the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index was shocked, and this occurs on the same year that the
number of Authorized Participants that are popularly regarded as HFT increased by the
largest increment in sample. In the chart, the implementation shortfall improved from a
2011 average of around 0.36 cents to a 2012 average of around 0.07 cents.
For further information, Table III gives summary statistics on the trade strings for bond
futures relevant to the event study. They are given by year and by the four volume bins.
The statistics are: implementation shortfall, as deﬁned above; number, the raw number
of strings in the category; volume per string, the par value in millions of the number of
contracts purchased or sold in the string; trades per string, the number of trades in the
string; market share per string, the volume of the string in percentage of daily volume
(single counted); average duration, two times the volume-weighted execution time from start
to ﬁnish of the string in minutes (multiplied by two since raw duration is a half-life); and
average aggressiveness, the percentage of the volume in the string executed via marketable
orders.
TABLE III ABOUT HERE
To make the event study a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences, we locate an asset in the MX data
sample that is not traded by HFT but that shares risk factors and the clientele, to use as a
control. The control group is the interest-rate future listed on the same exchange. It diﬀers
from the bond future in having a market structure inimical to HFT and thus attracting
almost no HFT volume. As Table I showed (see Section 2), the rates-futures market is a
tick-locked market with minimal price volatility and enormous depth (billions of dollars) at
the inside quotes. It takes an average of 30 minutes for the price to change—anecdotally, “if
you place an order for the BAX on Monday, it might ﬁll on Tuesday.” It is not proﬁtable
for HFTs to trade a contract with such high depth and low volatility: If HFTs must wait
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

30 minutes for a typical queue of limit orders to clear, they cannot hope to exit a position
quickly except by crossing the spread, which is expensive. Since the rates future is a market
with poor structure for HFT, yet a market that otherwise shares interest-rate risks (exposure
to the level factor of the yield curve) and otherwise shares the same clientele (big Canadian
banks and funds), we argue it is an eﬀective control for liquidity trends in the bond future.
Figure 9 shows implementation shortfalls for the bond future and the rates future in the
two years around the November 2011 event. The ﬁgure shows the implementation shortfalls
for four cross-sections of the trade strings for both contracts: those sized $2–10M, those sized
$10–25M, those sized $25–100M, and those sized $100M+.
FIGURE 9 ABOUT HERE
Parallel trends appear to hold at least visually for the ﬁrst three cross-sections and is particularly strong for trade strings sized $2–10M and $25–100M. To conﬁrm this quantitatively,
later in the paper we will ﬁt a dynamic DiD model to test for pre-period trends. There is
no clear treatment eﬀect for any of the cross-sections other than the strings sized $2–10M.
Whatever treatment eﬀect exists is conﬁned to the group of the smallest trade strings.
Indeed, in a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regression, the treatment eﬀect is conﬁned to trade
strings sized $2–10M, as well as trade strings with duration 0–10 minutes. Table IV shows
the results of a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences event study on weekly implementation shortfall
observed during the ﬁve months before and ﬁve months after the November 2011 treatment
date. The model ﬁt is
ISi,t = Treatmenti,t + BAXi + Montht + Controlsi,t + ϵi,t,
(1)
where i indexes the contract (bond or rates futures) and t indexes the week. Treatment
is a dummy for observations of the bond future in the post-period; BAX is a dummy for
observations of the rates futures; Month is a series of time ﬁxed eﬀects (one for each month).
The diﬀerence in diﬀerences is therefore the variable Treatment. The control variables are:
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Volume, the trading volume in contracts; Volatility, the 20-day rolling daily return volatility;
and Lag, the previous week’s average level of implementation shortfall.
TABLE IV ABOUT HERE
While the treatment eﬀect for the strings sized $2–10M and for the strings with duration
0–10 minutes are both signiﬁcant and economically meaningful—31 basis points and 21.5
basis points relative to the rates future—there is no signiﬁcant treatment eﬀect for the other
cross-sections of trade strings by size or by duration. It would appear HFT improves implementation shortfall for only the smallest, shortest positions built by institutional traders.
A.
Why HFT improves implementation shortfall for only the smallest trade strings
We argue it is intuitive that HFT would improve implementation shortfall for only the
smallest strings. HFTs are low-capital, low-risk traders that cannot hold in inventory a
substantial portion of large institutional ﬂows. Indeed, Figure 5 shows that the HFTs in
sample rarely take a position during a trade string of greater than $100K.10 Thus, it is
natural that HFTs would improve the transaction cost of only the smallest positions that
institutions build, since they lack the capacity to act as a consistent counterparty to larger
ones.
To conﬁrm this intuition, we provide two pieces of evidence. First, we show HFTs are
improving per-trade executions cost at a shorter term, via eﬀective spreads, but not at a
longer term, via per-trade price impacts at the ﬁve-minute lag.
This helps explain why
it is possible to discern an improvement in implementation shortfall for only the smaller
positions that institutions build. Smaller positions are built quickly, often under 20 minutes
(see Table III), so price impacts at a ﬁve-minute lag matter less to the implementation
shortfall. However, large positions are built much more slowly and impact the price greatly,
so they depend more on longer-term improvements in execution costs. For these positions,
10This is not “by construction” since the same HFTs can be identiﬁed by excluding the overnight inventory
criterion and simply using their switching rate and order lifetime.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

price impact or “slippage” is a more important determinant of implementation shortfall than
the eﬀective spread.
To show this, we run the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on four per-trade liquidity
metrics computed for solely the trades in the trade strings (not for all the trades on the
market): the per-trade eﬀective spread, the signed diﬀerence between a trade price and
the contemporaneous midquote; and three measures of per-trade price impact, the signed
diﬀerence between the midquote contemporaneous to a trade and the midquote some time
interval after the trade. The three measures are pre-trade price impact at ﬁve seconds, at
30 seconds, and at ﬁve minutes. We compute these metrics only for trades in trade strings
to narrow the focus of the metrics to outcomes experienced by ﬁnancial institutions when
negotiating large positions. Table V shows the results.
TABLE V ABOUT HERE
In the table, the quasi-experiment of November 2011 leads to statistical improvements in
eﬀective spreads, ﬁve-second price impacts, and 30-second price impacts: 13 basis points, 10
basis points and 13 basis points respectively. However, there is no signiﬁcant improvement
in the ﬁve-minute price impact, with a t-statistic of only 0.75. The plausibly exogenous variation in HFT competition leads to better eﬀective spreads and shorter-term price impacts,
as has been found elsewhere (Brogaard and Garriott 2019), but creates no discernible beneﬁt
for longer-term price impacts. Yet longer-term price impact is the liquidity statistic most
relevant to the largest institutional traders, for whom “slippage” or long-term price impact
is more important than marginal eﬀective spreads.
The second piece of evidence we give, to conﬁrm the intuition that HFT is too reluctant
to take risk to beneﬁt the larger positions built by institutions, is to show the time structure
of the treatment eﬀect on the liquidity metrics. We show HFT withdraws its beneﬁt from
institutions as they work their orders, and it does so quickly. This means that HFT can be
counted on to beneﬁt only the orders that ﬁnish quickly, since it withdraws well before an
institution ﬁnishes its largest orders to trade. Figure 11 shows the time structure of HFT’s
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

improvements to implementation shortfall, eﬀective spreads, and per-trade price impact given
in volume time.
FIGURE 11 ABOUT HERE
For implementation shortfall, the treatment eﬀect is conﬁned to the ﬁrst $30 million of the
position; and for eﬀective spreads and price impacts, it is conﬁned to the ﬁrst $10 million.
The rest of the position is unaﬀected by the treatment, conﬁrming that HFT reduces its
beneﬁts once it runs against its risk and capital limits.
B.
Dynamic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences
Last, to show robustness and to verify parallel trends quantitatively, we ﬁt a dynamic
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences model to the event data (see, e.g., Callaway and Sant’Anna 2019).
Dynamic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences, sometimes called staggered diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences, is a
form of the DiD model in which the treatment eﬀect is estimated on multiple increments
of the pre- and post-period data. This can be used to estimate the progressive response
of a treatment over time and to verify that the data is not trending before the treatment
date. If the treatment eﬀect is statistically insigniﬁcant in all the pre-period increments,
then the model corroborates the assertion of parallel trends. Also, if the treatment is statistically signiﬁcant in all the post-period data, then the model conﬁrms the treatment eﬀect
is associated with the claimed treatment date.
We ﬁt the dynamic DiD model on the same event-study dataset, weekly averages of data
observed the ﬁve months before and ﬁve months after the November 2011 treatment date:
metrici,t = CGBi,t · Montht + Montht + ϵi,t,
(2)
where i indexes the contract (bond or rates futures), t indexes the week, CGBi,t is a dummy
equalling one for the bond future, and Montht is a month ﬁxed eﬀect. The treatment eﬀects
are therefore CGBi.t · Montht. Unlike classic DiD, there is one treatment eﬀect estimated
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

per month, even in the pre-period. The metric variables are the ﬁve liquidity metrics tested
in this paper: implementation shortfall for strings sized $2–10M, eﬀective spread, and pertrade price impacts after ﬁve seconds, 30 seconds, and ﬁve minutes. Since the dynamic DiD
is multicollinear with a constant, either a month must be omitted from the analysis or the
data must be demeaned. We demean the data so to ﬁt a treatment eﬀect for every month.
Table X gives the ﬁt of the dynamic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences for each liquidity statistic.
TABLE X ABOUT HERE
Each column shows the set of 10 ﬁt treatment eﬀects, one for each month in the pre- and
post-periods for each of the liquidity metrics studied in the paper. During the pre-period
(before November 2011), the treatment eﬀects are insigniﬁcant in 24 out of 25 cases in the
months tested. The exception is a treatment eﬀect for the ﬁve-minute price impact (which
we argue is weakly aﬀected by HFT if at all).
In the post-period, the treatment eﬀects on implementation shortfall are statistically
signiﬁcant in all ﬁve months. However, for the per-trade liquidity metrics, only the eﬀective
spread has signiﬁcant treatment eﬀects in all ﬁve post-period months. The ﬁve-second price
impact is signiﬁcant in four out of ﬁve of the post-period months, but the 30-second price
impact is signiﬁcant in only three, and the ﬁve-minute price impact is signiﬁcant in only two.
The strength of the treatment eﬀect for only the most immediate per-trade liquidity metric,
the eﬀective spread, is for us further illustration that the impact of HFT is discernible
moreso in the shorter-term per-trade liquidity metrics, particularly the immediate metric
of the eﬀective spread, and is less discernible in the longer-term metrics, particularly the
ﬁve-minute price impact.
The ﬁt of a dynamic DiD model is often presented graphically so that the eye can judge
whether there is a pre-treatment trend in the data. Figure 12 gives a graphical presentation
in which the treatment eﬀect for each month is represented in the graph by a dot with bars
for 95% signiﬁcance. For conciseness, we show only the implementation shortfall, eﬀective
spread, and ﬁve-second price impact.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

FIGURE 12 ABOUT HERE
V.
Conclusions
In this paper, we examine recent ﬁndings about HFT and institutional trading in the context of a ﬁxed-income market rather than an equity market. Using data from Canadian bond
futures, we ask whether empirically identiﬁed HFTs use back running, a predatory trading
strategy (Yang and Zhu 2018), on empirically identiﬁed examples of institutions building
large positions. In contrast to recent ﬁndings (Korajczyk and Murphy 2019; van Kervel
and Menkveld 2019), we reject the hypothesis that HFTs are back running in this dataset.
HFTs in Canadain bond futures trade the opposite way a back runner would, which is
more consistent with a strategy of liquidity supply or short-term price arbitrage. Moreover,
exploiting a quasi-experiment in which many HFTs entered the bond futures market, we
ﬁnd increased HFT competition beneﬁts institutions rather than harms them, at least by
measures of implementation shortfall, eﬀective spread and short-term price impact.
The results in our study might diﬀer from recent ﬁndings for two reasons. First, it could
be the diﬀerent market structure of ﬁxed income versus that of equity. For example, the
bond futures market may be more liquid than markets for individual stocks, meaning that
HFTs are simply less able to detect institutional trading (though a greater liquidity would
also raise the reward to successful back running, since a back runner in a liquid market
can build a larger position and exit at less cost).
Another possibility is that our data
have a better mix of advantages and disadvantages for the research question. Although the
chief disadvantage is the empirical identiﬁcation of HFTs and institutions, a compensating
advantage is the consolidation of the Canadian bond futures market and a lack of alternative
markets or assets that HFTs could use to oﬀset their exposures to bond futures. In other
studies, HFTs could be hedging their exposures across markets or assets, which is likely as
cross-market trading is a primary activity of HFTs (Menkveld 2013). If so, the empiricist
cannot accurately observe the HFTs’ true exposure, which is likely to be much less than a
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

partial exposure observed in only one piece of a larger market. With our data, we close oﬀ
this concern, and we ﬁnd the opposite result.
From our results, we draw the moral that HFT can play some positive role even in a largely
institutional market. Although HFTs are unwilling to take on much risk, their traditional
advantages in automation and speed (which decreases adverse selection) seem to enable them
here, as elsewhere (Hendershott et al. 2011; Brogaard et al. 2014), to decrease transaction
costs at least on the margin. HFT competition appears to be an eﬀective mechanism for
enhancing this eﬀect on transaction costs, as it has been found to be elsewhere (Brogaard
and Garriott 2019). While we do not ﬁnd HFT decreases transaction costs for the larger
positions that institutions build, this is natural given its low tolerance for inventory and for
risk. Thus, while our result is “good news” for HFT, it is also news of a good that ultimately
is limited, as HFT does not provide any substitute for the risk-bearing capacity that natural
market participants currently obtain from banks.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 1: Trading volume of bond futures and of the front three rates futures
This ﬁgure shows average monthly trading volume (in number of contracts) for the CGB (the future
on the Government of Canada 10-year bond) and for the front three contracts of the BAX (the
future on the Canadian Banker’s Acceptance rate) by expiry. The left y-axis is for the CGB, and
the right y-axis is for the BAX. Trading volume is the total electronic number of contracts traded
during normal trading hours.
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
Contracts traded (millions)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Date
CGB volume (left axis)
BAX volume, front contract (right axis)
BAX volume, second contract (right axis)
BAX volume, third contract (right axis)
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 2: Volume share of high-frequency traders in bond and rates futures
This ﬁgure shows average monthly percent HFT volume share for the CGB (the future on the
Government of Canada 10-year bond) and for the front three contracts of the BAX (the future on
the Canadian Banker’s Acceptance rate).
0
10
20
30
40
HFT volume (%)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Date
Bond futures
Rates futures
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 3: HFT counterparty share during four volume quartiles of trade strings, sorted by volume
This ﬁgure shows the percent of volume institutions transacted with HFT during a trade string
for the CGB contract. A trade string is a sequence of trades by a participant, 95% in the same
direction (buy or sell), with no more than 20 minutes between any two trades. Each panel is a
subsample of trade strings by volume. The graph in each panel divides trade strings into four
quartiles at cutoﬀs of 25%, 50% and 75% of the volume.
0
10
20
30
40
50
HFT volume share as string counterparty
1
2
3
4
String quartile
$2-$10M
$10-$25M
$25-$100M
$100M+
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 4: Multi-day price impacts of trade strings
This ﬁgure shows the price impact of trade strings in bins by volume, duration or long-term price
impact, observed at seven time lags: immediately after the string’s ﬁnish, at end of day, and at
ﬁve 24-hour increments after ﬁnish. In black is the mean price impact, and in dashed gray is the
95% conﬁdence interval. A trade string is a sequence of trades by a participant, 95% in the same
direction (buy or sell), with no more than 20 minutes between any two trades. Volume is the size of
the total net position acquired during the trade string; duration is two times the volume-weighted
execution time from start to ﬁnish of the string in minutes. The ﬁrst three bins are simply by
volume; the last two are by volume and duration to emphasize the importance of duration to the
price impact of large-sized strings.
(a) For volumes $2–25M
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Price impact (basis points)
0
End of day
24h
48h
72h
96h
120h
Time lag
(b) For volumes $25–100M
and durations ≥10 min.
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Price impact (basis points)
0
End of day
24h
48h
72h
96h
120h
Time lag
(c) For volumes ≥$100M
and durations ≥60 min.
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Price impact (basis points)
0
End of day
24h
48h
72h
96h
120h
Time lag
(d) For price impacts ≥3 basis points
-2
0
2
4
6
8
0
End of day
24h
48h
72h
96h
120h
Time lag
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 5: Cumulative order ﬂows during trade strings
This ﬁgure shows the cumulative order ﬂows of institutions building a position via a trade string
(blue), the net position of HFTs in the market (red), and the net position of all other participants
in the market (green), during 11 moments during the life of a trade string: 10 time deciles from
string start to ﬁnish and at the moment 30 minutes after string end. A trade string is a sequence
of trades by a participant, 95% in the same direction (buy or sell), with no more than 20 minutes
between any two trades. The strings are for the CGB contract, the future on the Government of
Canada 10-year bond. Together with Figure ??, the panels subsample the trade strings in 12 bins
by volume and duration. The series sum to zero by deﬁnition.
(a) For volumes $2–25M
-100
-50
0
50
100
2
4
6
8
10
Deciles of time
(b) For volumes $25–100M
and durations ≥10 min.
-400
-200
0
200
400
2
4
6
8
10
Deciles of time
(c) For volumes ≥$100M
and durations ≥60 min.
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
2
4
6
8
10
Deciles of time
(d) For price impacts ≥3 basis points
-200
-100
0
100
200
2
4
6
8
10
Deciles of time
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 6: Yearly change in number of Approved Participants popularly regarded as HFTs
In accordance with regulation, the Montr´eal Exchange (MX) issues a public release called a circular
when a new direct-access and clearing member joins or leaves the exchange. The status of being a
direct-access and clearing member is called Approved Participant status. The name of the company
is listed on the release.
For the purpose of this graph, an MX Approved Participant is considered an “HFT” if its name is
mentioned on one of four articles in the popular press listing “well-known” HFT ﬁrms. The four
articles are from (click for link) The Wall Street Journal, Investopedia, Quora and Medium. The
ﬁrms listed on these websites are intentionally a superset; most of these ﬁrms are not Approved Participants on MX according to the circulars on its website. The websites list the ﬁrms named: ATD,
Allston Trading LLC, Chicago Trading Company, Chopper Trading, Citadel Securities, DRW Holdings LLC, DV Capital, EWT, Five Rings Capital LLC, Flow Traders, Geneva Trading, GETCO,
GSA Capital Partners, GTS, Hudson River Trading, IMC Financial, Jane Street, Jump Trading,
KCG Holdings Inc., Knight Capital, Latour Trading, Optiver, Quantlab Financial, RSJ Algorithmic
Trading, Spire Europe, Spot Trading, Sun Trading, Susquehanna International Group LLP, Tower
Research Capital, Tradebot Systems Inc., Two Sigma Investments LP, Virtu Financial, Wedbush,
Wolverine, XR Trading, XTX Markets. This list is intentionally a superset; most of these ﬁrms are
not Approved Participants on MX according to the circulars on its website.
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Change in Authorized Participants
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Year
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 7: Herﬁndahl-Hirschman index of HFT volume 2011–2012
The graph below shows the monthly average level of the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of
HFT volumes during, before and after the sample window of the event study. The HHI index is
computed as the daily sum of the squared market shares of the HFTs, where market shares are the
daily volumes of each HFT divided by the total volume over all HFTs.
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
HHI index
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 8: Implementation shorfall of strings sized $2–$10M and number of HFT
This ﬁgure plots the average monthly implementation shortfall for trade strings sized $2–$10 million
(in solid blue) and the average monthly number of HFTs (in dashed gray) in inverted scale, both
for the CGB contract, the future on the Government of Canada 10-year bond, 2009–2014. A trade
string is a sequence of trades by a participant, 95% in the same direction (buy or sell), with no more
than 20 minutes between any two trades. Implementation shortfall is the diﬀerence between the
volume-weighted average price of a string and the midquote contemporaneous to the ﬁrst trade. At
the request of the Montr´eal Exchange, the number of empirically identiﬁed HFTs is not explicitly
labeled on the y-axis.
-.2
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Implementation shortfall
Number of HFTs (inv.)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Date
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 9: Implementation shortfall of CGB compared with that of BAX, by volume bin
This ﬁgure shows the weekly average implementation shortfall of trade strings for the CGB contract
(in solid blue), the future on the Government of Canada 10-year bond, compared with that for the
BAX contract (in dashed gray), the future on the Canadian Banker’s Acceptance rate, 2009–2014.
A trade string is a sequence of trades by a participant, 95% in the same direction (buy or sell),
with no more than 20 minutes between any two trades. Implementation shortfall is the diﬀerence
between the volume-weighted average price of a string and the midquote contemporaneous to the
ﬁrst trade. The vertical black bar is the event month.
(a) $2–$10M
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
Implementation Shortfall (cents)
-.2
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
Implementation Shortfall (cents)
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
(b) $10M–$25M
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
Implementation Shortfall (cents)
-.4
0
.4
.8
1.2
1.6
Implementation Shortfall (cents)
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
(c) $25M–$100M
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Implementation Shortfall (cents)
0
.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Implementation Shortfall (cents)
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
(d) $100M+
0
.5
1
1.5
2
Implementation Shortfall (cents)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Implementation Shortfall (cents)
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 10: Liquidity metrics for CGB compared to those of BAX, by volume bin
This ﬁgure shows liquidity metrics for trades in trade strings for the CGB contract, the future on
the Government of Canada 10-year bond, compared with those for the BAX contract, the future
on the Canadian Banker’s Acceptance rate. A trade string is a sequence of trades by a participant,
95% in the same direction (buy or sell), with no more than 20 minutes between any two trades.
Eﬀective spread is the signed diﬀerence between the trade price and contemporaneous midquote;
price impact is the signed diﬀerence between the contemporaneous midquote and the midquote
some time interval after the trade.
(a) Eﬀective spread
80
85
90
95
100
BAX effective spread (bps)
110
120
130
140
CGB effective spread (bps)
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
(b) Five-second price impact
20
30
40
50
BAX price impact (bps)
40
50
60
70
80
CGB price impact (bps)
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
(c) Thirty-second price impact
20
30
40
50
BAX price impact (bps)
40
50
60
70
80
CGB price impact (bps)
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
(d) Five-minute price impact
35
40
45
50
BAX price impact (bps)
45
50
55
60
65
70
CGB price impact (bps)
Jan. 2011
Jun. 2011
Nov. 2011
Apr. 2012
Sep. 2012
Month
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 11: Change in execution costs of CGB trade strings, by volume bin
This ﬁgure shows the change in execution-cost metrics computed separately for volume increments
of trade strings for the CGB contract, the future on the Government of Canada 10-year bond, after
the event. A trade string is a sequence of trades by a participant, 95% in the same direction (buy
or sell), with no more than 20 minutes between any two trades. The metrics are computed for the
ﬁrst $5 million of the string, the next $5 million, the next $5 million, and so on to $50 million.
Implementation shortfall is the diﬀerence between the volume-weighted average price of a portion
of a string and the midquote contemporaneous to the ﬁrst trade. Eﬀective spread is the signed
diﬀerence between the prices of trades in the portion and the contemporaneous midquotes; price
impact is the signed diﬀerence between the contemporaneous midquote and the midquote some
time interval after the trades in the portion.
(a) Implementation shortfall
-.05
-.04
-.03
-.02
-.01
.01
.02
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Millions of notional of trade string
(b) Eﬀective spreads
-.003
-.002
-.001
.001
.002
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Millions of notional of trade string
(c) Per-trade price impact
-.002
-.001
.001
.002
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Millions of notional of trade string
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Figure 12: Dynamic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on liquidity metrics
This ﬁgure portrays the ﬁt treatment eﬀects and 95% conﬁdence interval of the treatment coefﬁcients from a dynamic DiD event study using weekly average data from the CGB (the future
on the Government of Canada 10-year bond) and the BAX (the future on the Canadian Banker’s
Acceptance rate) on various metrics of liquidity. The treatment group is the CGB, and the control
group is the BAX. The event window is the ﬁve months before and ﬁve months after the ﬁrst month
that there was an increase in the number of HFT trading the CGB, November 2011. The metrics
are: Implementation shortfall (IS), the diﬀerence between the volume-weighted average price of a
string and the midquote contemporaneous to the ﬁrst trade; eﬀective spread, the signed diﬀerence
between a trade price and the contemporaneous midquote; and price impact, the signed diﬀerence
between the contemporaneous midquote and the midquote some time interval after the trades in
the portion.
(a) Implementation shortfall
-0.50
0.00
0.50
June 2011
July 2011
Aug. 2011
Sept. 2011
Oct. 2011
Nov. 2011
Dec. 2011
Jan. 2012
Feb. 2012
Mar. 201
(b) Eﬀective spreads
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
June 2011
July 2011
Aug. 2011
Sept. 2011
Oct. 2011
Nov. 2011
Dec. 2011
Jan. 2012
Feb. 2012
Mar. 201
(c) Five-second price impact
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
June 2011
July 2011
Aug. 2011
Sept. 2011
Oct. 2011
Nov. 2011
Dec. 2011
Jan. 2012
Feb. 2012
Mar. 201
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Table I: Average daily statistics for the bond and rates futures, 2009–2014
This table gives yearly averages and standard deviations of the daily average observations of various
statistics for the CGB (the future on the Government of Canada 10-year bond) and for the BAX
(the future on the Canadian Banker’s Acceptance interest rate). Volatility is the two-week rolling
standard deviation of the daily close price log return, annualized. Time to change is the number of
minutes until a change in the bid or ask price. Order lifetime is the number of minutes the average
limit order rests. Percent ticklocked is the percent of the time the bid-ask spread is equal to the
tick size. Inside depth is the sum of the quantities of visible limit orders at the bid and ask prices.
Trades is the number of trades. Trade size is the size (in millions of dollars) of the trades.
Panel A: Statistics for the bond future
Years
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Volatility
7.127
5.928
6.376
5.063
5.071
5.252
(2.758)
(2.045)
(2.060)
(1.667)
(1.962)
(4.049)
Time to change
0.151
0.161
0.141
0.206
0.245
0.250
(0.039)
(0.053)
(0.038)
(0.079)
(0.101)
(0.085)
Order lifetime
1.53m
2.09m
0.84m
0.68m
0.74m
1.63m
(0.601)
(1.157)
(0.419)
(0.230)
(0.270)
(0.704)
Percent ticklocked
29.2%
41.2%
49.8%
73.4%
80.4%
89.6%
(12.51)
(9.127)
(8.361)
(7.103)
(6.893)
(4.016)
Inside depth
$3.25M
$3.24M
$3.12M
$5.01M
$7.55M
$8.38M
(0.989)
(0.978)
(0.684)
(1.303)
(2.142)
(1.591)
Trades
4853.0
5966.6
8505.4
11944.8
15796.1
17084.7
(1444)
(1822)
(2187)
(2812)
(4132)
(4397)
Trade size
$0.33M
$0.33M
$0.28M
$0.25M
$0.26M
$0.25M
(0.068)
(0.068)
(0.046)
(0.041)
(0.033)
(0.039)
Panel B: Statistics for rates futures
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Volatility
0.459
0.762
0.683
0.377
0.319
0.331
(0.468)
(0.672)
(0.533)
(0.247)
(0.245)
(0.276)
Time to change
30.51
17.34
15.92
49.61
151.6
168.1
(73.61)
(52.23)
(53.95)
(103.4)
(173.7)
(181.1)
Order lifetime
54.2m
44.5m
45.5m
61.5m
75.3m
95.5m
(48.02)
(38.02)
(34.60)
(42.54)
(46.85)
(69.32)
Percent ticklocked
90.9%
91.9%
94.4%
97.4%
98.5%
98.8%
(13.23)
(10.83)
(8.923)
(7.650)
(9.093)
(7.763)
Inside depth
$1944M
$1822M
$2077M
$3990M
$14369M
$17150M
(2244)
(1880)
(1805)
(2970)
(10260)
(11984)
Trades
238.4
429.9
563.6
445.7
358.1
314.3
(178.0)
(310.1)
(394.6)
(342.3)
(268.2)
(220.9)
Trade size
$29.1M
$27.8M
$28.4M
$30.5M
$35.2M
$38.9M
(16.92)
(16.16)
(16.11)
(16.64)
(20.69)
(29.05)
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Table II: Summary statistics on participant groups trading the CGB, 2009–2014
This table gives yearly averages and standard deviations of the daily observations of trading statistics for market participants trading the CGB contract, the future for the Government of Canada
10-year bond. The statistics are averaged over the members of the HFT and nonHFT groups.
Order lifetime is the number of minutes the average limit order rests averaged over members of
the participant group. Switching rate is the average percent of trades in which a buy follows a
sell or a sell follows a buy, averaged over group members. Overnight inventory is the end-of-day
inventory position in number of contracts, averaged over group members. Quotes, Trades, and
Cancels are the daily number of limit-order inserts, trades, and limit-order cancels, averaged over
group members.
Panel A: Statistics for HFTs
Years
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Order lifetime
0.25m
0.30m
0.49m
0.75m
0.76m
1.01m
(1.282)
(1.342)
(0.938)
(1.612)
(0.567)
(1.395)
Switching rate
30.0%
28.5%
21.8%
27.3%
27.6%
27.9%
(9.474)
(10.17)
(8.078)
(11.19)
(10.73)
(12.07)
Overnight inventory
0.362
0.681
1.278
1.545
2.820
5.378
(1.604)
(3.491)
(3.767)
(3.905)
(7.623)
(12.87)
Quotes
2634.7
4716.1
6707.9
7647.0
8395.0
13859.4
(4874)
(7941)
(11497)
(10424)
(9750)
(13747)
Trades
648.8
781.2
1266.4
1412.2
1710.3
2670.8
(354.7)
(555.2)
(837.7)
(1098.4)
(1740.4)
(2820.9)
Cancels
2421.6
4303.7
6047.9
6963.7
7562.6
12663.1
(4616)
(7583)
(10901)
(9826)
(8811)
(12688)
Panel B: Statistics for nonHFTs
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Order lifetime
18.8m
19.7m
19.5m
21.6m
24.5m
22.6m
(61.13)
(66.50)
(66.36)
(77.55)
(85.23)
(76.97)
Switching rate
12.9%
12.4%
11.4%
9.2%
8.7%
8.8%
(13.07)
(11.48)
(12.23)
(10.10)
(8.397)
(8.457)
Overnight inventory
410.6
430.2
468.7
541.6
689.9
682.3
(580.2)
(575.9)
(649.3)
(751.8)
(948.0)
(947.3)
Quotes
908.6
980.3
2522.8
1928.9
2660.6
2597.4
(3854)
(4043)
(12023)
(7104)
(9484)
(9495)
Trades
400.7
437.3
598.7
808.5
1060.0
980.2
(664.1)
(662.2)
(856.4)
(1279.6)
(1794.3)
(1576.5)
Cancels
804.3
866.1
2383.1
1753.2
2399.7
2343.1
(3634)
(3874)
(11830)
(6898)
(9129)
(9225)
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Table III: Summary statistics for bond-future trade strings, by volume bin
This table gives yearly averages of statistics for trade strings on the CGB, the future on the
Government of Canada 10-year bond.
A trade string is a sequence of trades by a participant,
95% in the same direction (buy or sell), with no more than 20 minutes between any two trades.
Implementation shortfall is the diﬀerence between the volume-weighted average price of a string and
the midquote contemporaneous to the ﬁrst trade. Number is the count of strings in the category.
Volume per string is the par value in millions of the position purchased or sold in the string. Trades
per string is the count of trades in a string. Market share per string is the volume per string as a
percent of daily volume. Duration is two times the volume-weighted execution time from start to
ﬁnish of the string in minutes (multiplied by two as duration is a half-life). Aggressiveness is the
percentage string volume executed via marketable orders.
Years
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Positions of $2–10M
Implementation shortfall
0.580¢
0.544¢
0.355¢
0.073¢
-0.089¢
-0.037¢
Number
14,977
17,789
20,254
23,687
26,222
26,513
Volume per string
$4.7M
$4.7M
$4.7M
$4.7M
$4.7M
$4.8M
Trades per string
15.5
15.8
18.4
19.8
19.2
20.0
Market share per string
0.32%
0.27%
0.22%
0.17%
0.13%
0.12%
Duration
14.1m
14.9m
16.7m
16.1m
16.9m
21.6m
Agressiveness
40.1%
41.2%
42.3%
44.4%
42.0%
42.1%
Positions of $10–25M
Implementation shortfall
0.763¢
0.852¢
0.722¢
0.563¢
0.297¢
0.310¢
Number
5,693
6,651
7,814
10,009
12,267
11,730
Volume per string
$14.7M
$14.9M
$14.7M
$14.7M
$15.0M
$14.9M
Trades per string
34.1
37.7
46.2
53.3
50.9
53.6
Market share per string
1.0%
0.83%
0.67%
0.53%
0.40%
0.38%
Duration
24.6m
30.8m
29.4m
27.6m
24.4m
29.5m
Agressiveness
39.5%
43.5%
42.0%
47.0%
45.3%
45.1%
Positions of $25–100M
Implementation shortfall
1.76¢
1.46¢
1.80¢
1.12¢
1.12¢
1.08¢
Number
2,389
2,767
2,850
4,008
5,241
4,918
Volume per string
$42.0M
$42.7M
$41.9M
$42.5M
$42.5M
$42.7M
Trades per string
98.4
106.6
126.7
157.1
147.6
154.0
Market share per string
2.7%
2.3%
1.8%
1.5%
1.1%
1.1%
Duration
58.8m
62.0m
60.0m
65.5m
53.4m
60.1m
Agressiveness
39.5%
42.8%
40.7%
48.3%
45.8%
45.2%
Positions of $100M+
Implementation shortfall
6.88¢
4.14¢
4.90¢
3.26¢
2.41¢
2.09¢
Number
212
209
240
321
537
536
Volume per string
$179.1M
$149.5M
$164.0M
$154.2M
$175.2M
$172.5M
Trades per string
653.0
390.8
580.6
523.2
663.4
773.5
Market share per string
10.2%
7.3%
6.7%
5.2%
4.3%
4.1%
Duration
135.7m
121.3m
120.3m
91.2m
118.4m
152.1m
Agressiveness
53.2%
45.9%
46.2%
43.4%
41.0%
48.5%
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Table IV: Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on implementation shortfall
This table reports regression coeﬃcients from a DiD event study using weekly average data from
the CGB (the future on the Government of Canada 10-year bond) and the BAX (the future on the
Canadian Banker’s Acceptance rate) on implementation shortfall. The treatment group is the CGB,
and the control group is the BAX. The event window is the ﬁve months before and ﬁve months
after the ﬁrst month that there was an increase in the number of HFT trading the CGB, November
2011. Implementation shortfall (IS) is the diﬀerence between the volume-weighted average price of
a string and the midquote contemporaneous to the ﬁrst trade. The model is,
ISi,t = Treatmenti,t + BAXi + Montht + Controlsi,t + ϵi,t
where i indexes the contract (CGB or BAX) and t indexes the week. Treatment is a dummy for
observations of the CGB contract in the post-period; BAX is a dummy for observations of the BAX
contract; Month is a series of time ﬁxed eﬀects (one for each month). The diﬀerence in diﬀerences
is therefore the variable Treatment.
The control variables are: Volume, the trading volume in
contracts; Volatility, the 20-day rolling daily return volatility; and Lag, the previous week’s average
level of implementation shortfall. Columns 1 through 4 report treatment eﬀects for trade strings
binned in four groups by volume. Columns 5 through 7 report the treatment eﬀects for trade strings
binned in three groups by duration. Coeﬃcients on Montht are not reported to save space.
Volume bins
Duration bins
$2–10M
$10–25M
$25–100M
$100M+
0-10 min.
10-60 min.
60+ min.
Treatment
-31.00∗∗∗
-6.64
-70.40
-188.48
-21.53∗
-29.35
-85.13
(-4.89)
(-0.27)
(-1.41)
(-1.63)
(-2.74)
(-1.97)
(-0.86)
BAX
-53.20∗∗∗
-127.36∗
-140.70
-795.06∗
-55.25∗∗∗
-70.72∗
-259.06
(-5.66)
(-2.71)
(-1.87)
(-2.41)
(-7.24)
(-2.26)
(-1.30)
Volume
-86.90
-737.47∗∗
563.15
-332.59
32.70
300.93
-1997.15
(-0.67)
(-4.36)
(0.43)
(-0.10)
(0.41)
(0.75)
(-1.59)
Volatility
-2.02
-5.78
5.01
-48.29
-0.55
-3.19
-5.11
(-1.85)
(-1.31)
(0.52)
(-0.85)
(-0.47)
(-0.91)
(-0.22)
Lag
0.01
0.01
-0.15
-0.19
-0.04
-0.23∗
-0.17
(0.15)
(0.08)
(-0.96)
(-1.40)
(-0.16)
(-2.49)
(-1.39)
Constant
52.53∗∗∗
155.33∗
129.86
909.59∗
61.41∗∗∗
58.24
328.49
(5.10)
(3.21)
(1.19)
(2.46)
(7.32)
(1.48)
(1.48)
N
84
84
84
83
84
84
84
R2
0.732
0.585
0.420
0.301
0.893
0.413
0.330
t statistics in parentheses; ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Table V: Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on spreads and price impacts
This table reports regression coeﬃcients from a DiD event study using weekly average data from
the CGB (the future on the Government of Canada 10-year bond) and the BAX (the future on the
Canadian Banker’s Acceptance rate) on eﬀective spread and on various measures of price impact.
The treatment group is the CGB, and the control group is the BAX. The event window is the ﬁve
months before and ﬁve months after the ﬁrst month that there was an increase in the number of
HFT trading the CGB, November 2011. Eﬀective spread (ES) is the signed diﬀerence between the
trade price and contemporaneous midquote for trades in the strings, in basis points; Price impact
(PI) is the signed diﬀerence between the contemporaneous midquote and the midquote some timeinterval after the trade for trades in the strings, in basis points. Price impacts are computed at
ﬁve-second, 30-second and ﬁve-minute intervals. The model is,
metrici,t = Treatmenti,t + BAXi + Montht + Controlsi,t + ϵi,t
where i indexes the contract (CGB or BAX) and t indexes the week.
Treatment is a dummy
for observations of the CGB contract in the post-period; BAX is a control-group ﬁxed eﬀect for
observations of the BAX contract; Month is a series of time ﬁxed eﬀects (one for each month). The
diﬀerence in diﬀerences is therefore the variable Treatment. The control variables are: Volume,
the trading volume in contracts; Volatility, the 20-day rolling daily return volatility; and Lag, the
previous week’s average level of implementation shortfall. Column 1 reports a treatment eﬀect on
the eﬀective spread of trades in trade strings. Columns 2 through 4 report the treatment eﬀects on
the price impact of trades in trade strings. Coeﬃcients on Montht are not reported to save space.
Eﬀective
Five-second
30-second
Five-minute
spread
price impact
price impact
price impact
Treatment
-13.24∗∗∗
-9.52∗∗
-12.99∗
-10.84
(-6.16)
(-3.57)
(-2.52)
(-0.75)
BAX
-28.69∗∗∗
-18.79∗∗
-25.75∗∗
-26.82
(-8.27)
(-4.13)
(-4.03)
(-1.91)
Volume
35.28
54.10
41.22
-127.51
(1.50)
(1.39)
(0.56)
(-0.61)
Volatility
0.11
-0.45
-1.53∗∗
-2.12
(0.40)
(-0.89)
(-3.90)
(-1.49)
Lag
0.23∗
0.15
0.20
0.11
(2.80)
(1.17)
(1.26)
(1.47)
Constant
100.38∗∗∗
61.41∗∗∗
66.86∗∗∗
73.20∗∗∗
(9.20)
(5.90)
(4.87)
(7.79)
N
84
84
84
84
R2
0.963
0.829
0.748
0.349
t statistics in parentheses; ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Table VI: Dynamic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences event study on liquidity metrics
This table reports regression coeﬃcients from a dynamic DiD event study using weekly average
data from the CGB (the future on the Government of Canada 10-year bond) and the BAX (the
future on the Canadian Banker’s Acceptance rate) on various metrics of liquidity. The treatment
group is the CGB, and the control group is the BAX. The event window is the ﬁve months before
and ﬁve months after the ﬁrst month that there was an increase in the number of HFT trading the
CGB, November 2011. The metrics are: Implementation shortfall (IS), the diﬀerence between the
volume-weighted average price of a string and the midquote contemporaneous to the ﬁrst trade;
eﬀective spread, the signed diﬀerence between a trade price and the contemporaneous midquote;
and price impact, the signed diﬀerence between the contemporaneous midquote and the midquote
some time interval after the trades in the portion. The model is,
metrici,t = CGBi,t · Montht + Montht + ϵi,t
where i indexes the contract (CGB or BAX) and t indexes the week. Columns 1 through 4 report
treatment eﬀects for trade strings binned in four groups by volume. Columns 5 through 7 report
the treatment eﬀects for trade strings binned in three groups by duration. Coeﬃcients on Montht
are not reported to save space (the below are coeﬃcients on CGBi,t · Montht).
Month
Implementation
Eﬀective
Five-second
30-second
Five-minute
shortfall
spread
price impact
price impact
price impact
Jun. 2011
0.07
-2.43
0.12
-1.10
-0.72
(0.66)
(-1.03)
(0.06)
(-0.43)
(-0.21)
Jul. 2011
-0.09
-2.69
-2.75
-5.61
-12.16∗∗∗
(-1.56)
(-1.01)
(-1.43)
(-1.68)
(-4.44)
Aug. 2011
0.06
2.32
0.13
2.87
1.07
(0.64)
(0.95)
(0.08)
(0.85)
(0.51)
Sep. 2011
-0.03
5.10
-0.87
-3.12
-3.51
(-0.58)
(1.76)
(-0.58)
(-1.33)
(-0.99)
Oct. 2011
-0.09
4.74
0.40
-1.17
6.89
(-0.78)
(1.57)
(0.19)
(-0.48)
(1.05)
Nov. 2011
-0.24∗∗
-6.63∗∗∗
-9.66∗∗
-4.10
-3.20
(-3.40)
(-4.88)
(-2.77)
(-1.25)
(-0.68)
Dec. 2011
-0.18∗
-6.32∗∗
-1.06
-3.89
-6.09
(-2.17)
(-2.75)
(-0.47)
(-1.77)
(-1.25)
Jan. 2012
-0.28∗∗
-12.67∗∗∗
-4.73∗∗
-5.58∗∗
-7.51∗
(-3.42)
(-7.92)
(-2.66)
(-3.13)
(-2.27)
Feb. 2012
-0.36∗∗∗
-15.66∗∗∗
-8.11∗∗∗
-9.69∗∗∗
-5.59∗∗
(-7.98)
(-16.22)
(-5.97)
(-4.53)
(-2.85)
Mar. 2012
-0.23∗∗∗
-17.55∗∗∗
-5.56∗∗∗
-8.18∗∗∗
-5.93
(-3.59)
(-11.22)
(-3.94)
(-3.88)
(-1.99)
N
84
84
84
84
84
R2
0.646
0.801
0.754
0.697
0.520
t statistics in parentheses; ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

REFERENCES
Baron, Matthew, Jonathan Brogaard, Bj¨orn Hagstr¨omer, and Andrei Kirilenko, 2019, Risk
and return in high-frequency trading, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 54,
993–1024.
Berger-Soucy, L´eanne, Corey Garriott, Andr´e Usche, et al., 2018, Government of canada
ﬁxed-income market ecology .
Brogaard, Jonathan, and Corey Garriott, 2019, High-frequency trading competition, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 54, 1469–1497.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Terrence Hendershott, and Ryan Riordan, 2014, High-Frequency Trading and Price Discovery, The Review of Financial Studies 27, 2267–2306.
Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005, Predatory trading, The Journal
of Finance 60, 1825–1863.
Callaway, Brantly, and Pedro HC Sant’Anna, 2019, Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences with multiple
time periods, Available at SSRN 3148250 .
Campbell, Bryan, and Scott Hendry, 2008, Price discovery in canadian and us 10-year government bond markets, Available at SSRN 2695197 .
Cox, Justin, Bonnie Van Ness, and Robert Van Ness, 2019, Increasing the tick: Examining the impact of the tick size change on maker-taker and taker-maker market models,
Financial Review 54, 417–449.
Fleming, Michael J, Bruce Mizrach, and Giang Nguyen, 2018, The microstructure of a us
treasury ecn: The brokertec platform, Journal of Financial Markets 40, 2–22.
Garriott, Corey, and Ryan Riordan, 2019, Trading on long-term information, Available at
SSRN 3419065 .
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Harris, Lawrence, 1998, Optimal dynamic order submission strategies in some stylized trading problems, Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 7, 1–76.
Hendershott, Terrence, Charles M Jones, and Albert J Menkveld, 2011, Does algorithmic
trading improve liquidity?, The Journal of Finance 66, 1–33.
Hirschey, Nicholas, 2019, Do high-frequency traders anticipate buying and selling pressure?,
Available at SSRN 2238516 .
Kirilenko, Andrei, Albert S Kyle, Mehrdad Samadi, and Tugkan Tuzun, 2017, The ﬂash
crash: High-frequency trading in an electronic market, The Journal of Finance 72, 967–
998.
Korajczyk, Robert A., and Dermot Murphy, 2019, High-Frequency Market Making to Large
Institutional Trades, The Review of Financial Studies 32, 1034–1067.
Malinova, Katya, Andreas Park, and Ryan Riordan, 2018, Do retail investors suﬀer from
high frequency traders?, Available at SSRN 2183806 .
Menkveld, Albert J, 2013, High frequency trading and the new market makers, Journal of
ﬁnancial Markets 16, 712–740.
Tabb, Larry, 2017, Speed: Why it matters and what can be done .
Tong, Lin, 2014, A blessing or a curse? the impact of high frequency trading on institutional
investors, in The Impact of High Frequency Trading on Institutional Investors (October 5,
2015). European Finance Association Annual Meetings.
van Kervel, Vincent, and Albert J Menkveld, 2019, High-frequency trading around large
institutional orders, The Journal of Finance 74, 1091–1137.
Weller, Brian M, 2017, Does algorithmic trading reduce information acquisition?, The Review
of Financial Studies 31, 2184–2226.
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165

Yang, Liyan, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2018, Back-running: Seeking and hiding fundamental information in order ﬂows, Rotman School of Management Working Paper .
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3121165
