High-Frequency Trading and Market
Performance
MARKUS BALDAUF and JOSHUA MOLLNER∗
January 14, 2020
Journal of Finance, forthcoming
ABSTRACT
We study the consequences of, and potential policy responses to, high-frequency trading
(HFT) via the tradeo↵between liquidity and information production. Faster speeds
facilitate HFT, with consequences for this tradeo↵: information production decreases
because informed traders have less time to trade before HFTs react, but liquidity
(measured by the bid-ask spread) improves because informational asymmetries decline.
HFT also pushes outcomes inside the frontier of this tradeo↵. However, outcomes can
be restored to the frontier by replacing the limit order book with one of two alternative
mechanisms: delaying all orders except cancellations or implementing frequent batch
auctions.
JEL classiﬁcation: D47, D82, G14, G18
Keywords: high-frequency trading, order anticipation, quote fade, latency, information
production, bid-ask spread, limit order book, non-cancellation delay, asymmetric delay, speed
bump, frequent batch auctions
∗Baldauf is with the Sauder School of Business, University of British Columbia. Mollner (Corresponding author) is with the Department of Managerial Economics and Decision Sciences, Kellogg School of
Management, Northwestern University. E-mail: joshua.mollner@kellogg.northwestern.edu. First Version:
September 18, 2014. We are indebted to our advisors Timothy Bresnahan, Gabriel Carroll, Jonathan Levin,
Paul Milgrom, and Monika Piazzesi. We also thank Sandro Ambuehl, Sandeep Baliga, Robert Battalio,
Dan Bernhardt, Philip Bond, Eric Budish, Darrell Duﬃe, Georgy Egorov, Liran Einav, Lorenzo Garlappi,
Will Gornall, Joseph Grundfest, Terrence Hendershott, Peter Klibano↵, Fuhito Kojima, John Leahy, Alberto Teguia, Muriel Niederle, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Matthew Pritsker, Alvin Roth, Ilya Segal, Andrzej
Skrzypacz, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, Laura Tuttle, Xin Wang, Brian Weller, Glen Weyl, numerous seminar
participants, various industry experts, and anonymous referees for valuable comments. We acknowledge
ﬁnancial support by the Kohlhagen Fellowship Fund and the Kapnick Fellowship Program through grants
to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. Baldauf gratefully acknowledges ﬁnancial support
from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Mollner was a Postdoctoral Researcher
at Microsoft Research while part of this research was completed, and he thanks them for their hospitality.
We have read the Journal of Finance’s disclosure policy and have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
1

Financial markets have been transformed by faster speeds in recent years. For example, the
BYX exchange slashed its order processing time sevenfold, from 445 microseconds in 2009
to 64 microseconds in 2018.1 Likewise, the round-trip communication time between Nasdaq
and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) has nearly halved, from over 14.5 milliseconds
in 2010 to 7.9 milliseconds today.2
Another important feature of modern trading is that it is highly fragmented, with many
stocks now traded at over 30 venues, considerably more than just a decade ago. Given this
fragmentation, the faster speeds have increased the e↵ectiveness of high-frequency trading
(HFT) strategies, including order anticipation, which we describe below. A stylized fact
is that latencies (the lag between when an order is sent to an exchange and when it is
processed) are random, which implies that traders cannot ensure simultaneous processing
of orders sent to several exchanges. Thus, if HFTs are suﬃciently fast, they may observe
the trade generated by the ﬁrst such order to be processed by an exchange and react on the
remaining exchanges before the orders of the original trader are processed at those exchanges
and in such a way that the original trader fails to trade successfully. This can take two forms:
(i) traders may cancel their remaining quotes, which we call “passive-side order anticipation,”
or (ii) traders other than the original trader may trade against the remaining quotes, which
we call “aggressive-side order anticipation.”3
In this paper, we present a model of order anticipation by HFTs, and we analyze both
its consequences and potential policy responses through the lens of a well-known tradeo↵
between liquidity and information production. Our three main ﬁndings are as follows. First,
faster speeds allow HFTs to be more successful at order anticipation, which improves liquidity in the sense of narrowing the bid-ask spread but also lessens information production.
Second, order anticipation pushes outcomes inside the frontier of this tradeo↵, which represents an ineﬃciency of HFT, albeit one that di↵ers from the commonly voiced concern
that it represents a socially costly arms race. Third, the ineﬃciency is due to aggressive-side
(not passive-side) order anticipation, and hence, certain alternative trading mechanisms can
eliminate the ineﬃciency by preventing aggressive-side order anticipation.
To obtain these results, we build a model that features random latency, multiple ex1See BATS (2009, 2018).
2See “Raging Bulls: How Wall Street Got Addicted to Light-Speed Trading,” Wired Magazine, August
3, 2012 and Quincy Data (2019).
3Internet Appendix Section II reports evidence of order anticipation that comes from a variety of academic
and industry sources. It also discusses the sources of randomness in latency and some of the magnitudes in
question. The Internet Appendix is available in the online version of the article on the Journal of Finance
website.
2

changes, and a single security that is traded by liquidity investors, information investors,
and HFTs. Liquidity investors trade for exogenous hedging, saving, or borrowing motives.
Information investors may, through costly research, obtain and subsequently trade on private
information about the security. HFTs may trade for proﬁt by speculating or by facilitating
transactions with other traders. In the baseline, trading is conducted in limit order books
(LOBs).
In equilibrium, as in prior literature (e.g., Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015)), HFTs play
two roles. One, the liquidity provider, facilitates trade by posting quotes at all exchanges.
The others, snipers, wait to trade until order ﬂow reveals a suﬃciently strong signal of the
value of the security. As is standard, the liquidity provider faces adverse selection: information investors and snipers trade against her quotes only when the quotes are mispriced.
To o↵set the resulting losses, the liquidity provider must set a bid-ask spread. Also in equilibrium, and similar to, for example, Easley and O’Hara (1987), information investors trade
larger quantities than liquidity investors, so that order ﬂow signals the investor’s type. Because of random latency, an information investor’s orders are not processed simultaneously,
which allows HFTs to act on this signal before he completes his trade. The liquidity provider
reacts with passive-side order anticipation, that is, by sending cancellations for her remaining
quotes after observing one or more trades. Snipers react with aggressive-side order anticipation, that is, by sending orders to trade against the remaining quotes after observing two or
more trades. The resulting winner-take-all races may be won by the information investor,
the liquidity provider, or a sniper.
Using the comparative statics of the model, we evaluate the consequences of recent improvements in HFT speed. Faster speeds enable HFTs to be more successful at order anticipation, with two primary economic e↵ects. A negative e↵ect is a reduction in information
production. Intuitively, order anticipation reduces the amount of rent that informed traders
can extract by trading on a piece of information, thereby weakening the incentive to obtain
such information. Less fundamental research is then conducted so that markets provide less
information about the fundamental value of the security, potentially generating further (unmodeled) distortions in the wider economy. However, a positive e↵ect is an improvement in
liquidity as measured by the bid-ask spread. Order anticipation achieves this by reducing
the adverse selection faced by liquidity providers through two channels:
(i) passive-side order anticipation is itself successful avoidance of adverse selection, and (ii) through its e↵ect
on research, order anticipation reduces the amount of asymmetric information available to
create adverse selection. These two predicted consequences are in line with the conclusions
3

of many empirical studies, and as we discuss below, they suggest a need to reinterpret the
conclusions of others.
In sum, when trading is conducted in LOBs, faster HFT speeds induce a tradeo↵: information production declines, but the bid-ask spread narrows. Another question that arises
is whether these outcomes lie on the frontier of this tradeo↵. We show that they generally
do not. Again, the reason is order anticipation—more precisely, aggressive-side order anticipation. To see why, a necessary condition for reaching the frontier is that all proﬁts from
informed trading accrue to the agents who actually produce the information. Aggressive-side
order anticipation violates this condition, as it amounts to snipers proﬁting from information
that they did not produce. We formalize this insight by following the spirit of mechanism
design and optimizing over a general class of trading mechanisms so as to characterize the
frontier. We also show that this frontier can be achieved by replacing the prevailing LOB
with either of two plausible alternatives.
Noncancellation delay mechanisms (NDs) add a small delay between receipt at an exchange and processing for all order types but cancellations.
The result is to eliminate
aggressive-side order anticipation by allowing the liquidity provider to cancel mispriced
quotes before they can be exploited by snipers. Adding randomness to the length of the delay leads to an additional e↵ect: investors become less able to synchronize across exchanges,
which ampliﬁes passive-side order anticipation, and leads in turn to a smaller spread and
lower research intensity.
A set of points on the frontier of the tradeo↵can thus be implemented by varying the amount of randomness, including points that dominate the LOB
outcome along both dimensions, that is, with a smaller spread and more research.
Frequent batch auctions (FBAs) are uniform-price sealed-bid double auctions conducted
at repeated intervals.
Following Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), we consider batch
intervals that are “long” relative to latency and that are synchronized across exchanges. This
has an e↵ect opposite that of a randomized ND: investors become more able to synchronize
across exchanges. Thus, FBAs prevent not only aggressive-side but also passive-side order
anticipation.
FBAs therefore implement a point on the frontier of the tradeo↵, yet one
with a larger spread and more intensive research than either the LOB or any ND outcome.
This reverses the result of Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), who study a model in which
information is modeled as exogenous public news and ﬁnd that FBAs implement a smaller
spread than the LOB.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses related literature.
Section II presents the model. Section III describes equilibrium in the baseline in which trad4

ing occurs in LOBs, and it assesses theoretically the consequences of recent improvements in
HFT speed. Section IV describes the tradeo↵between liquidity and information production,
showing that the baseline equilibrium is not on its frontier. Section V characterizes the
equilibria prevailing under the two alternative trading mechanisms. Section VI concludes.
I.
Related Literature
Our model connects ﬁrst to the literature on market microstructure, speciﬁcally the
strand focusing on liquidity and asymmetric information (Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle
(1985), Easley and O’Hara (1987), Glosten (1994), Back and Baruch (2004)). Other work
demonstrates that public information may give rise to similar forces when trading takes
place in LOBs (Foucault (1999), Goettler, Parlour, and Rajan (2009), Budish, Cramton, and
Shim (2015), Foucault, Kozhan, and Tham (2017)), with the more recent contributions also
highlighting connections to HFT. The aspects of our model that pertain to trading build
on some of these papers by embedding communication latency within a multi-exchange
ﬁnancial system. Our model also connects to the literature on information acquisition in
ﬁnancial markets. Central is Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), who study incentives to acquire
information and repercussions for informational eﬃciency. Combining aspects of these two
literatures, our paper embeds information acquisition in a realistic model of modern trading.
This allows our model to capture the tradeo↵between liquidity and information production.
What is more, it allows us to study how this tradeo↵is inﬂuenced by various features of
market microstructure, including trading speed and the trading mechanism.
Order anticipation lies at the heart of our model: HFTs attempt to infer an investor’s
information as he trades, and they respond by canceling their quotes (i.e., passive-side order
anticipation) or by trading themselves (i.e., aggressive-side order anticipation).
Versions
of this behavior have been considered in earlier literature. Indeed, one might interpret the
market maker’s behavior in Kyle (1985)—adjusting prices in response to information inferred
from order ﬂow—as a form of passive-side order anticipation. In subsequent work, Yang and
Zhu (forthcoming) add aggressive-side order anticipation to a two-period Kyle (1985) model
by including HFTs that are endowed with superior ability (relative to the market maker)
to extract information from order ﬂow, which a↵ects how the insider works his order over
time. In contrast, our information investors split their orders not over time but rather across
exchanges. While this precludes our ability to speak to dynamic considerations, it allows us
to capture the microstructure of the trading environment in more detail and thus to formulate
5

an explicit model of the source of signals that permit aggressive-side order anticipation.
Other models of HFT include those of Biais, Foucault, and Moinas (2015) and Foucault, Hombert, and Ro¸su (2016), which, like Yang and Zhu (forthcoming), limit HFTs to
aggressive trading. Consequently, faster speeds increase adverse selection against liquidity
providers, reducing liquidity. In A¨ıt-Sahalia and Sa˘glam (2017a, 2017b), HFTs are limited
to passive trading and thus are liquidity providers. Consequently, faster speeds decrease
adverse selection and improve liquidity. In contrast to these models, ours includes both
aggressive and passive HFTs, and as a result we capture both of the intuitive e↵ects mentioned above. Interestingly, we nevertheless ﬁnd that the latter e↵ect dominates, so that
faster speeds improve liquidity on net. Other models that contain both aggressive and passive HFTs include Foucault, Kadan, and Kandel (2013), Jovanovic and Menkveld (2016),
Foucault, Kozhan, and Tham (2017), Menkveld and Zoican (2017), and Budish, Cramton,
and Shim (2015). The details of our model build most heavily on the latter. Our main
incremental contribution can be thought of as endogenizing the signals to which HFTs react.
In Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), these signals are exogenous. In our model, however,
they are patterns in order ﬂow that arise endogenously from informed trading in fragmented
markets. As we explain in the text, this di↵erence proves important.
Finally, other studies use models of HFT to evaluate alternative trading mechanisms or
other interventions. Wah and Wellman (2013), Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), Bongaerts and Van Achter (2016), Jovanovic and Menkveld (2016), Rojˇcek and Ziegler (2016),
A¨ıt-Sahalia and Sa˘glam (2017a), Du and Zhu (2017), Brolley and Cimon (2018), Aldrich
and Friedman (2019), and Bernales (2019) variously consider Tobin taxes, cancellation fees,
minimum resting times, pro-rata matching, batch auctions, and order processing delays.
II.
Baseline Model
A single security is traded on multiple exchanges.
An investor, who may be either
liquidity-motivated or information-motivated, arrives at a random point in time. There are
two types of HFTs.
Limit order book.
There are X ≥1 exchanges. In the baseline, each exchange operates a
separate LOB in which prices are continuous and shares are divisible; below we consider
alternative trading mechanisms. Our model of LOB trading is standard, but it is useful to
highlight two special order types, both common in practice. An immediate-or-cancel order
6

is a limit order that is automatically cancelled if it does not lead to an immediate trade (i.e.,
cancelled if it is nonmarketable).4 In contrast, a post-only order is automatically cancelled
if it does lead to an immediate trade (i.e., cancelled if marketable).
Orders are processed sequentially in the usual way.5 If multiple orders arrive at the same
time, ties among traders are broken uniformly at random (as by a small amount of random
latency). Traders observe orders when they are processed, but trading is anonymous in that
traders do not observe identities behind orders they did not themselves submit.
Time.
Fix " to be some positive inﬁnitesimal.6
The set of time periods is T
=
{0,",2",...,1}. See footnote 6 for a discussion of the mathematical tools used in the background to make this construction rigorous. In a period t ∈T , events occur in the following
order:
(i) the investor may arrive, (ii) previously sent orders are processed, and (iii) new
orders are sent.
Latency.
Latency is the time between when an order is submitted by a trader and when it
is processed by the exchange. It is drawn from a distribution with two-point support {",3"}.
Thus, an order sent at t ∈T will be processed at either t + " or t + 3". We allow (but do not
require) the HFTs and the investor to di↵er in their probabilities of obtaining the shorter
latency, letting pH and pI denote those probabilities, respectively.7 We do require pH ≥0.5
and pI ≥0.5. On that domain, an increase in the parameter monotonically reduces both the
expected value and the variance of latency, and thus can be unambiguously interpreted as
an improvement in technology. The same latency applies to all orders sent by a given trader
4Market orders can be thought of as immediate-or-cancel orders that specify inﬁnite limit prices. Because
there will be latency in our model, quotes can change while orders are en route. For that reason, using a
market order is a weakly dominated strategy: an immediate-or-cancel order specifying an appropriately
chosen limit price achieves the same end while also guarding against execution at unattractive prices.
5If the incoming order is to buy (sell) at a price at or above (below) the ask (bid), then a trade occurs
at the ask (bid). The incoming order is referred to as aggressive and the matching order as passive.
6An inﬁnitesimal " is a number for which ￿"￿< 1￿n for all n ∈N. The idea is formalized by a branch
of mathematics known as nonstandard analysis (Robinson (1966)). Nonstandard analysis is based on the
hyperreal numbers ∗R, an ordered ﬁeld extension of the real numbers, that contains both inﬁnites and nonzero
inﬁnitesimals. Similarly, the hypernatural numbers ∗N contain not only the standard natural numbers but
also inﬁnites. Formally, our approach is as follows. Fix N ∈∗N ￿N to be some inﬁnite hypernatural, and
deﬁne " = 1￿N. This is tantamount to dividing the unit interval into N ∈N discrete time periods, and
then letting N diverge to inﬁnity. But rather than work with the sequence, we work directly in the limit.
Remark 1 explains the reasons for this approach.
7Though not required for our results, it might be natural to assume pH > pI. Indeed, di↵erent traders
face di↵erent economic problems when determining which speed technologies to adopt (e.g., due to economies
of scale or complementarities with other trading activity), which may lead to di↵ering levels of speed.
7

to a given exchange in a given time period, but latencies are otherwise drawn independently.
Remark 1. Latency is measured in multiples of the inﬁnitesimal ". This construction approximates the reality of incredibly fast speeds in modern markets wherein latencies—often
on the order of microseconds—are negligible relative to the rate at which real economic activity takes place (e.g., the rate at which investors arrive to trade). This is also useful for
tractability, in two ways. First, it allows us to deliver an equilibrium that is stationary in
the sense that the spread remains constant until a trade occurs, which would not be possible
with conventional constructions of time. (We remark on this further in the penultimate
paragraph of Section III.B.) Second, it allows us to deliver a clean formalization of certain
alternative trading mechanisms by providing a simple language for lengths of time that are
both long relative to latency and short in an overall sense. For instance, if one interprets
" as a microsecond, then one might interpret √" as a millisecond and use it to model a
one-millisecond order processing delay.
Security.
A single security has a fundamental value per share v, which is either −1 or 1
(each with equal probability), is chosen by nature prior to time zero, and is initially unknown
by all traders. After trading ends, positions are liquidated at v per share.
Investor.
An investor arrives at a time drawn from the uniform distribution on T .8 He is
an information investor with probability λ ∈(0,1) and a liquidity investor otherwise.
If he is an information investor, then immediately upon arrival he chooses a research
intensity r ∈[0,1] at the cost c(r). This cost function is assumed to be continuously di↵erentiable, weakly increasing, and weakly convex. Research intensity determines his success in
obtaining information: he learns v with probability r and fails to learn it otherwise.
If he is a liquidity investor, then he has either a buying motive or a selling motive (each
with equal probability), which is modeled as a utility bonus of size β that is earned if he is,
respectively, long or short exactly one share of the security when trading ends. We assume
that β ≥
λX
1−λ+λX , where recall that X denotes the number of exchanges in the economy. As
derivations below reveal, this assumption is suﬃcient to ensure that adverse selection is not
so severe that the equilibrium spread exceeds 2β, which would crowd out trade from liquidity
investors and lead to market breakdown.
8This distribution can be constructed as in Loeb (1975). Moreover, our assumption that the distribution
is uniform can be signiﬁcantly weakened, although we omit the details here.
8

HFTs.
There are two types of HFTs: liquidity providers and snipers. There are at least
two liquidity providers and an inﬁnite number of snipers.9
Actions.
Aside from an information investor’s choice of research intensity, the available
actions are orders that can be sent. Information investors, liquidity investors, and snipers
are restricted to immediate-or-cancel orders. Liquidity providers are restricted to post-only
orders (and cancellations thereof). The investor is restricted to sending orders only in the
period of his arrival.
HFTs are prohibited from sending orders in any two periods that
are inﬁnitely close.10 Information investors and HFTs can send orders to any exchange. A
liquidity investor can send orders only to his “home exchange,” which is selected uniformly
at random from the set of exchanges.
Payo↵s.
From acquiring a portfolio consisting of y dollars and z shares, an HFT receives
utility y + zv, a liquidity investor with a buying motive y + zv + β {z = 1}, and a liquidity
investor with a selling motive y +zv +β {z = −1}. An information investor who acquires this
same portfolio and chooses research intensity r receives utility y + zv −c(r).
III.
Limit Order Book
In this section, we study the baseline model in which each exchange operates a separate
LOB. We ﬁrst describe equilibrium behavior. We then discuss comparative statics.
A.
Equilibrium Description
Our ﬁrst result characterizes the LOB equilibrium in terms of two outcome variables:
the bid-ask spread and research intensity. The solution concept is weak perfect Bayesian
9To formalize and clarify what we mean by “inﬁnite”: one should think of our model as the limit of
a sequence of models each with a ﬁnite number of HFTs. The precise method for taking this limit does
not matter for our main analysis, and hence, we do not detail it here. But it does matter for supplemental
analysis that we conduct in Internet Appendix Section VII.B, where we discuss some of the most natural
possibilities. (As an aside: essentially equivalent to this sequence-based approach, one could again leverage
nonstandard analysis so as to feature a hypernatural number of HFTs.) Indeed, there are many HFTs in
practice, on the order of hundreds in U.S. markets.
10Two times t,t′ ∈T are inﬁnitely close if ￿t−t′￿is an inﬁnitesimal. Without this restriction, an HFT that
sent an order at t might wish to send a redundant order at t + " because, given the randomness of latency,
the latter order might arrive before the former. Allowing for such behavior would complicate the subsequent
mathematics but not change the main forces of the model.
9

equilibrium (WPBE), where the relevant beliefs are about the value of the security.11
PROPOSITION 1: Under the LOB, there exists a WPBE in which the spread s∗
LOB and
research intensity r∗
LOB are the unique solution to
s∗
LOB =
2λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
(1)
r∗
LOB ∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿rXI ￿1 −s∗
LOB
2
￿−c(r)￿,
(2)
where
XI = XpI + X(1 −pI)X + (1 −pH)(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1
XS = X(1 −pI) −X(1 −pI)X −(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1
represent the expected number of trades made by an information investor and snipers, respectively, conditional on an information investor learning v.
In terms of (s∗
LOB,r∗
LOB) as characterized by Proposition 1, equilibrium strategies are:
• Investor. If he is a liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive, he sends to his home
exchange an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) one share at the price β (−β).
If he is an information investor, he conducts research with intensity r∗
LOB. If he learns
that the value of the security is v = 1 (v = −1), he sends to each exchange an immediateor-cancel order to buy (sell) one share at the price 1 (−1). He sends no orders if he does
not learn v.
• Liquidity providers.
One liquidity provider is active on the equilibrium path and is
referred to as “the liquidity provider” in what follows. At time zero, she sends to each
exchange a post-only order to buy one share at the bid −s∗
LOB￿2 and another to sell one
share at the ask s∗
LOB￿2. If at any time t one or more trades occur, she sends cancellations
for all of her remaining orders, doing so in the same period.
A second liquidity provider who is inactive on path but may be active o↵path is referred
to as “the enforcer.” If at some time t ≥3" prior to which no trade has occurred the LOB
at some exchange consists of anything other than a post-only order to buy one share at
−s∗
LOB￿2 and a post-only order to sell one share at s∗
LOB￿2, then she sends such orders to
that exchange, doing so in the same period.
11A WPBE consists of strategies and beliefs such that (i) strategies are optimal given beliefs and (ii) beliefs
are consistent with Bayesian updating whenever possible.
10

The remaining liquidity providers remain completely inactive both on and o↵path.
• Snipers. If at any time t trades occur at the ask (bid) at two or more exchanges, each
sniper sends to all other exchanges an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) one share
at the price 1 (−1), doing so in the same period.
In the paragraphs that follow we sketch why these strategies constitute an equilibrium; we
defer a formal treatment to the proof of Proposition 1 in Internet Appendix Section I. While
HFTs cannot directly observe whether the investor is information-motivated or liquiditymotivated, a signal of their motivation can be extracted from the pattern of his trades.
HFTs monitor these trades, update their beliefs about the investor’s motives using Bayes’
rule, and react in a way that depends on their type. The liquidity provider attempts to
cancel her quotes whenever the expected value of future trades against them is negative.
Snipers attempt to trade whenever there is an opportunity to arbitrage quotes against their
beliefs.
To describe behavior on path, we consider two cases. First, suppose that the ﬁrst trades
to occur are two or more that take place simultaneously. Because a liquidity investor sends
just a single order, this implies that the investor is an information investor, which allows the
HFTs to infer the value of the security. Snipers, now knowing that the remaining quotes
present an arbitrage opportunity, attempt to trade against them. For the same reason, the
liquidity provider sends cancellations for all remaining quotes. In this case, HFTs react to
endogenously generated order ﬂow in a way that is analogous to how they react to exogenous
public news in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015). Second, suppose that the ﬁrst trade takes
place in isolation. This can occur whether the investor is information-motivated or liquiditymotivated, and it does not permit inference about the value of the security that is suﬃciently
strong to indicate an arbitrage opportunity. As a result, snipers do not react. The liquidity
provider, however, does react, sending cancellations for all remaining quotes. This is because
a liquidity investor sends just a single order, which implies that any future trades would be
information-motivated. Figure 1 illustrates these two cases.
Bertrand competition among liquidity providers leads us to focus on equilibria in which
the liquidity provider earns zero proﬁts in expectation.12 This is ensured by requiring that
the equilibrium spread balance the revenue from trades with liquidity investors against the
12Although considerable proﬁts may have accrued in the early days of HFT, they were short-lived (see, for
example, “High-Frequency Traders Fall on Hard Times,” Wall Street Journal, March 21, 2017). Furthermore,
much of the rest of the literature also assumes competitive liquidity provision (e.g., Glosten and Milgrom
(1985), Kyle (1985)).
11

t
t + "
t + 2"
t + 3"
t + 4"
Figure 1. Illustration of equilibrium (LOB). One equilibrium scenario:
(i) the investor sends orders at t ∈T , either to either one or all exchanges depending on his
type, and (ii) at least one order receives the shorter latency and is processed at t + " (solid
black arrow), while any remaining orders receive the longer latency and are processed at
t + 3" (dashed black arrow). HFTs react to the trade(s) at t + " by sending orders that may
be processed at t + 2" or t + 4" (dashed gray arrows). With a single trade at t + ", only the
liquidity provider reacts. With two or more trades at t + ", snipers react as well.
costs of adverse selection exerted by information investors and snipers. When a liquidity
investor is present, which occurs with probability 1 −λ, the liquidity provider earns the
half-spread s∗
LOB￿2 on the one trade that takes place. In contrast, when an information
investor is present and learns the value of the security, which occurs with probability λr∗
LOB,
the liquidity provider loses 1 −s∗
LOB￿2 on each of the XI + XS trades that take place. The
zero-proﬁt condition is thus
(1 −λ)s∗
LOB
2
= λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)￿1 −s∗
LOB
2
￿.
Solving for the spread yields equation (1) in the proposition. The liquidity provider cannot
proﬁtably deviate from this spread: narrower quotes would yield negative expected proﬁts,
while wider quotes would be undercut by the enforcer.
Equation (2) in the proposition ensures that information investors conduct research with
an intensity that optimally balances costs and beneﬁts. The cost of implementing research
intensity r is c(r). The corresponding beneﬁt is the product of
(i) r, the probability of
learning the value of the security, (ii) XI, the number of trades an information investor can
expect to complete, and (iii) 1 −s∗
LOB￿2, his proﬁt per trade, that is, the magnitude of his
informational advantage minus the half spread.
B.
Remarks
Although each liquidity investor desires to trade just a single share, aggregate quoted
depth exceeds that amount in equilibrium. The reason relates to our assumption that each
12

liquidity investor trades only at his home exchange, which we interpret as an extreme way
of capturing frictions that a↵ect order routing decisions. In practice, there may be many
sources of such frictions, for instance, broker-client conﬂicts of interest or technological barriers to observing prices in real time. Such frictions fragment the collective order ﬂow of
liquidity investors. In response, liquidity providers must quote more aggregate depth. In
the model, depth in fact scales linearly in the number of exchanges because the liquidity
provider optimally o↵ers one share at both the bid and the ask at each exchange to serve a
liquidity investor who might attempt to trade there.13 Note that fractional shares could be
quoted—although liquidity investor demand is not divisible, shares are.
In contrast to liquidity investors, information investors do wish to trade against the entire
aggregate depth. For this reason, a larger number of exchanges being targeted is a signal
of informationally-motivated trade.14 This is what allows HFTs to extract information from
order ﬂow. What allows them to use that information is random latency. While an information investor sends all orders in a wave simultaneously at a time t, random latency may
create dispersion in their processing times at the di↵erent exchanges, with some orders being
processed at t + " and others at t + 3". It is this dispersion that permits order anticipation.
Having observed trades at some exchanges at t + ", HFTs react by sending orders to the
remaining exchanges, which may be processed at t + 2", before the information investor’s
remaining orders are processed at t + 3". Passive-side order anticipation occurs when the
liquidity provider, reacting in this way, cancels a quote before the information investor can
trade against it. Aggressive-side order anticipation occurs when a sniper removes such a
quote by trading against it herself.
Smart order routers, with RBC’s THOR (Aisen et al. (2015)) as a prominent example,
attempt to mitigate the e↵ects of order anticipation by releasing orders in a wave at slightly
di↵erent times, giving those sent to high-latency exchanges a head start. In our model,
however, information investors face the same latency distribution at each exchange, as if
13That adding a trading venue deepens the aggregate book is corroborated by empirical evidence (e.g.,
Boehmer and Boehmer (2003), Fink, Fink, and Weston (2006), Foucault and Menkveld (2008), He, Jarnecic,
and Liu (2015), Aitken, Chen, and Foley (2017)). On the theoretical side, Dennert (1993) also features this
force.
14A similar property is present in many other models (Kyle (1985), Easley and O’Hara (1987), Glosten
(1989, 1994), Biais, Martimort, and Rochet (2000)), where it either emerges or is assumed that larger
volumes signal more information about the value of the security. The aforementioned property of our model
di↵ers only in that ours is a multi-exchange setting in which volume is measured in e↵ect by the number of
exchanges targeted. Consistent with this property of our model, empirical evidence shows that large trades
tend to be more informed than their smaller counterparts (e.g., Hasbrouck (1991), Lin, Sanger, and Booth
(1995), Easley, Kiefer, and O’Hara (1997), Chakravarty et al. (2012)).
13

they were already employing such an algorithm.
Equilibrium is stationary in the sense that the spread remains constant until a trade
occurs, at which point a burst of activity occurs whose nature does not depend on calendar
time.
Important for delivering this type of tractability is the fact that the distribution
governing the investor’s arrival time is inﬁnitely more di↵use than the distribution governing
latency. This is one way nonstandard analysis helps deliver a tractable model. In analogous
models with more conventional timing, the scales of these two distributions necessarily di↵er
by only a ﬁnite multiple. In consequence, such models are instead plagued by technicalities
that do not correspond to important economic forces. See Internet Appendix Section III.G
for details.15
Proposition 1 does not assert the uniqueness of equilibrium (only existence), but we do not
view this as problematic for two reasons. First, the selected equilibrium has many features
that one might reasonably expect (e.g., symmetry across exchanges, zero proﬁts for liquidity
providers, etc.). Moreover, we argue in Internet Appendix Section III.J that all equilibria
with these features give rise to the same outcome (s∗
LOB,r∗
LOB). Second, when we compare
the LOB to alternative mechanisms in Section V, we ensure that we do so in a consistent
way by making the same equilibrium selection. That is, equilibrium strategies remain ﬁxed
in all respects except the spread and research intensity, and the di↵erent mechanisms have
an e↵ect only by inﬂuencing how those ﬁxed strategies map into trading outcomes.
C.
E↵ect of Faster Speed
Our ﬁrst main insight concerns the e↵ect of faster HFT technologies. To derive it, we
study how the equilibrium of Proposition 1 varies with the parameter pH.16 In examining the
comparative statics, we again focus on two outcome variables, namely, liquidity, as measured
by the bid-ask spread, and information production, as measured by research intensity.
COROLLARY 1: Both the spread s∗
LOB and research intensity r∗
LOB are weakly decreasing in
pH.
15In short, the issue is the following. Because a liquidity investor sends a single order while an information
investor sends multiple orders at once, an information investor’s minimum latency (the minimum taken across
the orders he sends) is ﬁrst-order stochastically dominated by a liquidity investor’s latency. If the scale of
the latency distribution is not inﬁnitesimal, then calendar time becomes informative about the next order
to arrive (its likelihood of being liquidity-motivated relative to information-motivated) and as a result the
spread varies with time.
16See Internet Appendix Section III.A for comparative statics with respect to the remaining parameters
(i.e., pI,λ,X).
14

According to Corollary 1, an increase in pH (i.e., faster speed) reduces equilibrium research intensity. Intuitively, faster HFTs are more adept at order anticipation, which reduces
the ﬁlls that information investors receive. This disincentivizes research and leads to less of
it in equilibrium.17 This empirical implication—that faster HFT technologies lead to less
fundamental research and hence less informative prices—is in line with the ﬁndings of Weller
(2018), Lee and Watts (2018), and Gider, Schmickler, and Westheide (2019). In contrast,
several other papers argue that HFT makes prices more informative, but this ﬁnding can
be explained by use of an incomplete notion of informativeness. For example, Hendershott,
Jones, and Menkveld (2011) study an upgrade that resulted in faster HFT and ﬁnd price
changes to be less correlated with trades thereafter. This result is consistent with faster
speeds leading to more passive-side order anticipation, and it suggests that information is
incorporated into prices faster conditional on becoming available. But this evidence says
little about the extent of fundamental research or the probability of information becoming
available in the ﬁrst place.18
An increase in pH also reduces the equilibrium spread. The liquidity provider quotes a
smaller spread when HFTs are faster because she faces less adverse selection. This occurs for
two reasons. First, as described above, faster speeds reduce research intensity and in turn
the amount of information that is ultimately traded upon. Second, faster speeds facilitate
passive-side order anticipation, which enables the liquidity provider to cancel more mispriced
quotes before they are exploited. This empirical implication—that faster HFT technologies
lead to smaller spreads—is in line with the majority of the evidence on this topic.19
This comparative static also represents an interesting contrast to Budish, Cramton, and
Shim (2015), who ﬁnd that HFT speed has no e↵ect on the spread. In their model, HFTs
react to exogenous signals. The resulting race to react is only among themselves, and hence
its nature is not a↵ected by their absolute speed. In our model, however, HFTs react to
endogenous patterns in order ﬂow. The resulting race to react also includes the information
17That information leakage disincentivizes research is also observed by the literature on dual trading
(Fishman and Longsta↵(1992), R¨oell (1990)). More broadly, that incentives to acquire information are
related to the rents that can be derived from it is illustrated by many models (e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz
(1980)).
18Other empirical work similarly argues that HFT improves price informativeness (Brogaard (2010),
Carrion (2013), Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014), Chaboud et al. (2014), Conrad, Wahal, and
Xiang (2015), Boehmer, Fong, and Wu (2018)).
19Empirical evidence that enhanced HFT reduces the spread (or generally improves liquidity) is provided
by Brogaard (2010), Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011), Hasbrouck and Saar (2013), Menkveld (2013),
Frino, Mollica, and Webb (2014), Brogaard et al. (2015), Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015), Boehmer, Fong,
and Wu (2018), and Malinova, Park, and Riordan (2018).
15

investor whose orders triggered the race. Thus, faster HFT speeds do a↵ect the nature of the
race, reducing adverse selection by intensifying the speed disadvantage of the information
investor.
IV.
Feasible Outcomes
Liquidity and information production—or in our context, a small spread and high research intensity—are desirable properties of ﬁnancial markets.
But these two objectives
often conﬂict: to incentivize information production, agents must be able to trade on the
information they produce, which then typically exacerbates adverse selection and worsens
liquidity. The comparative statics of the previous section illustrate this conﬂict. According
to Corollary 1, when HFTs become faster, liquidity improves but information production
declines.
Given the conﬂict between these dual objectives of liquidity and information production,
it is useful to consider what is feasible in their two dimensions. Importantly, reaching the
frontier of this feasible set requires that all proﬁts from informed trading ﬂow to the agents
who actually produce the information. Our next main insight is that this necessary condition
does not hold in the LOB equilibrium for the reason that aggressive-side order anticipation
enables snipers to proﬁt from information they did not produce. In this section, we follow
an approach that is in the spirit of mechanism design to formalize this insight and to provide
a framework for evaluating alternatives to the LOB.
A.
Framework
We use two criteria to evaluate a trading mechanism—liquidity and information production. As before, information production is measured by research intensity.20 In previous
sections, liquidity is measured by the bid-ask spread. Here, we wish to consider general mechanisms, including some that do not feature a spread. We therefore employ what amounts to
a change of variables and take liquidity investor welfare (or more precisely, the investor’s expected utility conditional on being a liquidity investor) to be our measure. For our model of
the LOB, liquidity investor welfare is equivalent to the spread through w∗
LOB = β −s∗
LOB￿2.21
20Although informative prices are not valuable to the traders in our model, the literature has identiﬁed
several channels through which they may be a positive externality for nontraders (see Internet Appendix
Section V).
21Note that with a richer model of liquidity investors, for example, if they were risk averse and traded to
hedge their endowment shocks, a reduction in liquidity would crowd out their trading and reduce allocative
16

(Analogous equalities hold for the mechanisms that we analyze in Section V.)
Of course, other potential criteria could be used, for example, those that consider the
welfare of HFTs or information investors. We focus on the two criteria above, however,
because of their central position in the literature and because they are the features of our
model that relate most closely to the stated objectives of most regulatory bodies.22
We next characterize what is feasible in terms of these two criteria. To do so, we imagine
the problem of a social planner who recommends a research intensity to the investor and
also allocates resources (dollars and shares). The planner does not observe research directly,
and thus to incentivize it must make the allocation a function of the state, subject to several
constraints that we deﬁne formally in the next section. This framework nests optimization
over a wide range of trading mechanisms, including the LOB and the alternatives considered
in Section V.
B.
Formalities
Potential investor characteristics deﬁne ﬁve states:
(i) a liquidity investor with a buying
motive, (ii) a liquidity investor with a selling motive, (iii) an information investor who learns
v = 1, (iv) an information investor who learns v = −1, or (v) an information investor who fails
to learn v. We denote these ﬁve states ⇥= {B,S,1,−1,0}, and we use ✓for a typical element.
The probability distribution over ⇥is a↵ected by the choice of r: P(B) = P(S) = (1 −λ)￿2,
P(1) = P(−1) = λr￿2, and P(0) = λ(1 −r).
Letting v(✓) denote the expected value of the security conditional on available information, we have v(B) = v(S) = v(0) = 0, v(1) = 1, and v(−1) = −1. Let H denote the set of
HFTs (including both liquidity providers and snipers). The expected utility that HFT h ∈H
receives from a portfolio consisting of y dollars and z shares in state ✓is uh(y,z￿✓) = y+zv(✓).
Similarly, the expected utility, gross of research costs, that the investor receives from a portfolio consisting of y dollars and z shares in state ✓is
u(y,z￿✓) =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
y + zv(✓) + β {z = 1}
if ✓= B
y + zv(✓) + β {z = −1}
if ✓= S
y + zv(✓)
if ✓∈{1,−1,0}.
eﬃciency. This may provide an additional reason to prioritize liquidity.
22Nevertheless, in Internet Appendix Section VII we argue that our key results would extend if the liquidity
investor welfare criterion were replaced by either (i) total investor welfare or (ii) total trader welfare.
17

We consider contracts among the planner, the investor, and HFTs. A contract speciﬁes a
research intensity as well as payments to the traders as functions of the state, which may be
in the form of dollars, shares, or both. Let y(✓) and z(✓) denote, respectively, the number
of dollars and shares paid to the investor in state ✓under such a contract. Let yh(✓) and
zh(✓) denote the corresponding quantities for HFT h ∈H. The following analysis treats
these quantities as deterministic, but allowing for randomization would not change any of
the results.
The outcome of a contract is determined by two criteria:
(i) research intensity, denoted
by r, and (ii) liquidity investor welfare, denoted by w.
The feasible set, F, consists of
outcomes that can be implemented by contracts satisfying certain constraints:
F =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
(r,w) ∃y(✓),∃z(✓),∃{yh(✓)}h∈H,∃{zh(✓)}h∈H such that
(W), (BB–1), (BB–2), (IR–I), (IR–H), (O)
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
,
where
(W) w = 1
2u(y(B),z(B)￿B) + 1
2u(y(S),z(S)￿S)
(BB–1) (∀✓∈⇥) ∶y(✓) + ∑h∈H yh(✓) = 0
(BB–2) (∀✓∈⇥) ∶z(✓) + ∑h∈H zh(✓) = 0
(IR–I) (∀✓∈⇥) ∶u(y(✓),z(✓)￿✓) ≥0
(IR–H) (∀h ∈H) ∶Er[uh(yh(✓),zh(✓)￿✓)] ≥0
(O) r ∈arg maxˆr∈[0,1] ￿ˆr
2u(y(1),z(1)￿1) + ˆr
2u(y(−1),z(−1)￿−1) + (1 −ˆr)u(y(0),z(0)￿0) −c(ˆr)￿.
The constraint (W) is deﬁnitional: it requires that w represent the investor’s expected
utility conditional on being a liquidity investor. Constraints (BB–1) and (BB–2) require
budget balance with respect to dollars and shares, respectively. Constraint (IR–I) requires
individual rationality for the investor at the interim stage, that is, after learning his type
but before the resolution of any residual uncertainty about v. Constraint (IR–H) requires
individual rationality for HFTs at the ex ante stage. Finally, constraint (O) requires that
the investor’s choice of research intensity be optimal.23
23Note that this formulation does not impose a truthfulness constraint to require that the investor ﬁnd it
optimal to report ✓. In that sense, we are analyzing a relaxed problem that involves fewer constraints than
there “should” be. Nevertheless, because the alternative trading mechanisms that we discuss in Section V
achieve the frontier of even this relaxed problem, the absence of this constraint is not relevant to our key
results about the frontier of F (see Corollaries 2, 5, and 6).
18

C.
The LOB Does Not Achieve the Frontier of F
The set of feasible outcomes is characterized by the following proposition.
PROPOSITION 2: The feasible set is
F = ￿(r,w) ￿r ∈[0,1],w ∈￿0,β −
λ
1 −λrc′(r)￿￿.
In particular, an outcome (r,w) ≥(0,0) is on the frontier of F if and only if
(1 −λ)(β −w) = λrc′(r).
(3)
Intuitively, the constraints of the problem can be combined in such a way that they come
down to a single tradeo↵: information investors can be incentivized to conduct research, but
only if they are paid with funds raised through a tax on liquidity investors. The left-hand
side of (3) is the share of liquidity investors multiplied by the per-capita liquidity investor
tax. The right-hand side is the share of information investors multiplied by rc′(r), where
the latter represents the minimum expected payment required to incentivize an information
investor to research with intensity r.24
To be on the frontier, it must be the case that
liquidity investors are not taxed beyond the minimum necessary to incentivize the desired
level of research.
While Proposition 2 characterizes the feasible set, it does not speak to the particular
point in the set that a social planner would optimally implement. Nevertheless, a necessary
condition for optimality is that the outcome be on the frontier of the set. A corollary of
Propositions 1 and 2 is that the LOB equilibrium generally fails this requirement.
COROLLARY 2: If X > 2, pI < 1, and c′(0) < XI, then the LOB outcome is not on the
frontier of F.
To be on the frontier, all information rents from the trading stage must accrue to those
who actually produce information. Importantly, this is not the case when aggressive-side
order anticipation occurs—instead, snipers divert a portion of the rents. In doing so, snipers
contribute to adverse selection, raising the spread but without producing any information.
In short, aggressive-side order anticipation is a wedge that can push the outcome inside the
frontier of the tradeo↵between liquidity and information production.
24An incentive scheme that achieves this minimum is to pay c′(r) conditional on information being
produced. Because information is produced with probability r, the expected payment is rc′(r).
19

Under the conditions of Corollary 2, the LOB equilibrium involves aggressive-side order
anticipation, and as a result its outcome is o↵the frontier. To understand those conditions,
note that aggressive-side order anticipation does not take place if there are two or fewer
exchanges or if the investor’s latency is deterministic. It also does not take place if research
is too costly to occur in equilibrium, which c′(0) < XI rules out.
Although aggressive-side and passive-side order anticipation have much in common, the
analysis above highlights an important di↵erence between the two HFT strategies. Specifically, while aggressive-side order anticipation moves the outcome o↵the frontier of the
feasible set, passive-side order anticipation moves the outcome along the frontier.25 As a result, passive-side order anticipation may actually be beneﬁcial, at least if suﬃcient emphasis
is placed on liquidity. In contrast, our ﬁndings highlight a sense in which aggressive-side
order anticipation is an unambiguously ineﬃcient form of HFT.
D.
Robustness
We now turn to the question of robustness. We argue that our main results are not
driven by our occasionally stylized modeling choices. As the previous analysis shows, the
key economic insight is that the LOB is not on the frontier of the tradeo↵between liquidity
and information production because it permits aggressive-side order anticipation, through
which some information rents are obtained by traders who do not produce information.
Accordingly, in the following discussion we focus on the extent to which aggressive-side
order anticipation persists in less stylized settings. We conclude that aggressive-side order
anticipation is a robust feature of LOB trading.
One limitation of the model is that it does not allow us to consider how informed traders
might split orders over time. In the model, at most a single liquidity investor is present.
Because an information investor cannot therefore pretend to be a stream of liquidity investors, he is e↵ectively limited to trading at just a single point in time. He therefore trades
as intensely as possible at that moment and optimally synchronizes his trading in one large
“wave.” For private information that is short-lived, this modeling approach seems realistic.
But for private information that is long-lived, which is the case in which information acquisition has the greatest social beneﬁt, it may be less than fully realistic. A more realistic
model would be one in which a stream of liquidity investors arrive. In such a model, there
would indeed be scope for dynamic order splitting and, potentially, less order anticipation
25Similarly, Lyle and Naughton (2016) empirically distinguish between “liquidity provider monitoring”
by HFTs, which lowers the spread, and residual HFT, which raises it.
20

would occur. Nevertheless, in Internet Appendix Section III.F where we consider such a
model—a multi-exchange version of Back and Baruch (2004)—we show that if the market is
suﬃciently fragmented, then equilibrium requires that the informed trader sometimes trade
in a large wave even though doing so would give himself away and lead to order anticipation.
Because modern markets are indeed quite fragmented, this seems likely to be the relevant
case.
It is also stylized to assume that liquidity investors do not compare prices when selecting
an exchange. As we discuss in Section III.B, this assumption captures a realistic economic
force—frictions that a↵ect order routing decisions—albeit in an extreme way. This assumption is not uncommon in the literature on trading in fragmented markets (e.g., Mendelson
(1987), Chowdhry and Nanda (1991), Biais et al. (2015), Foucault et al. (2017)). Indeed,
as mentioned above, this assumption is important because it delivers the key property that
a larger number of exchanges targeted is a signal of informationally motivated trade. However, this property would arise even if frictions that a↵ect order routing were captured in
a less extreme way by allowing for a limited amount of cross-exchange elasticity (as in, for
example, Baldauf and Mollner (forthcoming)). Depending on modeling speciﬁcs, this might
weaken the extent to which trading motives are signaled by the number of exchanges targeted. Nevertheless, some signal, and therefore some order anticipation, would remain so
long as information investors continue to target more exchanges than liquidity investors in
the sense of ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance. Similar conclusions would apply if we relaxed
the assumption that liquidity investors are homogeneous in the quantity they demand (see
Internet Appendix Section III.H).
Our assumption of risk neutrality is also not without loss. For example, if information
investors were risk averse, then they might trade less intensely on information, sending orders
to only a subset of exchanges. Nevertheless, as long as risk aversion is not too extreme, the
trading demands of information investors would continue to dominate those of liquidity
investors. In turn, some signal would remain in order ﬂow, and order anticipation would
continue to occur (see Internet Appendix Section III.I).
Another limitation of the model is that it imposes many restrictions on order types.
Information investors, liquidity investors, and snipers are restricted to immediate-or-cancel
orders, which limits them to aggressive trading. In contrast, liquidity providers are restricted
to post-only orders, which limits them to passive trading. Many of these restrictions are
fairly standard in the literature (e.g., Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985), Budish,
21

Cramton, and Shim (2015)).26 Moreover, they allow our analysis to be clean and tractable
by ensuring that no trader has an opportunity to alternate between aggressive and passive
trading.27 Nevertheless, they are unlikely to be driving our conclusions.28 In particular, given
an information investor’s need to synchronize execution across venues, aggressive behavior
would likely emerge endogenously, which would again open the door for order anticipation.
It is quite stylized to model latency as draws from a two-point distribution, but this
also does not drive our results. For order anticipation to occur in the LOB equilibrium, the
necessary property is that the maximum investor latency exceeds the sum of his minimum
latency and the minimum HFT latency. We use a simple and convenient distribution with
that property. We also assume that latencies are drawn independently. While some correlation likely exists in practice, the necessary condition for order anticipation to occur is only
that such correlation is not perfect across either traders or exchanges.
Another limitation is that latencies are exogenous. Endogenizing them (as in, for example, Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), Foucault, Kozhan, and Tham (2017)) might
capture additional forces. Depending on the speciﬁcs, these forces might attenuate or even
overturn the comparative statics of Corollary 1, as a change in HFT speed would alter the
marginal return on speed investments for investors. But so long as investors do not achieve
perfect synchronization (i.e., pI < 1), which seems to be the realistic case (see Internet Appendix Section II.B), order anticipation occurs and the LOB outcome lies inside the frontier
(see Corollary 2). Our conclusion that the alternative mechanisms studied in Section V
implement outcomes on the frontier also continues to hold.
V.
Alternative Trading Mechanisms
As the previous section highlights, the key to improving upon the LOB is to eliminate
aggressive-side order anticipation. Motivated by this observation, we consider two realistic
alternative trading mechanisms that achieve this. (Conversely, we do not consider other
26Some exceptions are Parlour (1998), Foucault (1999), Foucault, Kadan, and Kandel (2005), and Ro¸su
(2009), who develop models of LOB trading in which agents endogenously choose whether to trade aggressively or passively. However, none of these models features asymmetric information.
27This is why traders are not given access to “plain vanilla” limit orders in our model, that is, those can
be used to trade either passively or aggressively.
28Note further that neither type of HFT earns positive proﬁts in any of the equilibria we identify. Accordingly, it would make no di↵erence if the model were augmented with an initial stage in which HFTs were
to choose their type endogenously. What is important for our analysis is that no HFT may use a strategy
that could lead to an outcome in which she makes both aggressive and passive trades.
22

familiar alternatives, such as minimum resting times, that do not have this e↵ect.) We ﬁnd
that these alternatives are optimal in the model in the sense that they implement outcomes
on the frontier of the tradeo↵between liquidity and information production.
A.
Noncancellation Delay Mechanisms
We ﬁrst consider a family of mechanisms in which exchanges process cancellations upon
receipt but other order types only after a small (possibly random) delay. As a result, a cancellation received slightly after an order of a di↵erent type might be processed ﬁrst (whereas
LOBs process orders strictly in the order received). The e↵ect is to eliminate aggressive-side
order anticipation, but not its passive-side counterpart.
In the formulation below, all limit orders (including both immediate-or-cancel and postonly orders) receive a delay. In practice, exchanges provide an even wider variety of order
types, and accordingly there are many degrees of freedom concerning exactly which orders
to delay. In recent years, versions of this same basic economic mechanism have been proposed or implemented by several venues across multiple asset classes (see Internet Appendix
Section VI.A), but these developments have been controversial. We hope to contribute some
clarity to this issue by providing a formal model-based analysis of these mechanisms.
A.1. Deﬁnition
We focus our formal analysis on a speciﬁc family of ND mechanisms, parametrized by
q ∈[0,1], where the length of the delay is chosen as follows. All noncancellation orders
receive a delay of constant length δND. With probability q, a noncancellation order receives
an additional delay, which is a random variable drawn from some distribution FND.29 Aside
from these delays, all order processing is as in the LOB.30 In particular, orders are observed
immediately upon processing (but remain unobserved until they are processed, even if they
have already been received by the exchange). In addition, we retain all previous restrictions
on orders that the various traders can submit.
To have the desired e↵ect, δND should be small but should exceed the maximum di↵erence
in reaction time that may occur between two HFTs responding to the same event. In the
language of the paper, this requirement corresponds to an inﬁnitesimal delay δND > 2", which
29This is simply one way to parametrize the addition of randomness drawn from FND to the ﬁxed delay
δND. Analogues of the results derived here would exist for any other smooth parametrization.
30Note that with such a delay, it becomes possible for a cancellation order to be processed before the order
it was meant to cancel. In that case, the latter order would be cancelled immediately upon processing.
23

we assume hereafter. Furthermore, we assume that the distribution FND (i) puts positive
probability only on inﬁnitesimal values t ∈T and (ii) puts inﬁnitesimal probability on any
particular t. Roughly speaking, the variance of FND should be “one order of magnitude
larger” than latency.
We also impose the following correlation structure on the random
component of the delay: draws are identical for orders sent by the same trader to the same
exchange at the same time and otherwise are independent.
A.2. Equilibrium
We next characterize the ND equilibria in terms of the spread and research intensity.
PROPOSITION 3: For all q ∈[0,1], under qND, there exists a WPBE in which the spread
s∗
qND and research intensity r∗
qND are the unique solution to
s∗
qND =
2λr∗
qNDXqND
1 −λ + λr∗
qNDXqND
(4)
r∗
qND ∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿rXqND ￿1 −
s∗
qND
2
￿−c(r)￿,
(5)
where XqND = qX + ∑X
x=1 ￿X
x￿(1 −q)xqX−x (xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)]) represents the
expected number of trades made by an information investor conditional on learning v.
The strategies that support this outcome in equilibrium are precisely as before (see Section III.A). As mentioned, this provides us with some conﬁdence that our analysis constitutes
a consistent comparison of the di↵erent trading mechanisms.
As we explain below, trading outcomes change in two ways relative to the LOB baseline:
(i) in terms of the number of trades made by information investors, with XI now mapping into
XqND, and (ii) in terms of the number of trades made by snipers, with XS now mapping into
zero. Given this, the equilibrium spread and research intensity are pinned down precisely
as before.
First, the liquidity provider earns zero proﬁts in expectation.
Revenue from
liquidity investors must be balanced by the costs of adverse selection, which comes now
only from information investors and not from snipers. The zero-proﬁt condition is therefore
(1 −λ)
s∗
qND
2
= λr∗
qNDXqND ￿1 −
s∗
qND
2 ￿, which yields equation (4). Second, information investors
must choose research intensity optimally, which yields equation (5).
A key di↵erence relative to the baseline is that now snipers do not trade.
Because
delays are applied to the orders sent by snipers but not to the cancellations sent by liquidity
providers, all mispriced quotes are cancelled before snipers can trade against them. Thus,
24

NDs eliminate aggressive-side order anticipation, which, as we have argued, is the key to
rooting out the main friction in the model.
The deterministic component of the delay, δND, by itself eliminates aggressive-side order
anticipation.
However, adding randomness to the length of the delay has an additional
e↵ect: more passive-side order anticipation occurs. To illustrate, consider XqND, the expected
number of ﬁlls obtained by an informed information investor. If q = 1, so that the delay is
always random in length, then the information investor’s orders are processed with such
dispersion that he obtains just a single ﬁll and X1ND = 1. After observing this ﬁrst trade,
the liquidity provider sends cancellations for the remaining mispriced quotes, which are
processed almost surely before the information investor’s remaining orders.
If q = 0, so
that the delay is always ﬁxed in length, then the information investor expects to obtain
X0ND = XpH(1−pI)X +X[1−pH(1−pI)] ﬁlls. To see this, the second term of the expression
accounts for the fact that he fails to obtain a ﬁll for an order only if it has latency 3" (which
occurs with probability 1 −pI) and the liquidity provider’s corresponding cancellation has
latency " (which occurs with probability pH). The ﬁrst term corrects for the fact that all
orders are ﬁlled if all have latency 3". See Figures 2 and 3 for depictions of the q = 0 and
q = 1 cases, respectively. Intermediate values of q monotonically bridge these two extremes.
Thus, higher values of q reduce an information investor’s expected number of trades. As
Corollary 3 states, this leads to a lower research intensity. However, it also reduces adverse
selection against the liquidity provider, which leads to a smaller spread.
COROLLARY 3: Both the spread s∗
qND and research intensity r∗
qND are weakly decreasing in
q.
A.3. Comparison to Limit Order Book Outcomes
How does the qND equilibrium compare to that of the LOB? In general, the answer
depends on q. However, an attractive feature of this family of mechanisms is that for an
appropriately chosen value of q, qND dominates the LOB along both dimensions: it implements both a smaller spread and higher research intensity. In this sense, our analysis
shows that meaningful improvements can be derived from only minor modiﬁcations of the
prevailing LOB design.
COROLLARY 4: There exists a ˆq ∈[0,1] such that s∗
ˆqND ≤s∗
LOB and r∗
ˆqND ≥r∗
LOB.
Because X0ND ≥XI and X1ND ≤XI, the intermediate value theorem guarantees a ˆq for
25

￿
t
t + δND + " t + δND + 2" t + δND + 3" t + δND + 4"
Figure 2. Illustration of equilibrium (0-ND). One equilibrium scenario:
(i) the investor sends orders at t ∈T , to either one or all exchanges depending on his type,
and (ii) at least one order receives the shorter latency, being received at t+" but not processed
until t + δND + " (solid black arrow), while any remaining orders receive the longer latency
and are processed at t + δND + 3" (dashed black arrow). The liquidity provider reacts to
the trade(s) at t + δND + " by sending cancellations that will be processed at t + δND + 2" or
t + δND + 4" (dashed gray arrows). Sniper orders are not processed until t + 2δND + 2" at the
earliest, by which time all quotes have been cancelled.
which XˆqND = XI. For this ˆq, an information investor’s optimal research intensity is the same
weakly decreasing function of the spread under both ˆqND and the LOB (see equations (2)
and (5)). To prove the result, it suﬃces to show that for a ﬁxed research intensity, the spread
is weakly lower under ˆqND than under the LOB. But this follows from the fact that NDs
eliminate sniping, so that XˆqND ≤XI + XS (see equations (1) and (4)).
B.
Frequent Batch Auctions
We next consider the FBA mechanism, whereby exchanges conduct uniform-price sealedbid double auctions at repeated intervals. This di↵ers from the LOB in several ways, most
notably in breaking the sequential nature of order processing. The e↵ect is to eliminate not
only aggressive-side but also passive-side order anticipation.
This proposal has received a great deal of recent attention from academics—most notably,
Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015)—as well as policymakers and industry participants.
Although our formulation below closely follows Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), we
reverse their conclusion that FBAs implement a smaller spread than the LOB.
B.1. Deﬁnition
We consider an FBA design that is motivated by the Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015)
proposal.31 They advocate a batch length that is “long” relative to latency, yet still relatively
31Two subtle di↵erences exist between our model of batch auctions and that in Budish, Cramton, and
Shim (2015):
(i) their model has one order type, whereas ours has two, and (ii) their model has one double
26

￿
￿
t
T1
T1 + "
T1 + 2"
T1 + 3"
T2
Figure 3. Illustration of equilibrium (1-ND). One equilibrium scenario: the investor
sends orders at t ∈T , to either one or all exchanges depending on his type. Let T1 denote
the time at which the ﬁrst of these orders is processed (solid black arrow). The liquidity
provider reacts to the trade at T1 by sending cancellations that will be processed at T1 +" or
T1+3" (dashed gray arrows). Sniper orders are not processed until T1+δND+" at the earliest,
by which time all quotes have been cancelled. Any subsequent orders that the investor had
sent (e.g., dashed black arrow) will be processed almost surely after all quotes have been
cancelled.
short. The natural analogue in the language of this paper is that the batch length be an
element of T that is inﬁnitesimal yet inﬁnitely larger than ", which we assume hereafter. In
addition, we focus on auctions that are synchronized across exchanges, which those authors
also identify as an attractive property (Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2014)).32 For instance,
if the batch length is √", then the exchanges would hold separate auctions at each time √",
2√", 3√", and so on.
In what follows, we describe a speciﬁc model of the individual batch auctions that seeks
to remain as close as possible to the LOB model of the baseline. The model allows for
two order types, competitive and noncompetitive. Liquidity providers are restricted to using competitive orders, while investors and snipers are restricted to noncompetitive orders.
Both order types specify quantities and prices, but they are treated di↵erently within the
auction as described in the next paragraph. The language “competitive” and “noncompetitive” comes from Treasury auctions (Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2017)), where, as
in our model, competitive orders may set the price while noncompetitive orders may not.
Thus, competitive orders are analogous to post-only orders, and noncompetitive orders are
auction, whereas bid and ask sides clear separately in ours. These modiﬁcations are primarily for tractability
(an additional challenge for us given the presence of asymmetric information). However, Budish, Cramton,
and Shim (2015) would obtain the same ﬁndings with or without these modiﬁcations and thus our ﬁndings
can still be compared with theirs.
32While perfect synchronization might be diﬃcult to achieve and enforce in practice (especially across
competing exchanges), small deviations from it do not a↵ect our results, so long as they are bounded by the
minimum HFT latency. Internet Appendix Section III.D treats the case of large deviations.
27

analogous to immediate-or-cancel orders. In terms of these analogies, we retain all previous
restrictions on orders that the various traders can submit. We also adopt the conventions
that unﬁlled competitive orders are carried over to the next batch auction, remaining active
until cancelled, while unﬁlled noncompetitive orders expire.
At the end of the interval, each exchange computes four aggregate schedules based on
competitive buy, competitive sell, noncompetitive buy, and noncompetitive sell orders. Then,
in a bid-side cross, competitive buy orders match with noncompetitive sell orders, and in an
ask-side cross, competitive sell orders match with noncompetitive buy orders. For each cross,
there are four cases. In the ﬁrst, there is no market-clearing price (i.e., the schedules do not
intersect), in which case no trade occurs. In the second, there is a unique market-clearing
price but a range of market-clearing quantities (i.e., the schedules intersect horizontally),
in which case the maximum quantity is chosen, and if there is a long side of the market,
such orders are rationed pro rata. In the third, there is a unique market-clearing quantity
but a range of market-clearing prices (i.e., the schedules intersect vertically), in which case
the maximum (minimum) of the range is used for the bid-side (ask-side) auction.33 The
fourth case, in which the market-clearing price and quantity are both unique (i.e., the two
schedules intersect at a point), can be treated as a special instance of either of the previous
two cases. At the end of the interval, the aggregate schedules are announced, along with the
clearing prices and quantities. However, each auction is “sealed bid” in that no information
is released until the end of the interval. Finally, for a batch auction, we deﬁne the spread to
be the following analogue of its LOB counterpart: the di↵erence between the lowest price at
which there exists a competitive order to sell (the ask) and the highest price at which there
exists a competitive order to buy (the bid).
B.2. Equilibrium
We next characterize the FBA equilibrium in terms of the spread and research intensity.
PROPOSITION 4: Under FBAs, there exists a WPBE in which the spread s∗
FBA and research
intensity r∗
FBA are the unique solution to
s∗
FBA =
2λr∗
FBAX
1 −λ + λr∗
FBAX
(6)
r∗
FBA ∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿rX ￿1 −s∗
FBA
2
￿−c(r)￿.
(7)
33Hence, noncompetitive orders are price-taking while competitive orders are price-setting.
28

The strategies that support this outcome in equilibrium are also essentially as before
(see Section III.A). The primary di↵erences are that the liquidity provider uses competitive
orders to set her quotes, and investors use noncompetitive orders to trade against them. We
defer a formal statement of equilibrium strategies to the proof of Proposition 4 in Internet
Appendix Section I.
Trading outcomes again change in two ways relative to the LOB baseline:
(i) in terms
of the number of trades made by information investors, with XI now mapping into X, and
(ii) in terms of the number of trades made by snipers, with XS again mapping into zero.
Given this, the equilibrium spread and research intensity are again pinned down as before.
Equation (6) ensures that the liquidity provider earns zero proﬁts, and equation (7) ensures
that information investors choose research intensity optimally.
The key di↵erence relative to the baseline is that FBAs allow information investors to
obtain ﬁlls at all X exchanges. This is because the ﬁrst of an information investor’s orders
to arrive does not result in an immediate trade. Rather, trade is delayed until the end of
the batch interval, by which time all his orders have arrived. Because the auctions clear
simultaneously, HFTs have no opportunity to react, and all of these orders are converted
into ﬁlls (see Figure 4). Thus, like NDs, FBAs prevent aggressive-side order anticipation and
as a result root out the main friction in the model. However, they have an additional e↵ect:
they also prevent passive-side order anticipation.34
B.3. Comparison to Limit Order Book Outcomes
FBAs implement higher research intensity and a larger spread than either the LOB or
any ND mechanism. Information investors choose the highest research intensity because
FBAs enable them to convert all orders into ﬁlls. And the liquidity provider quotes the
largest spread because FBAs maximize adverse selection: not only is research intensity at
its highest, but also the liquidity provider never succeeds in cancelling a mispriced quote.
PROPOSITION 5: For any q ∈[0,1], s∗
FBA ≥s∗
qND,s∗
LOB and r∗
FBA ≥r∗
qND,r∗
LOB.
That FBAs induce the largest spread in our model is in sharp contrast to Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015), who ﬁnd that FBAs reduce the spread and indeed eliminate it entirely.
The crucial di↵erence between the two models is the source of adverse selection. In both
models, batching eliminates adverse selection from snipers—it allows the liquidity provider
34As we discuss in Internet Appendix Section III.E, the same e↵ect is obtained by a processing delay
applied to all orders.
29

￿
t
t + "
t + 2"
t + 3"
Tn
Tn + "
Tn + 2"
Tn + 3"
batch interval n
batch interval n + 1
Figure 4. Illustration of equilibrium (FBAs). One equilibrium scenario: the investor
sends orders at t ∈T (dashed black arrows), to either one or all exchanges depending on
his type. With probability one, these are processed during the same batch interval. Let Tn
denote the time at which the auctions for that interval take place and corresponding trades
are announced. The liquidity provider reacts to the trade(s) at Tn by sending cancellations
that may be processed at Tn +" or Tn +3" (dashed gray arrows). Sniper orders are processed
in the same batch interval as the liquidity provider’s cancellations and thus result in no
trades.
to cancel her mispriced quotes before snipers can trade against them. However, in Budish,
Cramton, and Shim (2015), snipers are the only source of adverse selection, as information is
taken to be exogenous and public, whereas our model also features a second source, namely,
a trader who endogenously acquires private information. Batching actually increases this
latter source of adverse selection—it prevents the liquidity provider from cancelling her mispriced quotes before an information investor can trade against them. Moreover, this e↵ect
dominates in our model.35
C.
NDs and FBAs Achieve the Frontier of F
As we see above, both NDs and FBAs eliminate aggressive-side order anticipation. As a
result, these mechanisms implement outcomes on the frontier of the tradeo↵between liquidity
and information production.36
COROLLARY 5: If c′(1) ≥(1 −λ)X
1 −λ + λX , then
(i) for all q ∈[0,1], the qND outcome is on the frontier of F;
35In a hybrid model with both private information acquisition and public news, the comparison between
s∗
FBA and s∗
LOB would be theoretically ambiguous. Nevertheless, that s∗
FBA ≥s∗
qND (as in Proposition 5)
would be unambiguous because both mechanisms eliminate sniping on public news.
36Risk neutrality is important for this result. With risk aversion, achieving the frontier requires not only
that information investors receive all of the proﬁts from informed trading, but also that those proﬁts are
deterministic. NDs satisfy the ﬁrst criterion, but for q < 1 they generally fail the second.
30

(ii) the FBA outcome is on the frontier of F; and
(iii) if in addition either X ≤2 or pI = 1, then the the LOB outcome is on the frontier of F.
We sketch the proof for NDs.
In that case, by Proposition 3, the equilibrium is
characterized by equations (4) and (5).
The latter equation implies r∗
qNDc′(r∗
qND) =
(1 −λ)r∗
qNDXqND
1 −λ + λr∗
qNDXqND
.37
Because w∗
qND = β −s∗
qND￿2, the former equation implies w∗
qND =
β −
λr∗
qNDXqND
1 −λ + λr∗
qNDXqND
. It then follows that (1 −λ)(β −w∗
qND) = λr∗
qNDc′(r∗
qND), so that by
Proposition 2, (r∗
qND,w∗
qND) is indeed on the frontier of F. Analogous arguments establish
the corollary’s other claims.
The last part of the corollary states that if investor order synchronization is perfect
(pI = 1) or if there are very few exchanges (X ≤2), then the LOB also implements an
outcome on the frontier, for the same reason: there is no aggressive-side order anticipation.
Indeed, if either condition holds, then XS = 0. But as Corollary 2 above states, the LOB
fails to achieve the frontier under more general conditions.
The preceding results emphasize that inﬂuence over the trading mechanism may be a
useful lever for policy. The next result highlights a complementarity between this lever and
another that a policymaker may possess: inﬂuence over the number of exchanges. Indeed, the
Exchange Act grants the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) authority to approve
exchange applications, and the recent proliferation of trading venues in the U.S. was driven
in large part by SEC Regulations National Market System (NMS) and Alternative Trading
Systems (ATS). Corollary 6(i) states that by adjusting the number of exchanges, NDs can
implement all points on the frontier except those with very low research intensities. This can
be interpreted as a partial converse to Corollary 5(i). FBAs can also implement a number of
points on the frontier. In fact, the analogous partial converse would obtain if it were possible
to drop the integer constraint on the number of exchanges.
COROLLARY 6: Assume c′(1) ≥1 −λ, and let rmin = min￿r ∈[0,1] ∶c′(r) ≥
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr￿. If
(r,w) is on the frontier of F and r ≥rmin, then
37The proof of this step requires also assuming that the marginal cost of research be suﬃciently high at
r = 1. This eliminates the possibility that information investors are at a corner solution, choosing to conduct
research with maximal intensity r = 1. Indeed, if an information investor were at such a corner solution,
then the outcome would be inside the frontier of F because his rents could be reduced without a↵ecting
his choice of research intensity. Because it seems prohibitively diﬃcult to acquire all knowable information
about a security, we view this assumption as mild.
31

(i) there exist X′ ∈N and q ∈[0,1] such that (r,w) is implemented by qND with X′ exchanges;
(ii) there exists X′′ ∈R≥1 such that (r,w) is implemented by FBAs with X′′ exchanges (where
this refers to what would obtain by extending Proposition 4 to the domain X ∈R≥1).
The driving force behind Corollary 6 is the observation of Section III.B that aggregate
depth increases in the number of exchanges. More aggregate depth means more trading
opportunities for information investors, which incentivizes more research. However, it also
exacerbates adverse selection, increasing the spread, and so the outcome moves along the
frontier. The meaning of rmin is the research intensity that prevails under a single exchange.
Because research intensity increases in the number of exchanges, neither mechanism can
implement an intensity below rmin. In other words, there is a minimum amount of adverse
selection that none of these mechanisms can eliminate.
The advantages of NDs and FBAs are clear: they achieve the frontier of the tradeo↵between liquidity and information production (which LOBs generally do not). However, certain
unmodeled disadvantages may also exist. For instance, these alternatives depend fundamentally on delaying certain trades, and such delays might be costly. On the other hand, such
delays would be very short (FBAs might require delays on the order of one second, and NDs
would be even shorter, on the order of milliseconds or hundreds of microseconds depending
on the amount of randomness) in which case these costs are unlikely to be economically signiﬁcant. In practice, FBAs might require delays on the order of one second, and NDs would
be even shorter, on the order of milliseconds or hundreds of microseconds (depending on the
amount of randomness). On the other hand, delay costs could substantially detract from
the performance of other types of trading mechanisms, such as “infrequent” batch auctions.
Therefore, incorporating delay costs into the model would likely strengthen our results on
the desirability of the speciﬁc alternative trading mechanisms that we consider.
Another commonly voiced concern about NDs is that they lead to passive-side order
anticipation and hence contribute to so-called “phantom liquidity.” Our model captures this,
but it also highlights a countervailing force: NDs eliminate aggressive-side order anticipation.
The net e↵ect depends on the parametrization of the delay. If the delay is deterministic (i.e.,
q = 0), our analysis suggests that investors would experience less phantom liquidity (in
the model, X0ND ≥XI).
But if the delay is random (i.e., q = 1), investors would likely
experience more phantom liquidity (in the model, X1ND ≤XI).
Nevertheless, the latter
should not necessarily be viewed as problematic—it is precisely the mechanism through
which the outcome moves along the frontier, as research intensity is sacriﬁced for smaller
32

spreads.
VI.
Conclusion
Trillions of dollars are traded on ﬁnancial platforms each day. As a result, even small
changes in their technology or in market design may have considerable consequences and
as such deserve careful analysis. This paper provides a framework for evaluating both the
consequences of recent acceleration in the speed of HFT and the e↵ects of replacing the LOB
with certain alternatives that are currently in debate.
The model highlights two main consequences of faster speeds: smaller spreads and less
intensive research. These e↵ects stem from improving the success of two HFT strategies,
namely, aggressive-side and passive-side order anticipation. Yet our results also highlight an
important distinction between the two strategies. In particular, aggressive-side order anticipation has unambiguously detrimental implications, both increasing the spread and reducing
information acquisition. In contrast, our results are more ambiguous about the normative
implications of passive-side order anticipation, which, despite also reducing information acquisition, reduces the spread.
The analysis of alternative trading mechanisms focuses on two speciﬁc proposals: NDs
and FBAs. Both alternatives eliminate aggressive-side order anticipation and in so doing
implement equilibria on the frontier of the tradeo↵between small spreads and intensive
research. Collectively, the various NDs implement a segment of the frontier. FBAs implement
a point on the frontier characterized by relatively more intensive research but a larger spread.
The speciﬁc mechanism recommended by our analysis would therefore depend on how the
regulator weighs liquidity against information production, which might vary substantially
across securities and asset classes. Nevertheless, our analysis unequivocally shows that the
LOB—despite being current industry practice—is suboptimal in the sense that it generally
does not achieve the frontier.
Initial submission: June 20, 2018; Accepted: July 12, 2019
Editor: Philip Bond
33

REFERENCES
Aisen, Daniel, Bradley Katsuyama, Robert Park, John Schwall, Richard Steiner, Allen
Zhang, and Thomas L. Popejoy, 2015, Synchronized processing of data by networked
computing resources, US Patent 8,984,137.
A¨ıt-Sahalia, Yacine, and Mehmet Sa˘glam, 2017a, High frequency market making: Implications for liquidity, Working paper, Princeton University.
A¨ıt-Sahalia, Yacine, and Mehmet Sa˘glam, 2017b, High frequency market making: Optimal
quoting, Working paper, Princeton University.
Aitken, Michael, Haoming Chen, and Sean Foley, 2017, The impact of fragmentation, exchange fees and liquidity provision on market quality, Journal of Empirical Finance 41,
140–160.
Aldrich, Eric M., and Daniel Friedman, 2019, Order protection through delayed messaging,
Working paper, University of California, Santa Cruz.
Back, Kerry, and Shmuel Baruch, 2004, Information in securities markets: Kyle meets
Glosten and Milgrom, Econometrica 72, 433–465.
Baldauf, Markus, and Joshua Mollner, forthcoming, Trading in fragmented markets, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
BATS Global Markets, Inc. (BATS), 2009, BATS exchange announces further latency reductions, press release, http://cdn.batstrading.com/resources/press_releases/BATS_
Latency_Upgrade_FINAL.pdf.
BATS
Global
Markets,
Inc.
(BATS),
2018,
Cboe
system
performance:
Worldclass, sustained low latency, http://cdn.batstrading.com/resources/features/bats_
exchange_Latency.pdf Accessed: April 13, 2019.
Bernales, Alejandro, 2019, Make-take decisions under high-frequency trading competition,
Journal of Financial Markets 45, 1–18.
Biais, Bruno, Thierry Foucault, and Sophie Moinas, 2015, Equilibrium fast trading, Journal
of Financial Economics 116, 292–313.
34

Biais, Bruno, David Martimort, and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2000, Competing mechanisms in
a common value environment, Econometrica 68, 799–837.
Boehmer, Beatrice, and Ekkehart Boehmer, 2003, Trading your neighbor’s ETFs: Competition or fragmentation?, Journal of Banking & Finance 27, 1667–1703.
Boehmer, Ekkehart, Kingsley Y.L. Fong, and Juan (Julie) Wu, 2018, International evidence
on algorithmic trading, Working paper, Singapore Management University.
Bongaerts, Dion, and Mark Van Achter, 2016, High-frequency trading and market stability,
Working paper, Erasmus University Rotterdam.
Brogaard, Jonathan, 2010, High Frequency Trading and Its Impact on Market Quality,
Working paper, University of Utah.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Bj¨orn Hagstr¨omer, Lars Nord´en, and Ryan Riordan, 2015, Trading fast
and slow: Colocation and market quality, Review of Financial Studies 28, 3407–3443.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Terrence Hendershott, and Ryan Riordan, 2014, High-frequency trading
and price discovery, Review of Financial Studies 27, 2267–2306.
Brolley, Michael, and David Cimon, 2018, Order ﬂow segmentation, liquidity and price
discovery: The role of latency delays, Working paper, Wilfrid Laurier University.
Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim, 2014, Implementation details for frequent
batch auctions: Slowing down markets to the blink of an eye, American Economic Review:
Papers & Proceedings 104, 418–424.
Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim, 2015, The high-frequency trading arms race:
Frequent batch auctions as a market design response, Quarterly Journal of Economics
130, 1547–1621.
Carrion, Allen, 2013, Very fast money: High-frequency trading on the Nasdaq, Journal of
Financial Markets 16, 680–711.
Chaboud, Alain, Ben Chiquoine, Erik Hjalmarsson, and Clara Vega, 2014, Rise of the machines: Algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange market, Journal of Finance 69, 2045–
2084.
35

Chakravarty, Sugato, Pankaj Jain, James Upson, and Robert Wood, 2012, Clean sweep:
Informed trading through intermarket sweep orders, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 47, 415–435.
Chowdhry, Bhagwan, and Vikram Nanda, 1991, Multimarket trading and market liquidity,
Review of Financial Studies 4, 483–511.
Conrad, Jennifer, Sunil Wahal, and Jin Xiang, 2015, High-frequency quoting, trading, and
the eﬃciency of prices, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 271–291.
Dennert, J¨urgen, 1993, Price competition between market makers, Review of Economic Studies 60, 735–751.
Du, Songzi, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2017, What is the optimal trading frequency in ﬁnancial
markets?, Review of Economic Studies 84, 1606–1651.
Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, and Maureen O’Hara, 1997, The information content of
the trading process, Journal of Empirical Finance 4, 159–186.
Easley, David, and Maureen O’Hara, 1987, Price, trade size, and information in securities
markets, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 69–90.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2017, Treasury auctions.
Fink, Jason, Kristin E. Fink, and James P. Weston, 2006, Competition on the Nasdaq
and the growth of electronic communication networks, Journal of Banking & Finance 30,
2537–2559.
Fishman, Michael J., and Francis A. Longsta↵, 1992, Dual trading in futures markets, Journal of Finance 47, 643–671.
Foucault, Thierry, 1999, Order ﬂow composition and trading costs in a dynamic limit order
market, Journal of Financial Markets 2, 99–134.
Foucault, Thierry, Johan Hombert, and Ioanid Ro¸su, 2016, News trading and speed, Journal
of Finance 71, 335–382.
Foucault, Thierry, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel, 2005, Limit order book as a market
for liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1171–1217.
36

Foucault, Thierry, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel, 2013, Liquidity cycles and make/take
fees in electronic markets, Journal of Finance 68, 299–341.
Foucault, Thierry, Roman Kozhan, and Wing Wah Tham, 2017, Toxic arbitrage, Review of
Financial Studies 30, 1053–1094.
Foucault, Thierry, and Albert J. Menkveld, 2008, Competition for order ﬂow and smart
order routing systems, Journal of Finance 63, 119–158.
Frino, Alex, Vito Mollica, and Robert I. Webb, 2014, The impact of co-location of securities
exchanges’ and traders’ computer servers on market liquidity, Journal of Futures Markets
34, 20–33.
Gider, Jasmin, Simon N. M. Schmickler, and Christian Westheide, 2019, High-frequency
trading and price informativeness, Working paper, Tilburg University.
Glosten, Lawrence R., 1989, Insider trading, liquidity, and the role of the monopolist specialist, Journal of Business 62, 211–235.
Glosten, Lawrence R., 1994, Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable?, Journal of
Finance 49, 1127–1161.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a
specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics
14, 71–100.
Goettler, Ronald L., Christine A. Parlour, and Uday Rajan, 2009, Informed traders and
limit order markets, Journal of Financial Economics 93, 67–87.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
eﬃcient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1991, Measuring the information content of stock trades, Journal of Finance
46, 179–207.
Hasbrouck, Joel, and Gideon Saar, 2013, Low-latency trading, Journal of Financial Markets
16, 646–679.
37

He, Peng William, Elvis Jarnecic, and Yubo Liu, 2015, The determinants of alternative
trading venue market share: Global evidence from the introduction of Chi-X, Journal of
Financial Markets 22, 27–49.
Hendershott, Terrence, Charles M. Jones, and Albert J. Menkveld, 2011, Does algorithmic
trading improve liquidity?, Journal of Finance 66, 1–33.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Albert J. Menkveld, 2016, Middlemen in limit order markets, Working
paper, New York University.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
Lee, Charles, and Edward M. Watts, 2018, Tick size tolls: Can a trading slowdown improve
earnings news discovery?, Working paper, Stanford University.
Lin, Ji-Chai, Gary C. Sanger, and G. Geo↵rey Booth, 1995, Trade size and components of
the bid-ask spread, Review of Financial Studies 8, 1153–1183.
Loeb, Peter A., 1975, Conversion from nonstandard to standard measure spaces and applications in probability theory, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 211,
113–122.
Lyle, Matthew R., and James P. Naughton, 2016, How does algorithmic trading improve
market quality?, Working paper, Northwestern University.
Malinova, Katya, Andreas Park, and Ryan Riordan, 2018, Do retail investors su↵er from
high frequency traders?, Working paper, McMaster University.
Mendelson, Haim, 1987, Consolidation, fragmentation, and market performance, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 189–207.
Menkveld, Albert J., 2013, High frequency trading and the new market makers, Journal of
Financial Markets 16, 712–740.
Menkveld, Albert J., and Marius A. Zoican, 2017, Need for speed? Exchange latency and
liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 30, 1188–1228.
Parlour, Christine A., 1998, Price dynamics in limit order markets, Review of Financial
Studies 11, 789–816.
38

Quincy Data, 2019, Quincy extreme data latencies, Technical report.
Robinson, Abraham, 1966, Non-Standard Analysis (Princeton University Press).
R¨oell, Ailsa, 1990, Dual-capacity trading and the quality of the market, Journal of Financial
Intermediation 1, 105–124.
Rojˇcek, Jakub, and Alexandre Ziegler, 2016, High-frequency trading in limit order markets:
Equilibrium impact and regulation, Working paper, University of Zurich.
Ro¸su, Ioanid, 2009, A dynamic model of the limit order book, Review of Financial Studies
22, 4601–4641.
Wah, Elaine, and Michael P. Wellman, 2013, Latency arbitrage, market fragmentation, and
eﬃciency: A two-market model, in Proceedings of the Fourteenth ACM Conference on
Electronic Commerce (ACM).
Weller, Brian M., 2018, Does algorithmic trading reduce information acquisition?, Review of
Financial Studies 31, 2184–2226.
Yang, Liyan, and Haoxiang Zhu, forthcoming, Back-running: Seeking and hiding fundamental information in order ﬂows, Review of Financial Studies.
39

Internet Appendix for
“High-Frequency Trading and Market Performance”
MARKUS BALDAUF and JOSHUA MOLLNER1
ABSTRACT
This Internet Appendix provides additional derivations and analyses that supplement
the main text.
I
Proofs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
II
Empirical Evidence of Random Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
III
Additional Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
IV
Strategic Exchanges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
V
Beneﬁts of Informative Prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
VI
Alternative Mechanisms in Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
VII
Alternative Welfare Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
VIII
Mathematical Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
1Citation format: Baldauf, Markus, and Joshua Mollner, Internet Appendix for “High-Frequency Trading
and Market Performance,” Journal of Finance [DOI String]. Please note: Wiley-Blackwell is not responsible
for the content or functionality of any additional information provided by the authors. Any queries (other
than missing material) should be directed to the authors of the article.
1

I.
Proofs
LEMMA 1: The function
FLOB(y) = ypI + y(1 −pI)y + (1 −pH)(y −1)ypI(1 −pI)y−1
is increasing on the domain of positive integers.
Proof of Lemma 1 : We will instead prove the stronger statement that FLOB(⋅) is increasing
on the domain [1,∞). Taking the derivative,
F ′
LOB(y) = pI
(IA1)
+ (1 −pI)y [y ln(1 −pI) + 1]
(IA2)
+ (1 −pH)pI(1 −pI)y−1 [2y + y(y −1)ln(1 −pI) −1].
(IA3)
We proceed by deriving lower bounds on each of (IA1), (IA2), and (IA3).
• For (IA1), we have a lower bound of 1
2.
• For (IA2), we begin by making the change of variables z = (1 −pI)y to rewrite it as
z ln(z) + z. This expression is minimized when z = e−2. Evaluating at that value yields a
lower bound of −e−2 ≈−0.135.
• For (IA3), we begin by instead deriving a lower bound for the expression
(1 −pI)y−1 [2y + y(y −1)ln(1 −pI) −1].
We make the change of variables z = (1 −pI)y−1 to rewrite that expression as 2zy +
zy ln(z) −z. Note that pI ≥1
2 requires that y ≤1 −ln(z)
ln(2). The expression is linear in y, so
it suﬃces to derive a lower bound that applies at the endpoints y ∈￿1,1 −ln(z)
ln(2)￿.
– Evaluating the expression at y = 1, it becomes z ln(z)+z. This expression is minimized
when z = e−2. Evaluating at that value yields a lower bound of −e−2 ≈−0.135.
– Evaluating the expression at y = 1 −ln(z)
ln(2), it becomes
z ln(z)￿1 −ln(z) + 2
ln(2)
￿+ z,
2

which is minimized at z ≈0.045. Evaluating at that value yields a lower bound of
≈−0.316.
Thus, ≈−0.316 is a lower bound for the earlier expression. Using pH ≥1
2 and pI ≤1, we
can transform this into a lower bound for (IA3) of ≈−0.158.
Summing the three lower bounds, we obtain ≈0.207, and so we conclude that the derivative
is indeed positive on the domain of interest.
LEMMA 2: The function
FqND(y) = qy +
y
￿
x=1
￿y
x￿(1 −q)xqy−x (xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)])
is weakly increasing on the domain of positive integers.
Proof of Lemma 2 : Let
f(x) =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
(xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)])
if x ≥1
1
if x = 0.
We ﬁrst establish that f(⋅) is weakly increasing on the domain of nonnegative integers.
Notice that f(0) = f(1) = 1. Given this, it suﬃces to prove that f(⋅) is increasing on the
domain [1,∞). Taking the derivative,
f ′(x) = pH(1 −pI)x [xln(1 −pI) + 1]
(IA4)
+ 1 −pH(1 −pI).
(IA5)
We proceed by deriving lower bounds on both (IA4) and (IA5).
• For (IA4), we begin by making the change of variables z = (1 −pI)y to rewrite it as
pH[z ln(z) + z]. This expression is minimized when z = e−2 and pH = 1. Evaluating at
those values yields a lower bound of −e−2 ≈−0.135.
• For (IA5), the expression is minimized when pI = 0.5 and pH = 1. Evaluating at those
values yields a lower bound of 1
2.
Summing the two lower bounds, we obtain ≈0.365, and so we conclude that the derivative
is indeed positive on the domain of interest.
3

Next, notice that FqND(y) is simply a weighted average of f(x) over various values of x:
FqND(y) =
y
￿
x=0
￿y
x￿(1 −q)xqy−xf(x).
Moreover, the e↵ect of an increase in y is to shift the distribution over x upward in the sense
of ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance. Because f(x) is weakly increasing in x, we conclude
that XqND is weakly increasing in y.
Proof of Proposition 1 : The proof consists of four parts. First, we argue that there exists
a unique solution to (1) and (2).
Second, we describe the beliefs that are part of the
equilibrium. (The strategies are speciﬁed in Section III.A of the main article.) Third, we
verify that these beliefs are consistent with Bayes’ rule. Fourth, we verify that strategies are
sequentially rational given beliefs.
Part One (Existence and Uniqueness): Plugging (1) into (2), r∗
LOB is characterized as a ﬁxed
point of the correspondence
RLOB(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿
(1 −λ)rXI
1 −λ + λˆr(XI + XS) −c(r)￿.
By continuity of c(⋅), the maximum theorem (Berge (1963)) implies that RLOB(⋅) is nonempty
and upper semicontinuous in ˆr. Moreover, by convexity of c(⋅), RLOB(⋅) is convex valued.
Therefore, Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem (Kakutani (1941)) implies the existence of a ﬁxed
point.
We now argue that the ﬁxed point is unique. Suppose to the contrary that there exist
r1 ≠r2, with r1 ∈RLOB(r1) and r2 ∈RLOB(r2). By Topkis’ Theorem (Topkis (1978)), RLOB(⋅)
is weakly decreasing in the strong set order. Therefore, r2 ∈RLOB(r1) and r1 ∈RLOB(r2).
Because c(⋅) is convex and continuously di↵erentiable, this can be the case only if
(1 −λ)XI
1 −λ + λr1(XI + XS) = c′(r1) = c′(r2) =
(1 −λ)XI
1 −λ + λr2(XI + XS).
However, because r1 ≠r2, this can hold only if XI = 0, λ = 1, λ = 0, or XI + XS = 0, none of
which is the case. We therefore have a contradiction, and a unique ﬁxed point, r∗
LOB, exists.
Finally, s∗
LOB can be uniquely derived from r∗
LOB and (1).
Part Two (Description): See Section III.A of the main article for a description of the equilibrium strategies. As a technical point, note that because T , like the real line, is not a
4

well-ordered set, it is not possible to determine the outcome of this strategy proﬁle via induction on the set of times at which agents can move. Nevertheless, because there is only a
ﬁnite set of times at which agents choose to move on path, it is possible to uniquely determine the outcome of this strategy proﬁle via induction on the set of times at which agents
choose to move, as in equation (4.1) of Simon and Stinchcombe (1989).
If traders use the strategies deﬁned in Section III.A of the main article, then XI indeed
represents the expected number of trades made by an information investor conditional on
learning the value of the security. To see this, suppose that the information investor submits
orders to all X exchanges at time t. With probability (1 −pI)X, none of these orders are
processed at t + ", in which case all are ﬁlled at t + 3". With probability XpI(1 −pI)X−1,
exactly one of these orders is processed at t + ", in which case the snipers do not react and
the information investor needs only outrace the liquidity provider at the remaining X −1
exchanges, so he expects to receive an additional (1 −pH)(X −1) ﬁlls at t + 3". In all other
cases, the snipers do react; since there are an inﬁnite number of snipers and latencies are
drawn independently across traders, with probability one at least one HFT achieves the
minimum latency of " on each exchange, which precludes the information investor from
receiving any further ﬁlls at t + 3". Summing over these cases yields the expression for XI
asserted in the proposition.
Likewise, XS does indeed represent the expected number of trades made by snipers
(in aggregate) conditional on an information investor arriving and learning the value of the
security. If the information investor sends orders to all exchanges at time t, then the liquidity
provider succeeds in canceling a mispriced quote only if exactly one of the information
investor’s orders is processed at t + ". This occurs with probability XpI(1 −pI)X−1, in which
case the liquidity provider expects to cancel pH(X −1) mispriced quotes before they are
exploited by the information investor. Snipers capture all mispriced quotes that are neither
cancelled by the liquidity provider nor captured by the information investor. We must then
have XS = X −XI −pH(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1, which yields the expression asserted in the
proposition.
To complete the description of the WPBE, it remains to specify beliefs. The relevant
beliefs are what the HFTs believe in the time period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs about
who initiated those trades. We consider the cases X = 1 and X ≥2 separately.
• First, suppose X = 1. If one trade occurs at the ask (bid) in that time period, then HFTs
believe it to have been initiated either by a liquidity investor with a buying (selling)
5

motive, with probability
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB
,
or by an information investor who learned v = 1 (v = −1), with probability
λr∗
LOB
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB
.
• Second, suppose X ≥2. If exactly one trade occurs at the ask (bid) in that time period,
then HFTs believe it to have been initiated either by a liquidity investor with a buying
(selling) motive, with probability
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr∗
LOBXpI(1 −pI)X−1,
or by an information investor who learned v = 1 (v = −1), with probability
λr∗
LOBXpI(1 −pI)X−1
1 −λ + λr∗
LOBXpI(1 −pI)X−1.
If two or more trades occur at the ask (bid) in that time period, then HFTs believe
them to have been initiated by an information investor who learned v = 1 (v = −1), with
probability one.
Part Three (Consistency): Given equilibrium strategies, we have the following. One the
one hand, the investor is a liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive with probability
(1 −λ)￿2. Conditional on there being such an investor, in the time period in which the ﬁrst
trade occurs, there occurs exactly one trade initiated by him at the ask (bid) with probability
one. On the other hand, the investor is an information investor who learns v = 1 (v = −1)
with probability λr∗
LOB￿2. If X = 1 and conditional on there being such an investor, then in
the time period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs, there occurs exactly one trade initiated by
him at the ask (bid) with probability one. If X ≥2 and conditional on there being such an
investor, then in the time period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs, there occurs exactly one
trade initiated by him at the ask (bid) with probability XpI(1 −pI)X−1, and two or more
such trades occur with probability 1 −XpI(1 −pI)X−1. Applying Bayes’ rule, we obtain the
beliefs described above.
Part Four (Sequential Rationality): We now argue that a liquidity investor does not have
6

a proﬁtable deviation. Because he is restricted to sending immediate-or-cancel orders, he
is limited to buying at the ask s∗
LOB￿2 or selling at the bid −s∗
LOB￿2. Given all information
available to him, the expected value of a share is zero. Thus, because he derives a utility
bonus of β from buying (selling) exactly one share, he maximizes his expected proﬁts by
sending an order to buy (sell) one share with limit price β (−β), which is precisely what he
does in equilibrium. In addition, because we assume
β ≥
λX
1 −λ + λX ≥s∗
LOB
2
,
this order results in a trade.
We now argue that an information investor does not have a proﬁtable deviation. As
above, he is limited to buying at the ask s∗
LOB￿2 or selling at the bid −s∗
LOB￿2. First, suppose
that he fails to learn v. Then, given all information available to him, the expected value of
a share is zero. As a result, he loses s∗
LOB￿2 in expectation for every share he trades, so it is
indeed optimal to submit no orders. Second, suppose that he learns v = 1 (v = −1). Then he
earns the proﬁt 1−s∗
LOB￿2 > 0 for each share he buys (sells), and it is therefore in his interest
to buy (sell) as many shares as possible. If he sends orders to y exchanges, then he expects
to receive the following number of ﬁlls:
FLOB(y) = ypI + y(1 −pI)y + (1 −pH)(y −1)ypI(1 −pI)y−1.
By Lemma 1, this function is weakly increasing on the domain of positive integers, so it is
indeed optimal to submit orders to buy (sell) to each exchange. He then obtains F(X) = XI
ﬁlls in expectation. Finally, given the above, his expected proﬁts conditional on a choice of
r are
rXI ￿1 −s∗
LOB
2
￿−c(r).
Therefore, (2) implies the optimality of choosing research intensity r∗
LOB.
We now argue that the liquidity provider does not have a proﬁtable deviation. First, we
argue that she behaves optimally after one or more trades occur. Given the behavior of the
other traders, exactly one trade occurs when the investor is liquidity-motivated. However,
multiple trades may occur when the investor is information-motivated. Therefore, conditional on one or more trades having occurred at time t, the liquidity provider expects to lose
1−s∗
LOB￿2 > 0 on any subsequent trades against her quotes. It is therefore indeed optimal for
the liquidity provider to send cancellations after one or more trades occur. And for similar
7

reasons, the liquidity provider cannot proﬁtably deviate by replenishing the LOB after a
trade has occurred.
Second, we argue that the liquidity provider cannot proﬁtably deviate before a trade
occurs. These arguments are similar to those in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015, Proof of
Proposition 1). As argued in Section III.A of the main article, equation (1) implies that she
earns zero expected proﬁts in the equilibrium. It therefore remains to show that she does
not possess a deviation that would yield positive expected proﬁts. If the liquidity provider
deviates, then the enforcer will immediately enter post-only orders to buy (sell) one share
at −s∗
LOB￿2 (s∗
LOB￿2). Thus, any shares (or fractions of a share) that are quoted at a spread
wider than s∗
LOB will receive none of the beneﬁts (from liquidity investor orders), but might
receive adverse selection costs (from information investor and sniper orders), relative to what
transpires on path. Any shares (or fractions of a share) that are quoted at a spread narrower
than s∗
LOB will receive smaller beneﬁts and larger adverse selection costs. Any shares (or
fractions of a share) that are quoted at s∗
LOB will receive at most a prorated fraction of the
same beneﬁts but at least a prorated fraction of the same adverse selection costs. It is also
not proﬁtable to deviate by canceling her post-only orders because that would also lead to
zero proﬁts. Finally, it is not possible to deviate by initiating any trades because the model
restricts her to post-only orders.
The remaining liquidity providers (including the enforcer) also do not have proﬁtable
deviations. They earn zero proﬁts in equilibrium, and none of them possesses a deviation
that would yield positive expected proﬁts for reasons similar to those discussed in the previous
paragraph. Any shares (or fractions of a share) that are quoted at a spread wider than s∗
LOB
will receive none of the beneﬁts (from liquidity investor orders), but might receive adverse
selection costs (from information investor and sniper orders). Any shares (or fractions of
a share) that are quoted at a spread narrower than s∗
LOB will receive smaller beneﬁts and
larger adverse selection costs. Any shares (or fractions of a share) that are quoted at s∗
LOB
will receive at most a prorated fraction of the same beneﬁts but at least a prorated fraction
of the same adverse selection costs. Finally, it is not possible to deviate by initiating any
trades because the model restricts them to post-only orders.
We now argue that snipers do not have proﬁtable deviations. Given their restriction to
immediate-or-cancel orders, snipers are limited to buying at the ask s∗
LOB￿2 or selling at the
bid −s∗
LOB￿2, so long as those quotes are in place. First, we argue that they behave optimally
in a time period in which two or more trades occur. Given their beliefs, the expected value
of the security, conditional on trades occurring at the ask (bid) at two or more exchanges,
8

is 1 (−1). Thus, conditional on this event, a sniper earns the proﬁt 1 −s∗
LOB￿2 > 0 for each
share she buys (sells). It is therefore optimal for snipers to respond by sending orders to buy
(sell).
Second, we argue that snipers behave optimally in a time period in which exactly one
trade occurs. Suppose that X = 1. Given their beliefs, the expected value of the security,
conditional on a trade occurring at the ask (bid) at exactly one exchange, is (the additive
inverse of)
0 <
λr∗
LOB
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB
= s∗
LOB
2
.
Next, suppose that X ≥2. Given their beliefs, the expected value of the security, conditional
on a trade occurring at the ask (bid) at exactly one exchange, is (the additive inverse of)
0 <
λr∗
LOBXpI(1 −pI)X−1
1 −λ + λr∗
LOBXpI(1 −pI)X−1 < s∗
LOB
2
.
In either case, conditional on this event, a sniper expects to lose or break even on each trade
she makes, and so has no proﬁtable deviations.
Third, we argue that snipers cannot proﬁtably deviate before a trade occurs. Given their
restriction to immediate-or-cancel orders, it is not possible for them to deviate by attempting
to provide liquidity. It is also not proﬁtable for them to deviate by initiating trades at such
times. Any such trades would result in an expected loss of s∗
LOB￿2 per trade, and would lead
the liquidity provider to cancel her remaining quotes, thereby also preventing the deviating
sniper from completing any future trades.
Proof of Corollary 1 : As before, r∗
LOB is characterized as the ﬁxed point of the correspondence
RLOB(ˆr) ∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿
(1 −λ)rXI
1 −λ + λˆr(XI + XS) −c(r)￿.
Other things equal, the argmax is weakly increasing in XI and weakly decreasing in XS.
Di↵erentiating the expressions given in Proposition 1, we ﬁnd that XI is weakly decreasing
in pH and XS is constant in pH. These observations imply that, other things equal, the
argmax is weakly decreasing in pH. It is also weakly decreasing in ˆr. By combining the
previous two observations, we conclude that the ﬁxed point, r∗
LOB, is weakly decreasing in
pH.
Di↵erentiating the expression for the spread given in (1), we ﬁnd that, other things equal,
it is weakly increasing in XI, weakly increasing in XS, and weakly increasing in r∗
LOB. As
9

above, XI is weakly decreasing in pH and XS is constant in pH. Moreover, as established
above, r∗
LOB is weakly decreasing in pH. By combining these observations, we conclude that
s∗
LOB is weakly decreasing in pH.
Proof of Proposition 2 : An initial observation is that the combination of (BB–1), (BB–2),
and (IR–H) is equivalent to the following single constraint:2
1 −λ
2
y(B) + 1 −λ
2
y(S) + λr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + λr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + λ(1 −r)y(0) ≤0.
(BB)
The remainder of the proof consists of two parts. First, we show that the set deﬁned in the
proposition constitutes an outer bound for F. Second, we show that it constitutes an inner
bound for F.
Part One (Outer Bound). We begin by rewriting (O) as
r ∈arg max
ˆr∈[0,1]
￿ˆr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + ˆr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + (1 −ˆr)y(0) −c(ˆr)￿,
which implies3
r ￿y(1) + z(1)
2
+ y(−1) −z(−1)
2
−y(0)￿≥rc′(r).
(IA6)
Next, we rewrite (W) to obtain
w = 1
2 [y(B) + β {z(B) = 1}] + 1
2 [y(S) + β {z(S) = −1}]
≤β + 1
2y(B) + 1
2y(S).
2To elaborate: it is straightforward to verify that (BB) is implied by (BB–1), (BB–2), and (IR–H).
Moreover, if y(✓) and z(✓) satisfy (BB), then (BB–1), (BB–2), and (IR–H) are satisﬁed by choosing {yh}h∈H
and {zh}h∈H so that for all ✓∈⇥, ∑h∈H yh(✓) = −y(✓) and ∑h∈H zh(✓) = −z(✓).
3Deﬁne ⌅= ￿y(1)+z(1)
2
+ y(−1)−z(−1)
2
−y(0)￿. By assumption, c(⋅) is C1. Therefore, any solution to the
maximization problem in (O) must satisfy one of the three conditions (i) r = 0 and c′(0) ≥⌅, (ii) c′(r) = ⌅,
or (iii) r = 1 and c′(1) ≤⌅. In any of these three cases, the claimed inequality holds.
10

Applying (BB), this becomes
w ≤β −
λr
2(1 −λ) [y(1) + z(1)] −
λr
2(1 −λ) [y(−1) −z(−1)] −λ(1 −r)
1 −λ y(0)
= β −λr
1 −λ ￿y(1) + z(1)
2
+ y(−1) −z(−1)
2
−y(0) + 2y(0)￿.
Applying (IA6) yields
w ≤β −
λ
1 −λr [c′(r) + 2y(0)].
Applying also (IR–I) for ✓= 0, which requires y(0) ≥0, this becomes
w ≤β −
λ
1 −λrc′(r).
(IA7)
This establishes the desired upper bound on w. The lower bound w ≥0 follows immediately
from (W) and (IR–I) for ✓∈{B,S}.
Part Two (Inner Bound). For this part of the proof, we argue that any element of the set
deﬁned in the proposition can be implemented by a contract satisfying all of the constraints
of F. In what follows, we use rmax to denote the largest r such that there exists a w for
which (r,w) ∈F. It is deﬁned implicitly by
(1 −λ)β = λrmaxc′(rmax).
Suppose r ∈[0,rmax] and suppose w ∈￿0,β −
λ
1 −λrc′(r)￿. Let
y(B) = y(S) = w −β
z(B) = −z(S) = 1
y(1) = −y(−1) = 0
z(1) = −z(−1) = c′(r)
y(0) = 0
z(0) = 0.
We now argue that these contracts satisfy the constraints (W), (BB), (IR–I), and (O):
(W) Plugging in, 1
2u(y(B),z(B)￿B) + 1
2u(y(S),z(S)￿S) = w.
11

(BB) Plugging in, 1 −λ
2
y(B) + 1 −λ
2
y(S) + λr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + λr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + λ(1 −
r)y(0) = (1 −λ)(w −β) + λrc′(r), which is nonpositive by assumption.
(IR–I) First, u(y(B),z(B)￿B) = u(y(S),z(S)￿S) = w, which is nonnegative by assumption.
Second, u(y(1),z(1)￿1) = u(y(−1),z(−1)￿−1) = c′(r) ≥0. Third, u(y(0),z(0)￿0) = 0.
(O) Plugging in, (O) becomes r ∈arg max
ˆr∈[0,1]
{ˆrc′(r) −c(ˆr)}.
By convexity of c(⋅), the
optimality of conducting research with intensity r follows from checking the ﬁrstorder condition.
Proof of Corollary 2 : In the LOB equilibrium, liquidity investor welfare is determined by
the spread through w∗
LOB = β −s∗
LOB￿2. Therefore, by Proposition 2, the LOB equilibrium
outcome lies on the frontier of the feasible set if and only if
λr∗
LOBc′(r∗
LOB) = (1 −λ)s∗
LOB
2
.
(IA8)
As before, r∗
LOB is characterized by the ﬁxed point of the correspondence
RLOB(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿
(1 −λ)rXI
1 −λ + λˆr(XI + XS) −c(r)￿,
where XI and XS are as deﬁned in the statement of Proposition 1. The assumption that
c′(0) < XI ensures that at ˆr = 0, the maximization problem on the right-hand side of the
expression above for RLOB(ˆr) does not have a solution at zero. Consequently, zero is not a
ﬁxed point of that correspondence and so r∗
LOB > 0. Thus, at the value of ˆr that is the ﬁxed
point of the correspondence, all solutions to the maximization problem on the right-hand
side of the expression above are either a corner solution at one or an interior solution. In
either case,
c′(r∗
LOB) ≤
(1 −λ)XI
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB(XI + XS).
In addition, from equation (1) we have
s∗
LOB =
2λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB(XI + XS).
We then compare these expressions to the condition for being on the frontier of the feasible
set, equation (IA8). Given that λ ∈(0,1) and r∗
LOB > 0, the LOB equilibrium outcome is on
12

the frontier only if XS = 0. Restating the expression for XS, we obtain
XS = X(1 −pI) −X(1 −pI)X −(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1
= X(1 −pI)￿
X−1
￿
x=2
￿X −1
x
￿px
I(1 −pI)X−1−x￿.
Given that pI ≥0.5, XS = 0 only if either pI = 1 or X ≤2 (or both).
Proof of Proposition 3 : The proof consists of four parts. First, we argue that for any value
of q, there exists a unique solution to (4) and (5). Second, we describe the beliefs that are
part of the equilibrium. (The strategies are analogous to those speciﬁed in Section III.A of
the main article.) Third, we verify that these beliefs are consistent with Bayes’ rule. Fourth,
we verify that strategies are sequentially rational given beliefs.
Part One (Existence and Uniqueness): Plugging (4) into (5), r∗
qND is characterized as a ﬁxed
point of the correspondence
RqND(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)rXqND
1 −λ + λˆrXqND
−c(r)￿.
As in the proof of Proposition 1, r∗
qND uniquely exists, and s∗
qND can be uniquely derived
from r∗
qND and (4).
Part Two (Description): Equilibrium strategies are analogous to those described in Section III.A of the main article. The only di↵erences are that s∗
qND and r∗
qND assume the roles
played by s∗
LOB and r∗
LOB.
If traders use these strategies, then XqND does indeed represent the expected number of
trades made by an information investor conditional on learning the value of the security.
To see this, suppose that the information investor submits orders to all X exchanges, and
suppose that x of these orders receive only a delay of δND, while the other X −x also receive
an additional delay drawn from FND.
We consider two cases: x = 0 and x > 0.
First,
suppose x = 0, so that all orders receive a delay drawn from FND. The information investor
always obtains a ﬁll for his ﬁrst order to be processed. However, FND is so di↵use that
the probability of obtaining another ﬁll after the ﬁrst is inﬁnitesimally small. Therefore,
conditional on being in this case, the expected number of ﬁlls is one.
Second, suppose
x > 0. We begin by determining the expected number of ﬁlls for the x orders that do not
receive a delay drawn from FND. The information investor receives a ﬁll for any order that
achieves the minimum latency of ", which occurs with probability pI. In the event that all
13

of his orders have latency 3", then he obtains ﬁlls for all orders. Otherwise, he receives a
ﬁll for an order with latency 3" only if the liquidity provider’s corresponding cancellation
also has latency 3", which occurs with probability 1 −pH. Therefore, the number of these x
orders that the information investor expects to have ﬁlled is xpH(1−pI)x+x[1 −pH(1 −pI)].
Furthermore, the information investor does not expect any more ﬁlls: FND is so di↵use that
the probability of obtaining a ﬁll for any of the X −x orders receiving a delay drawn from
FND is inﬁnitesimally small. Collecting all of these observations, and considering the fact
that x ∼Binom(X,q), an information investor’s expected number of ﬁlls, conditional only
on learning the value of the security, is
XqND = qX +
X
￿
x=1
￿X
x ￿(1 −q)xqX−x (xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)]),
as claimed.
To complete the description of the WPBE, it remains to specify beliefs. The relevant
beliefs are what the HFTs believe in the time period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs about
who initiated those trades. We consider the cases X = 1 and X ≥2 separately.
• First, suppose X = 1. If one trade occurs at the ask (bid) in that time period, then HFTs
believe it to have been initiated either by a liquidity investor with a buying (selling)
motive, with probability
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr∗
qND
,
or by an information investor who learned v = 1 (v = −1), with probability
λr∗
qND
1 −λ + λr∗
qND
.
• Second, suppose X ≥2. If exactly one trade occurs at the ask (bid) in that time period,
then HFTs believe it to have been initiated either by a liquidity investor with a buying
(selling) motive, with probability
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr∗
qND ￿qX + ∑X
x=1 ￿X
x￿(1 −q)xqX−x [xpI(1 −pI)x−1]￿,
14

or by an information investor who learned v = 1 (v = −1), with probability
λr∗
qND ￿qX + ∑X
x=1 ￿X
x￿(1 −q)xqX−x [xpI(1 −pI)x−1]￿
1 −λ + λr∗
qND ￿qX + ∑X
x=1 ￿X
x￿(1 −q)xqX−x [xpI(1 −pI)x−1]￿.
If two or more trades occur at the ask (bid) in that time period, then HFTs believe
them to have been initiated by an information investor who learned v = 1 (v = −1), with
probability one.
Part Three (Consistency): Given equilibrium strategies, we have the following. On the one
hand, the investor is a liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive with probability
(1 −λ)￿2. Conditional on there being such an investor, in the time period in which the ﬁrst
trade occurs, there occurs exactly one trade initiated by him at the ask (bid) with probability
one. On the other hand, the investor is an information investor who learns v = 1 (v = −1) with
probability λr∗
qND￿2. If X = 1 and conditional on there being such an investor, then in the
time period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs, there occurs exactly one trade initiated by him at
the ask (bid) with probability one. If X ≥2 and conditional on there being such an investor,
then in the time period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs, there occurs exactly one trade initiated
by him at the ask (bid) with probability qX + ∑X
x=1 ￿X
x￿(1 −q)xqX−x [xpI(1 −pI)x−1], and two
or more such trades occur with probability 1 −￿qX + ∑X
x=1 ￿X
x￿(1 −q)xqX−x [xpI(1 −pI)x−1]￿.
When Bayes’ rule can be applied, we obtain the beliefs described above.
Part Four (Sequential Rationality): That liquidity investors, information investors, the liquidity provider, and the remaining liquidity providers (including the enforcer) do not have
proﬁtable deviations is as in the proof of Proposition 1.4
Snipers also have no deviations that would yield positive expected proﬁts. As in the
proof of Proposition 1, it is not proﬁtable to deviate by triggering any trades before a trade
occurs. In addition, it is not possible to obtain ﬁlls after a trade occurs because the delay
δND > 2" applied to noncancellations means that the liquidity provider always cancels her
quotes before any sniper can react to trade against them: even if the liquidity provider’s
cancellation obtains the maximum latency of 3", it is still processed before any sniper orders
that obtain the minimum latency of ". Therefore, no aggressive-side order anticipation can
occur in equilibrium.
4The primary di↵erence lies in establishing that it is optimal for information investors to send orders to
all X exchanges. The argument uses Lemma 2 in the same way that Proposition 1 uses Lemma 1.
15

Proof of Corollary 3 : As before, deﬁne
XqND = qX +
X
￿
x=1
￿X
x ￿(1 −q)xqX−x (xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)]),
where as before, the index x is interpreted as the number of exchanges at which the information investor’s orders receive only the ﬁxed delay δND. The number of ﬁlls that the
information investor expects to receive conditional on a realization of x is weakly increasing
in x. The e↵ect of an increase in q is to shift the distribution over x downward in the sense
of ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance. Therefore, XqND is weakly decreasing in q.
As before, r∗
qND is characterized as the ﬁxed point of the correspondence
RqND(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)rXqND
1 −λ + λˆrXqND
−c(r)￿.
Applying Topkis’ Theorem, RqND(ˆr) is weakly increasing in XqND, and therefore is weakly
decreasing in q. Because the correspondence is also weakly decreasing in ˆr, we obtain that
r∗
qND is weakly decreasing in q.
Di↵erentiating the expression for the spread given in (4), we ﬁnd that, other things equal,
it is weakly increasing in r∗
qND and weakly decreasing in q. Moreover, as established above,
r∗
qND is weakly decreasing in q. By combining these observations, we conclude that s∗
qND is
weakly decreasing in q.
Proof of Corollary 4 : As before, deﬁne
XqND = qX +
X
￿
x=1
￿X
x ￿(1 −q)xqX−x (xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)]).
16

Also, recall that
X0ND = XpH(1 −pI)X + X[1 −pH(1 −pI)]
= X(1 −pI)X −X(1 −pH)(1 −pI)X + X[1 −pH(1 −pI)]
= X(1 −pI)X +
X
￿
x=1
[x + (X −x)(1 −pH)]￿X
x ￿px
I(1 −pI)X−x
≥X(1 −pI)X + [1 + (X −1)(1 −pH)]XpI(1 −pI)X−1 +
X
￿
x=2
x￿X
x ￿px
I(1 −pI)X−x
= XpI + X(1 −pI)X + (1 −pH)(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1
= XI.
Moreover, X1ND = 1 ≤XI. Lastly, XqND is continuous as a function of q. Thus, by the
intermediate value theorem, there exists ˆq ∈[0,1] for which XˆqND = XI. Next, deﬁne s∗(⌦)
and r∗(⌦) as the solution to the system
s∗=
2λr∗(XI + ⌦)
1 −λ + λr∗(XI + ⌦)
(IA9)
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿rXI ￿1 −s∗
2 ￿−c(r)￿.
(IA10)
Notice that s∗
ˆqND and r∗
ˆqND correspond to s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 0. Similarly, s∗
LOB
and r∗
LOB correspond to s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= XS ≥0. From equation (IA9), s∗is,
other things equal, (i) weakly increasing in r∗and (ii) weakly increasing in ⌦. Furthermore,
from equation (IA10), r∗is, other things equal, (i) weakly decreasing in s∗and (ii) una↵ected
by ⌦. By combining these observations, we establish that s∗(⌦) is weakly increasing and
that r∗(⌦) is weakly decreasing. Therefore, we conclude that s∗
ˆqND ≤s∗
LOB and r∗
ˆqND ≥r∗
LOB,
as desired.
Proof of Proposition 4 : The proof consists of four parts. First, we argue that there exists
a unique solution to (6) and (7).
Second, we describe the strategies and beliefs of the
equilibrium. Third, we verify that these beliefs are consistent with Bayes’ rule. Fourth, we
verify that strategies are sequentially rational given beliefs.
Part One (Existence and Uniqueness): From (6) and (7), r∗
FBA is characterized as a ﬁxed
17

point of the correspondence
RFBA(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)rX
1 −λ + λˆrX −c(r)￿.
As in the proof of Proposition 1, r∗
FBA uniquely exists, and s∗
FBA can be uniquely derived
from r∗
FBA and (6).
Part Two (Description): In terms of the quantities s∗
FBA and r∗
FBA characterized by Proposition 4, the equilibrium strategies are as follows:
• Investor. If he is a liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive, then he sends to his
home exchange a noncompetitive order to buy (sell) one share at the price β (−β).
If he is an information investor, then he conducts research with intensity r∗
FBA. If he
learns that the value of the security is v = 1 (v = −1), then he sends to each exchange a
noncompetitive order to buy (sell) one share at the price 1 (−1). He sends no orders if
he does not learn v.
• Liquidity providers.
One liquidity provider is active on the equilibrium path and is
referred to as “the liquidity provider” in what follows. At time zero, she sends to each
exchange a competitive order to buy one share at the bid −s∗
FBA￿2 and another to sell
one share at the ask s∗
FBA￿2. If in any batch interval one or more trades occur, then she
sends cancellations for all of her remaining orders, doing so in the next batch interval.
A second liquidity provider who is inactive on path but may be active o↵path is referred
to as “the enforcer.” If in some batch interval prior to which no trade has occurred the
competitive schedules at some exchange are reported to have consisted of anything other
than a competitive order to buy one share at −s∗
FBA￿2 and a competitive order to sell one
share at s∗
FBA￿2, then she sends such orders to that exchange, doing so in the next batch
interval.
The remaining liquidity providers remain completely inactive both on and o↵path.
• Snipers. If in any batch interval trades occur at the ask (bid) at two or more exchanges,
then each sniper sends to all other exchanges a noncompetitive order to buy (sell) one
share at the price 1 (−1), doing so in the next batch interval.
If traders use these strategies, then an information investor makes X trades conditional
on learning the value of the security. To see this, note that the processing times of his orders
18

are separated by at most 2". Because the batch length is assumed to be inﬁnitely longer
than ", it is with only inﬁnitesimal probability that his orders are processed in di↵erent batch
intervals. And if his orders are processed in the same batch interval, then all X are ﬁlled
before any of the other traders can react.
To complete the description of the WPBE, it remains to specify beliefs. The relevant
beliefs are what the HFTs believe after the batch interval in which the ﬁrst trade occurs
about who initiated those trades (i.e., who submitted the noncompetitive orders involved in
those trades). We consider the cases X = 1 and X ≥2 separately.
• First, suppose X = 1. If one trade occurs at the ask (bid) in that batch interval, then
HFTs believe it to have been initiated either by a liquidity investor with a buying (selling)
motive, with probability
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr∗
FBA
,
or by an information investor who learned v = 1 (v = −1), with probability
λr∗
FBA
1 −λ + λr∗
FBA
.
• Second, suppose X = 2. If exactly one trade occurs at the ask (bid) in that batch interval,
then HFTs believe it to have been initiated by a liquidity investor with a buying (selling)
motive, with probability one. If X ≥2 and two or more trades occur at the ask (bid) in
that batch interval, then HFTs believe them to have been initiated by an information
investor who learned v = 1 (v = −1), with probability one.
Part Three (Consistency): Given equilibrium strategies, we have the following. On the one
hand, the investor is a liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive with probability
(1 −λ)￿2. Conditional on there being such an investor, in the batch interval in which the
ﬁrst trade occurs, there occurs exactly one trade initiated by him at the ask (bid) with
probability one. On the other hand, the investor is an information investor who learns v = 1
(v = −1) with probability λr∗
FBA￿2. If X = 1 and conditional on there being such an investor,
then in the batch interval in which the ﬁrst trade occurs, there occurs exactly one trade
initiated by him at the ask (bid) with probability one. If X ≥2 and conditional on there
being such an investor, then in the batch interval in which the ﬁrst trade occurs, there occur
two or more trades initiated by him at the ask (bid) with probability one. Applying Bayes’
rule, we obtain the beliefs described above.
19

Part Four (Sequential Rationality): That liquidity investors, information investors, the liquidity provider, and the remaining liquidity providers (including the enforcer) do not have
proﬁtable deviations is as in the proof of Proposition 1.
Snipers also have no deviations that would yield positive expected proﬁts. As in the proof
of Proposition 1, it is not proﬁtable to deviate by triggering any trades before a trade occurs.
In addition, it is not possible to obtain ﬁlls after a trade occurs because batching means that
the liquidity provider’s cancellations will be processed in the same batch interval as the
sniper orders. Therefore, no aggressive-side order anticipation can occur in equilibrium.
Proof of Proposition 5 : The proof consists of two parts. First, we show that for all q ∈[0,1],
s∗
FBA ≥s∗
qND and r∗
FBA ≥r∗
qND. Second, we show that s∗
FBA ≥s∗
LOB and r∗
FBA ≥r∗
LOB.
Part One (s∗
FBA ≥s∗
qND and r∗
FBA ≥r∗
qND). Deﬁne s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) as the solution to the
system
s∗=
2λr∗⌦
1 −λ + λr∗⌦
(IA11)
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿r⌦￿1 −s∗
2 ￿−c(r)￿.
(IA12)
Notice that s∗
FBA and r∗
FBA correspond to s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= X. Similarly,
s∗
qND and r∗
qND correspond to s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= XqND. We deﬁne XqND in
Proposition 3, and it is not more than X. It therefore suﬃces to show that s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦)
are both weakly increasing in ⌦. To do so, notice that r∗(⌦) is characterized as the ﬁxed
point of the correspondence
R(ˆr,⌦) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)r⌦
1 −λ + λˆr⌦−c(r)￿.
By Topkis’ Theorem, R(ˆr,⌦) is weakly increasing in ⌦.
Because the correspondence is
also weakly decreasing in ˆr, this fact implies that r∗(⌦) is weakly increasing. Furthermore,
from equation (IA11), s∗is, other things equal, (i) weakly increasing in r∗and (ii) weakly
increasing in ⌦. Therefore, we also have that s∗(⌦) is weakly increasing.
Part Two (s∗
FBA ≥s∗
LOB and r∗
FBA ≥r∗
LOB). Deﬁne s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) as the solution to the
20

system
s∗=
2λr∗[X⌦+ (XI + XS)(1 −⌦)]
1 −λ + λr∗[X⌦+ (XI + XS)(1 −⌦)]
(IA13)
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿r[X⌦+ XI(1 −⌦)]￿1 −s∗
2 ￿−c(r)￿.
(IA14)
Notice that s∗
FBA and r∗
FBA correspond to s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 1. Similarly,
s∗
LOB and r∗
LOB correspond to s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 0. It therefore suﬃces to
show that s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) are both weakly increasing in ⌦. To do so, notice that r∗(⌦) is
characterized as the ﬁxed point of the correspondence
R(ˆr,⌦) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿
(1 −λ)r[X⌦+ XI(1 −⌦)]
1 −λ + λˆr[X⌦+ (XI + XS)(1 −⌦)] −c(r)￿.
By Topkis’ Theorem, R(ˆr,⌦) is weakly increasing in ⌦.
Because the correspondence is
also weakly decreasing in ˆr, this fact implies that r∗(⌦) is weakly increasing. Furthermore,
from equation (IA13), s∗is, other things equal, (i) weakly increasing in r∗and (ii) weakly
increasing in ⌦. Therefore, we also have that s∗(⌦) is weakly increasing.
Proof of Corollary 5 : In the equilibria of the LOB, of NDs, and of FBAs, liquidity investor
welfare is determined by the spread through w∗= β −s∗￿2. Therefore, by Proposition 2, an
equilibrium outcome of one of these trading mechanisms lies on the frontier of the feasible
set if and only if the equilibrium spread, s∗, is related to the equilibrium research intensity,
r∗, through the equation
λr∗c′(r∗) = (1 −λ)s∗
2 .
(IA15)
As before, the equilibrium research intensities r∗
LOB, r∗
qND, and r∗
FBA are characterized,
respectively, by the ﬁxed points of the correspondences
RLOB(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿
(1 −λ)rXI
1 −λ + λˆr(XI + XS) −c(r)￿
RqND(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)rXqND
1 −λ + λˆrXqND
−c(r)￿
RFBA(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)rX
1 −λ + λˆrX −c(r)￿.
21

where XI and XS are as deﬁned in the statement of Proposition 1 and XqND is as deﬁned in
the statement of Proposition 3.
The assumption that c′(1) ≥(1 −λ)X
1 −λ + λX ensures that at ˆr = 1, none of the maximization
problems on the right-hand sides above has a corner solution at one. Consequently, at the
values of ˆr that are the respective ﬁxed points of these correspondences, each of the solutions
to the maximization problems on the right-hand sides above is either a corner solution at
zero or an interior solution. We have the following equations in either case:
r∗
LOBc′(r∗
LOB) =
(1 −λ)r∗
LOBXI
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
r∗
qNDc′(r∗
qND) =
(1 −λ)r∗
qNDXqND
1 −λ + λr∗
qNDXqND
r∗
FBAc′(r∗
FBA) = (1 −λ)r∗
FBAX
1 −λ + λr∗
FBAX .
In addition, from equations (1), (4), and (6), we have
s∗
LOB =
2λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
s∗
qND =
2λr∗
qNDXqND
1 −λ + λr∗
qNDXqND
s∗
FBA =
2λr∗
FBAX
1 −λ + λr∗
FBAX .
Comparing these expressions to the condition for being on the frontier of the feasible set,
equation (IA15), we ﬁnd that the qND outcome, for all q ∈[0,1], is on the frontier. Similarly,
the FBA outcome is on the frontier. Finally, the LOB outcome is on the frontier if XS = 0,
which is the case if either X ≤2 or pI = 1 (or both).
Proof of Corollary 6 : First, note that, under the corollary’s assumption that c′(1) ≥1 −
λ, rmin = min￿r ∈[0,1] ∶c′(r) ≥
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr￿is indeed well-deﬁned. Indeed, the assumption
implies that the set ￿r ∈[0,1] ∶c′(r) ≥
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr￿is nonempty (as it contains r = 1). And
because c(r) is assumed to be continuously di↵erentiable, that set is compact and thus does
have a minimum value. Suppose now that (r∗,w∗) is an outcome on the frontier of the
feasible set where r∗≥rmin. By Proposition 2, w∗= β −
λ
1 −λr∗c′(r∗) and w∗≥0.
22

Proof of Claim (ii). Consider FBAs with X′′ =
(1 −λ)c′(r∗)
1 −λ −λr∗c′(r∗) exchanges. Note that the
right-hand side is greater than or equal to one when r∗= rmin and is increasing in r∗, so
we do indeed have X′′ ∈R≥1, as claimed. We wish to use Proposition 4 to characterize the
equilibrium outcomes that prevail in this scenario. That proposition relies on the assumption
β ≥
λX
1 −λ + λX to characterize the equilibrium of FBAs with X exchanges. If X′′ > X, then
an analogous inequality it not guaranteed to hold. However, the only role of the inequality
in the proposition’s proof is to ensure that the equilibrium spread does not exceed 2β. We
therefore suppose for the moment that this is the case in the present scenario, and we verify
it later. By Proposition 4, FBAs with X′′ exchanges lead to equilibrium research intensity
that is characterized by the ﬁxed point of the correspondence
RFBA(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)rX′′
1 −λ + λˆrX′′ −c(r)￿
= arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿
(1 −λ)rc′(r∗)
1 −λ −λ(r∗−ˆr)c′(r∗) −c(r)￿.
The ﬁxed point of this correspondence occurs when r = ˆr = r∗. Furthermore, the associated
spread is
s∗=
2λr∗X′′
1 −λ + λr∗X′′ =
2λ
1 −λr∗c′(r∗),
which implies that liquidity investor welfare in this equilibrium is β −s∗￿2 = w∗. It only
remains to verify that s∗≤2β. However, this follows immediately from the fact that s∗= 2(β−
w∗) and the fact that w∗≥0. We conclude that the outcome (r∗,w∗) can be implemented
by FBAs with X′′ exchanges.
Proof of Claim (i). Next, choose X′ to be any natural number for which
X′pH(1 −pI)X′ + X′[1 −pH(1 −pI)] ≥
(1 −λ)c′(r∗)
1 −λ −λr∗c′(r∗).
Such a selection is possible because the left-hand side of the equation above diverges as
X′ →∞. Given that choice of X′, choose q ∈[0,1] such that
qX′ +
X′
￿
x=1
￿X′
x ￿(1 −q)xqX′−x (xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)]) =
(1 −λ)c′(r∗)
1 −λ −λr∗c′(r∗).
Such a selection is possible by the intermediate value theorem because (i) the left-hand side
of the equation above is continuous in q, (ii) the left-hand side exceeds the right-hand side
23

when q = 0 (by the deﬁnition of X′), (iii) the left-hand side evaluates to one when q = 1, and
(iv) the right-hand side is greater than or equal to one, since it is greater than or equal to
one when r∗= rmin and is increasing in r∗. It can then be shown through methods similar
to those used above that qND with X′ exchanges implements the outcome (r∗,w∗).
24

II.
Empirical Evidence of Random Latency
Order anticipation enabled by random latency lies at the heart of the model. Indeed,
if latency were completely deterministic, then no order anticipation would take place,5 the
equilibrium spread would be invariant to changes in the speed of HFTs and the LOB would
lead to an outcome identical to that of both FBAs and 0-ND. In this appendix, (i) we
provide additional details concerning the sources of randomness in latency, (ii) we provide
some statistics to quantify the extent of randomness, (iii) we conduct a simulation of the
model to form a rough estimate of the amount of order anticipation allowed by the prevailing
latency structure in modern markets, and (iv) we discuss some statistics pertaining to the
amount of order anticipation arising in practice.
A.
Sources of Randomness
A variety of factors contribute to latency in data networks (Bertsekas and Gallager (1992),
Kay (2009), Ixia (2012), Corvil (2014), Deutsche B¨orse Group (2018)). Summarizing Kay
(2009): (i) network interface delays for serialization occur as data are translated into packets
(or vice versa) as they pass from one domain to another, (ii) signal propagation delays occur
as packets travel across a physical distance, (iii) network processing delays occur as gateways,
ﬁrewalls, routers, or switches determine how to treat a packet, (iv) router and switch delays
occur as packets travel through them from an input port to a corresponding output port, and
(v) queuing delays occur when packets from di↵erent input ports are queued for sequential
transmission through the same output port.
Randomness in latency, known as jitter, may be stem from (i) variation in packet size,
which inﬂuences network interface delays, (ii) variation in route path, which inﬂuences signal propagation delays, and (iii) variation in network congestion, which inﬂuences queuing
5If latency were completely deterministic, then it would be possible to evade order anticipation by
coordinating the processing times of orders.
In fact, even if exchanges di↵ered in their latencies, such
coordination could be achieved by using smart order routers such as Royal Bank of Canada’s THOR (Aisen
et al. (2015), Lewis (2014)).
Rather than releasing orders simultaneously from a trading desk, THOR
releases orders at slightly di↵erent times so as to coordinate their arrival times. Nevertheless, latency is not
deterministic in practice. For example, as Lewis (2014) writes,
In theory, the fastest travel time, from Katsuyama’s desk in Manhattan to the BATS exchange
in Weehawken, N.J., was about two milliseconds, and the slowest, from Katsuyama’s desk to the
Nasdaq exchange in Carteret, N.J., was around four milliseconds. In practice, the times could
vary much more than that, depending on network traﬃc, static and glitches in the equipment
between any two points [emphasis added].
25

delays.6 For the within-exchange leg of communication, exchange architecture can interact with the aforementioned factors to inﬂuence the degree of randomness. (See Kirilenko
and Lamacie (2015) and Menkveld and Zoican (2017) for a discussion of exchange architecture.) For the trader-to-exchange leg of communication, variation may also be caused by the
weather, which a↵ects signal propagation delays for radio communication.7
B.
Evidence of Randomness
Three types of latency play a role in order anticipation: (i) trader-to-exchange latency,
which is the amount of time between when a trader sends an order to an exchange and when
the order is received by the exchange, (ii) within-exchange latency, which is the amount
of time between when an order is received by the exchange and when it is processed, and
(iii) exchange-to-trader latency, which is the amount of time between when an order is
processed and when ensuing announcements reach traders.8 All three components possess
some randomness. Below, we report some statistics that quantify the degree of randomness
present in two of these components.
Within-exchange.
Exchanges require some amount of time to accept, process, and execute
orders. Publicly available summary statistics concerning this latency are available for the
Bats-Y Exchange (BYX) for the week of May 30, 2016. According to BATS (2016), the
order acknowledgement latency for traders using the binary protocol was 75 microseconds
on average and 114 microseconds at the 80th percentile.
Similar latencies were realized
for traders using the FIX protocol: 88 microseconds on average and 114 microseconds at
the 80th percentile. The amount of randomness is extremely small in real terms, but it
is signiﬁcant relative to the scale of the distribution. In addition, similar statistics prevail
at other exchanges, including NYSE Arca and NYSE American (NYSE (2018)), NASDAQ
OMX (NASDAQ OMX (2012)), SIX Swiss Exchange (SIX Swiss Exchange (2016)), Eurex
6One contributing factor to variation in network congestion may be “quote stuﬃng,” a practice in which
certain traders occasionally submit large numbers of orders in order to slow down certain exchanges (Gai,
Yao, and Ye (2013), Egginton, Van Ness, and Van Ness (2016)).
7See “This Heat Wave’s So Bad It’s Even Slowing Down U.S. Stock Trades,” Bloomberg News, July
2, 2018. Weather may even force traders to abandon radio communication entirely to instead use slower
ﬁber-optic technology (Shkilko and Sokolov (2019)).
8Another type of latency, though less relevant to the model, is the time between a quote update or a trade
and the corresponding update of the Securities Information Processor (SIP). Bartlett and McCrary (2017)
study this form of latency for the time period between August 2015 and June 2016 and ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
degree of randomness.
26

Exchange (Deutsche B¨orse Group (2018)), MIAX Options Exchange (MIAX Miami International Securities Exchange (2018)), Toronto Stock Exchange (TMX Group (2014)), and
Brazil’s BM&FBOVESPA (Kirilenko and Lamacie (2015)). Furthermore, in a recent industry study, Lehr (2016) ﬁnds evidence of considerable variability in the outbound data feeds
of Nasdaq, Arca, and NYSE.9
These statistics indicate that randomness in within-exchange latency is a meaningful barrier to traders who wish to synchronize the timing of their trades across di↵erent exchanges.
Thus, although there have been e↵orts aimed at suppressing the randomness of trader-toexchange latency, including a recent patent application from Renaissance Technology (Mercer
and Brown (2016)), within-exchange latency remains a signiﬁcant constraint.
Exchange-to-trader.
We obtain order-level data that allow us to perform a detailed analysis
of exchange-to-trader latency. These data, provided by Thesys Technologies, LLC, comprise
a historical record of all messages broadcast by all exchanges in the U.S. A unique feature of
these data is that each order has two timestamps: the timestamp aﬃxed by the exchange at
the point of processing, and the timestamp aﬃxed by the ﬁrm at the point of receipt. The
di↵erence between these two timestamps is the realized exchange-to-trader latency.
For the analysis below, we restrict our focus to messages from Nasdaq for the week of
May 30, 2016. However, roughly similar results would obtain for other exchanges and other
sample periods. We record the latency of each message pertaining to SPDR S&P 500 Trust
ETF (SPY) sent between 9:30 and 16:00 on the trading days of that week. Figure IA.1
displays the histogram of those latencies, and Table IA.I presents corresponding summary
statistics. Two aspects of these data merit mention: latencies are extremely small, on the
order of microseconds, and there is a signiﬁcant amount of randomness. After 99 percent
winsorization, the latency is 31 microseconds on average, with a standard deviation of 19
microseconds.
Although these data pertain to just a single message recipient, we have no reason to
believe that the magnitude of randomness illustrated by our analysis is driven by this choice.
For instance, according to a CME spokesperson, “Every market participant will experience
some degree of variability.”10
9That analysis calculates the di↵erence in latencies between two data products o↵ered by the same
exchange and ﬁnds substantial variability in each case.
This requires variability in the latencies of the
individual products, although summary statistics pertaining to the individual latencies are not reported
separately.
10See “High-Speed Traders Proﬁt From Return of Loophole at CME,” Wall Street Journal, February 12,
2018.
27

0
10
20
30
40
Percent
20
40
60
80
100
microseconds
Figure IA.1. Histogram of exchange-to-trader latency. This ﬁgure presents a histogram of latencies of all messages pertaining to SPDR S&P 500 Trust ETF (SPY) between
Nasdaq and an HFT ﬁrm between 9:30 and 16:00 on trading days from May 30, 2016 and
June 3, 2016, with 99 percent winsorization. The histogram is truncated at 100 microseconds.
C.
Model Simulation
In this section, we simulate the model, using empirical latencies described in the previous
section and assuming that traders continue to behave as in equilibrium. We then analyze the
ﬁll rates that prevail in this simulation, interpreting them as a back-of-the-envelope estimate
of the ﬁll rates predicted by the model. These simulation results suggest that prevailing
amounts of randomness in latency are more than suﬃcient to generate the levels of order
anticipation observed in practice, which we summarize in the next section.
While our model ignores the exchange-to-trader component of latency, we reintroduce it
for the purposes of this exercise. When simulating a race between an information investor,
the liquidity provider, and snipers, we assume that traders behave essentially as in the
model: (i) the information investor sends immediate-or-cancel orders to each exchange,
(ii) the liquidity provider sends cancellations to each exchange after observing one trade, and
(iii) snipers send immediate-or-cancel orders to each exchange after observing two trades. A
28

Table IA.I
Summary Statistics of Exchange-to-Trader Latency
(microseconds)
This table presents summary statistics of latencies of all messages pertaining to SPDR S&P
500 Trust ETF (SPY) between Nasdaq and an HFT ﬁrm between 9:30 and 16:00 on trading
days from May 30, 2016 and June 3, 2016, with 99 percent winsorization.
mean
st. dev.
p20
p40
p60
p80
N
31.07
18.67
24
25
27
32
7,581,400
trader’s order is processed by an exchange only after the corresponding trader-to-exchange
and within-exchange latencies, and a trader observes the results of this processing only after
the corresponding exchange-to-trader latencies.
To simulate trader-to-exchange and exchange-to-trader latencies, we draw from the empirical distribution described in the previous section and depicted in Figure IA.1. To simulate within-exchange latencies, we draw from a shifted exponential distribution calibrated to
match the mean and 80th percentile of the latency distribution discussed in BATS (2016).
This calibration yields 11 microseconds for the shift parameter and 64 microseconds for
the rate parameter. Throughout, we assume that these three components are distributed
independently, not only across traders but also of each other within a trader.
We use this procedure to simulate the outcomes of races between an information investor,
the liquidity provider, and snipers, as the number of exchanges, X, ranges from one to 15.
Figure IA.2 summarizes the outcomes of 1,000 simulations per choice of X. When X = 1,
there is no opportunity for order anticipation of any sort, and the investor’s ﬁll rate is 100
percent. When X = 2, there is no opportunity for snipers to become active and the races are
divided between the investor (90.7 percent) and the liquidity provider (9.3 percent). Snipers
become active when X ≥3, and win a progressively larger proportion of races as X increases
further. When X = 10, the simulations predict a ﬁll rate of 56.6 percent for the investor.
D.
Evidence of Order Anticipation
If latency is random, as the evidence documented above indicates, then order anticipation
should take place in practice. This appendix summarizes a variety of evidence to that e↵ect.
29

0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
investor
snipers
liquidity provider
Figure IA.2. Calibrated Fill Rates, by Number of Exchanges. This ﬁgure shows
the fraction of races between an information investor, the liquidity provider, and snipers won
by each party in simulations of the model, for di↵erent numbers of exchanges. Each bar is
based on 1,000 simulations. Simulations assume that traders behave as in the equilibrium
of the model. Simulated exchange-to-trader and trader-to-exchange latencies are drawn iid
from the empirical distribution of latencies between Nasdaq and an HFT ﬁrm, as described
in the text. Simulated within-exchange latencies are drawn iid from a shifted exponential
distribution calibrated to match statistics from BATS (2016), as described in the text.
Evidence from industry sources.
The summary statistics on ﬁll rates reported by Barclays
(2014) hint at the amount of order anticipation they experience. They deﬁne the ﬁll rate of
a wave as
ﬁll rate =
#shares ﬁlled
min{#shares in order,#shares displayed}.
(IA16)
Consistent with the model, they face virtually no order anticipation when attempting to
access just a single exchange, achieving a ﬁll rate of 99 percent. However, as they attempt
to access quotes at more exchanges, they expose themselves to more order anticipation, and
30

their ﬁll rate declines.11 When targeting six or more exchanges, they achieve a ﬁll rate of 89
percent, and a hit ratio (the frequency of complete ﬁlls) of just 25 percent.
These ﬁll rates are somewhat higher than those prevailing in the simulations conducted
in Internet Appendix II.C. A combination of factors may be responsible for this gap. One set
of factors generate upward bias in the Barclays statistics relative to the empirical analogue
of the simulation results:
• Only for a subset of the orders it handles does the Barclays router behave like information
investors in our model, routing orders for the entire quoted depth. When less than the
entire quoted depth is desired, a ﬁll rate of 100 percent could be realized even if some
order anticipation occurs.
• The possibility of trading against hidden orders mechanically biases ﬁll rates upward.
Executions against hidden orders are added to the numerator of (IA16), but the number
of hidden orders quoted is not accounted for in the denominator. It therefore becomes
possible that an order for the entire displayed depth would receive a 100 percent ﬁll rate
even if order anticipation takes place.
Another set of explanations for the gap pertains to ways in which the simulations may be
an imperfect model of real behavior.
• The simulations, although based on real latency data, assume that latencies are drawn
independently across traders and across exchanges. Some correlation likely prevails in
practice, which would reduce the e↵ectiveness of order anticipation strategies.
• The simulations suppose that traders behave exactly as in the equilibrium of the model—
in particular, that liquidity investors target just a single exchange. In practice, there likely
exists some size heterogeneity among liquidity investors, so that some target two or more
exchanges at once. If the di↵erences between the order routing decisions of liquidity
investors and information investors are less stark, then the signals that can be extracted
from order ﬂow will be weaker (see Internet Appendix III.H). This would also lessen the
extent of order anticipation. Snipers in particular would exercise more caution before
acting, since a strong signal is needed to o↵set the costs of crossing the spread.
Although a coarser form of evidence, a general inability to achieve 100 percent ﬁll rates is
11Complicating interpretation of these ﬁgures is the fact that the number of exchanges that Barclays
targets is most likely an endogenous variable, and therefore we do not claim that this relationship is causal.
Nevertheless, these data are consistent with order anticipation, and indeed that is the explanation that
Barclays themselves provide.
31

also consistent with order anticipation. Evidence to that e↵ect comes from KCG (2014). As
they report, they achieve a ﬁll rate of approximately 94 percent when attempting to access
the entire national best bid and o↵er (NBBO) depth. Furthermore, their ﬁll rate drops to
approximately 91 percent when they widen their sweeps to include dark pools as well.
An additional source of such evidence comes from the exchange IEX. They o↵er their
clients an order routing service, and they publish the ﬁll rates that their router achieves to
their website (IEX Group (2018b)). In March 2018, their weighted average ﬁll rate across
all Reg NMS “protected” market centers was 94.32 percent. This ﬁgure is a single average
across the entire set of orders handled by IEX, without distinguishing, as Barclays does,
by the number of exchanges targeted. While it is therefore less directly comparable to the
simulation results, the fact that IEX does not always achieve a perfect ﬁll rate is nevertheless
informative. Moreover, this shortfall is not due to a relative lack of sophistication on the
part of IEX. To the contrary, their methods are cutting edge. In particular, they connect to
other exchanges through a custom-built ﬁber optic network that is speciﬁcally designed for
synchronization.
Related evidence comes from Nanex (2014), a market data provider with an associated research arm. They provide a highly detailed analysis of a small set of trades. The ﬁrst of these
trades—although not implemented using state-of-the-art smart order routing technology—
triggered large amounts of order anticipation. The last of these trades was conducted using
IEX’s more sophisticated smart order router, which reduced order anticipation but does not
appear to have eliminated it.
Evidence from academic literature.
Order anticipation has also been investigated in the
academic literature. For example, Malinova and Park (2017) provide direct empirical evidence of both aggressive-side and passive-side order anticipation for Canadian equities. In
the millisecond following a trade on a particular exchange, they detect market-wide increases
both in the probability of HFTs canceling their quotes and in the probability of HFTs trading aggressively in the same direction. Also consistent with order anticipation, they report
signiﬁcantly lower ﬁll rates for orders that target two exchanges than for orders that target
a single exchange, even after controlling for order size. Similarly, van Kervel (2015) ﬁnds
that executions on one venue are followed by cancellations elsewhere within the subsequent
100 milliseconds, which is consistent with passive-side order anticipation. Additionally, a
number of other studies also ﬁnd evidence of order anticipation, although not necessarily of
the form modeled in this paper (Hirschey (2019), Korajczyk and Murphy (2019), van Kervel
32

and Menkveld (2019)).
Lastly, Weller (2018) and Gider, Schmickler, and Westheide (2019) ﬁnd a connection
between HFT and less informative prices, which they suggest may be caused by the form of
order anticipation that we model in this paper.
33

III.
Additional Results
In this appendix, we present additional results that may be of interest. Internet Appendix III.A supplements Corollary 1 by discussing how the LOB equilibrium is a↵ected by
changes in the model parameters beyond pH. Similarly, Appendices III.B and III.C discuss
comparative statics for the equilibria of NDs and FBAs. Internet Appendix III.D studies
an asynchronous version of the FBAs mechanism, ﬁnding that it generates an equilibrium
outcome identical to that prevailing under 1-ND. Internet Appendix III.E studies the consequences of adding a small delay to all orders, ﬁnding that it generates an equilibrium
outcome identical to that prevailing under (synchronized) FBAs. Internet Appendix III.F
demonstrates that the economic forces of our model carry over to a setting in which liquidity investors arrive in a stream, which e↵ectively opens the door for informed traders to
split orders dynamically. Internet Appendix III.G motivates our use of the hyperreal-based
construction of time by describing the diﬃculties that would arise given a more standard
construction. Internet Appendix III.H considers an extension of the model in which liquidity
investors may be heterogeneous in the quantities they demand. Internet Appendix III.I considers an extension of the model in which information investors may be risk averse. Internet
Appendix III.J presents an argument in support of the equilibrium selection that we have
made.
A.
Limit Order Book Comparative Statics
Corollary 1 in the main text summarizes the comparative statics of the LOB equilibrium
with respect to pH. As the parameter of the model that governs the speed of HFTs, this
is likely the most interesting and policy-relevant comparative static exercise. But for completeness, in this appendix we provide and discuss comparative statics with respect to the
remaining parameters.
COROLLARY 1: The spread s∗
LOB and the research intensity r∗
LOB have the following comparative statics:
(i) s∗
LOB is weakly increasing in X, weakly increasing in pI, and weakly increasing in λ.
(ii) r∗
LOB is weakly decreasing in λ.
Proof of Corollary 1 :
With respect to X: Di↵erentiating the expression for the spread given in (1), we ﬁnd that,
34

other things equal, it is weakly increasing in XI +XS. It can be shown that XI +XS is weakly
increasing in X on the domain of the positive integers.12 These two observations imply that,
other things equal, the spread is weakly increasing in X. It is also weakly increasing in
research intensity, other things equal.
Moreover, applying Topkis’ Theorem to (2), we ﬁnd that, other things equal, research
intensity is weakly increasing in XI. By Lemma 1, XI is weakly increasing in X. These two
observations imply that, other things equal, research intensity is weakly increasing in X. It
is also weakly decreasing in the spread, other things equal.
By combining these observations, we conclude that s∗
LOB is weakly increasing in X.
With respect to pI: Di↵erentiating the expression for the spread given in (1), we ﬁnd that,
other things equal, it is weakly increasing in XI + XS. It can be shown that XI + XS is
weakly increasing in pI.13 These two observations imply that, other things equal, the spread
is weakly increasing in pI. It is also weakly increasing in research intensity, other things
equal.
Moreover, applying Topkis’ Theorem to (2), we ﬁnd that, other things equal, research
intensity is weakly increasing in XI. It can be shown that XI is weakly increasing in pI.14
12Notice that when X = 1, XI + XS = 1, and when X = 2, XI + XS ≥1. Thus, it suﬃces to show that
@(XI+XS)
@X
≥0 on the domain where X ≥2. Computing the derivative,
@(XI + XS)
@X
= 1 −pHpI(1 −pI)X−1 ￿2X −1 + ln(1 −pI)(X2 −X)￿.
Because pI ≥0.5, pI ≤1, and pH ≤1, we have
pHpI(1 −pI)X−1[2X −1 + ln(1 −pI)(X2 −X)] ≤0.5X−1[2X −1 + ln(0.5)(X2 −X)].
The right-hand side is maximized on the domain X ≥2 at X = 2, where it achieves ≈0.807. We conclude
that the derivative has the desired sign.
13Notice that
@(XI + XS)
@pI
= −pH(X −1)X(1 −pIX)(1 −pI)X−2.
When X = 1, this derivative evaluates to zero. When X ≥2 (and using the fact that pI ≥0.5), the derivative
is nonnegative.
14Notice that
@XI
@pI
= X −X2(1 −pI)X−1 + (1 −pH)(X −1)X(1 −pIX)(1 −pI)X−2.
This derivative is minimized on the domain pH ≥0.5 at pH = 0.5. Plugging that in and taking the ﬁrst order
condition with respect to pI, we see that when X ∈N, there are no critical points pI ∈(0.5,1), so we conclude
that the derivative is minimized either by setting pI = 0.5 or by setting pI = 1. If the latter, then the derivative
evaluates to X, which is positive. If the former, then the derivative evaluates to X −(X3 −X2 + 2X)(0.5)X,
which is weakly positive on X ∈N.
35

These two observations imply that, other things equal, research intensity is weakly increasing
in pI. It is also weakly decreasing in the spread, other things equal.
By combining these observations, we conclude that s∗
LOB is weakly increasing in pI.
With respect to λ: Di↵erentiating the expression for the spread given in (1), we ﬁnd that,
other things equal, it is weakly increasing in λ. Applying Topkis’ Theorem to (2), we ﬁnd
that, other things equal, research intensity is weakly decreasing in the spread and constant
in λ. By combining these observations, we establish the claimed comparative statics for s∗
LOB
and r∗
LOB with respect to λ.
Number of exchanges (X).
Given the high degree of fragmentation in modern equity markets, another very relevant set of comparative statics are those with respect to the number
of exchanges, X. According to the proposition, an increase in X increases the equilibrium
spread. The intuition can be seen through the following chain of forces. First, as observed
in Section III.B of the main article, aggregate depth increases in the number of exchanges.
Indeed, it scales linearly in the number of exchanges because the liquidity provider optimally o↵ers one share at both the bid and the ask at each exchange in order to serve a
liquidity investor who might attempt to trade there. Next, this increase in the depth of
the aggregate book also increases the number of shares available to informed traders (either directly informed information investors or indirectly informed snipers). The liquidity
provider is therefore exposed to more adverse selection, and she must charge a larger spread
to compensate.15
This represents an interesting contrast to the irrelevance result of Glosten (1994), who
demonstrates that in an idealized frictionless setting in which investors can costlessly send
simultaneous orders to separate exchanges in order to complete their trades at the best possible price, the liquidity of the aggregate market is invariant to the degree of fragmentation.
We do not obtain the same invariance result in our model because investors do not always act
to complete their trades at the best possible price. Rather, we make the extreme assumption
that liquidity investors are perfectly inelastic in their exchange choices. Nevertheless, similar
forces would break the Glosten (1994) invariance result even in more realistic models with
some cross-exchange elasticity, at least so long as some friction precludes perfect elasticity.
15A countervailing force not captured by this model is the following. If exchanges are strategic players
that compete for order ﬂow, then an increase in their number might reduce their market power and therefore
the fees that they charge. All else equal, smaller fees might be passed on as smaller spreads. Baldauf and
Mollner (forthcoming) propose a model that incorporates both this “competition channel” and the “exposure
channel” described above, but empirical analysis indicates that the exposure channel dominates.
36

On the other hand, the response of research intensity to an increase in X is theoretically
ambiguous, due to two competing e↵ects. The direct e↵ect of an increase in X is to create
more opportunities for an information investor to trade on any piece of information, which
tends to incentivize research. However, an increase in X also creates more opportunities
for snipers to trade, which contributes to adverse selection and raises the spread. Larger
spreads make each trade less proﬁtable, so the indirect e↵ect of an increase in X tends to
disincentivize research.
Investor speed (pI).
An increase in pI represents an improvement in the order routing
technology of the investor, because orders are processed sooner and are less dispersed. With
better technology, an information investor obtains more ﬁlls. While snipers may obtain either
more or fewer ﬁlls when pI increases, the overall e↵ect is that more information-motivated
trades take place. To o↵set the additional adverse selection, the liquidity provider must
charge a larger spread. The response of equilibrium research intensity to a change in pI is
theoretically ambiguous for essentially the same reason that research may either increase or
decrease in X.
Probability of information investor (λ).
Finally, an increase in the probability of an information investor, λ, intensiﬁes the adverse selection faced by the liquidity provider, who then
quotes a larger spread. The larger spread reduces the beneﬁts of research and leads to lower
research intensity.
B.
Noncancellation Delay Comparative Statics
This appendix uses the characterization of the qND equilibrium given in Proposition 3
to study how this outcome varies with the parameters of the model.
COROLLARY 2: The spread s∗
qND and the research intensity r∗
qND have the following comparative statics:
(i) s∗
qND is weakly decreasing in pH, weakly increasing in X, weakly increasing in pI, and
weakly increasing in λ.
(ii) r∗
qND is weakly decreasing in pH, weakly increasing in X, weakly increasing in pI, and
weakly decreasing in λ.
37

Proof of Corollary 2 : As before, deﬁne
XqND = qX +
X
￿
x=1
￿X
x ￿(1 −q)xqX−x (xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)]).
Lemma 2 establishes that XqND is weakly increasing in X. Moreover, by di↵erentiating XqND,
we ﬁnd that it is weakly decreasing in pH and weakly increasing in pI.
As is evident from equation (4), other things equal, the spread is (i) weakly increasing in
research intensity, (ii) weakly increasing in λ, and (iii) weakly increasing in XqND. Moreover,
the latter implies that, other things equal, the spread is also (iv) weakly decreasing in pH,
(v) weakly increasing in X, and (vi) weakly increasing in pI. Applying Topkis’ Theorem (5),
we see that, other things equal, research intensity is (i) weakly decreasing in the spread,
(ii) constant in λ, and (iii) weakly increasing in XqND. Moreover, the latter implies that, other
things equal, research intensity is also (iv) weakly decreasing in pH, (v) weakly increasing
in X, and (vi) weakly increasing in pI. By combining these observations, we establish all
claimed comparative statics except those of r∗
qND with respect to pH, X, and pI.
Recall that r∗
qND is characterized as the ﬁxed point of the correspondence
RqND(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)rXqND
1 −λ + λˆrXqND
−c(r)￿.
Applying Topkis’ Theorem, RqND(ˆr) is weakly increasing in XqND and therefore is (i) weakly
decreasing in pH, (ii) weakly increasing in X, and (iii) weakly increasing in pI. Because
the correspondence is also weakly decreasing in ˆr, we obtain that r∗
qND has the claimed
comparative statics with respect to these parameters.
The intuition for the comparative statics with respect to pH and λ is analogous to the
intuition for the corresponding comparative statics under the LOB. The intuition for the
comparative statics with respect to X and pI is as follows. Adding another exchange (i.e.,
increasing X) or improving the investor’s routing technology (i.e., increasing pI) increases
the number of venues at which an information investor may trade after learning the value
of the security, which increases the returns to research and incentivizes a higher research
intensity. The higher research intensity increases the adverse selection faced by the liquidity
provider, who quotes a larger spread.
These comparative statics under NDs are in contrast to what prevails under the LOB,
where it is theoretically ambiguous how research intensity responds to changes in X and pI.
38

The crucial di↵erence is that with NDs, adverse selection against the liquidity provider comes
only from the information investor, whereas under the LOB, snipers are another source of
adverse selection.
C.
Frequent Batch Auctions Comparative Statics
This appendix uses the characterization of the FBA equilibrium given in Proposition 4
to study how this outcome varies with the parameters of the model.
COROLLARY 3: The spread s∗
FBA and the research intensity r∗
FBA have the following comparative statics:
(i) s∗
FBA is weakly increasing in X and weakly increasing in λ.
(ii) r∗
FBA is weakly increasing in X and weakly decreasing in λ.
Proof of Corollary 3 : As is evident from equation (6), other things equal, the spread is
(i) weakly increasing in research intensity, (ii) weakly increasing in λ, and (iii) weakly increasing in X. Applying Topkis’ Theorem to (7), we see that, other things equal, research
intensity is (i) weakly decreasing in the spread, (ii) constant in λ, and (iii) weakly increasing
in X. By combining these observations, we establish all claimed comparative statics except
those of r∗
FBA with respect to X.
Recall that r∗
FBA is characterized as the ﬁxed point of the correspondence
RFBA(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿(1 −λ)rX
1 −λ + λˆrX −c(r)￿.
By Topkis’ Theorem, RFBA(ˆr) is weakly increasing in X.
Because the function is also
weakly decreasing in ˆr, we obtain that r∗
FBA has the claimed comparative static with respect
to X.
The intuition for the comparative statics with respect to λ is analogous to the intuition
for the corresponding comparative statics under the LOB. The intuition for the comparative
statics with respect to X is analogous to that under NDs. However, the comparative statics
with respect to pH and pI are all zero. Under the LOB or under NDs, these parameters
control the number of orders that an information investor expects to convert into ﬁlls. In
contrast, under FBAs, information investors always convert all orders, and therefore changes
in these parameters have no e↵ect.
39

D.
Asynchronous Frequent Batch Auctions
While Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2014) advocate the use of FBAs that are synchronized across exchanges, in practice it may be diﬃcult to achieve synchronization among
competitors. As a result, a natural question that arises is what would transpire if the batch
intervals were not synchronized. Our model allows us to examine what would happen in
such a setting.
We suppose that all exchanges use FBAs with “long” batch intervals that are “suﬃciently” asynchronous. Formally, in the language of the model, we suppose that for any
batch auction conducted by any exchange, no batch auction is conducted by the same or
another exchange until at least 3" has passed. Otherwise, we assume all is as before, and in
particular, that the batch length of each exchange is an inﬁnitesimal.
It can be shown that in such a setting, the equilibrium outcome would be the same as
that which prevails under 1-ND, characterized in Proposition 3. The intuition is the same:
aggressive-side order anticipation is eliminated, and in addition, an information investor’s
orders are processed with suﬃcient temporal dispersion to allow the liquidity provider to
react after just a single trade. Whereas 1-ND achieves this dispersion by adding randomness
to the processing times of noncancellation orders, asynchronous FBAs achieve it by ﬁxing
clearing times in a way that is dispersed across exchanges.
E.
Universal Delay
It is interesting to note that in this model, the outcome implemented by FBAs can
also be achieved with a universal delay applied to all orders before they are processed by
an exchange.16 In this appendix, we describe the mechanism and then discuss some of its
attractive (albeit unmodeled) properties relative to FBAs.
Formally, we deﬁne universal delay to be the following proposal. All orders receive a delay
of length δUD. To have the desired e↵ect, δUD should be small but should exceed the di↵erence
between (i) the maximum latency that the investor may experience and (ii) the sum of the
minimum latency that the investor may experience together with the minimum latency that
an HFT may experience. In the language of the paper, this requirement corresponds to an
inﬁnitesimal delay δUD > ". Aside from this delay, all order processing is as in the LOB. It can
16Our analysis considers a constant delay. In contrast, versions of universal delay in which orders are
delayed by random lengths of time are advocated by Harris (2013) and were subsequently implemented by
the foreign exchange venues EBS and ParFX (under the label “latency ﬂoor”).
40

be shown that in such a setting, the equilibrium outcome would be the same as that which
prevails under FBAs, characterized in Proposition 4. The intuition is the same: information
investors become able to trade against all mispriced quotes before HFTs can react. Whereas
batching achieves this by synchronizing the time of trade across exchanges, a universal delay
achieves this by delaying the reaction time of HFTs.
There are several reasons to think that a universal delay would be preferable to FBAs.
First, by virtue of being so near the status quo, it would be easier to implement and therefore
less likely to su↵er from glitches, loopholes, or other complications. In particular, a universal
delay could be implemented by, for example, forcing all orders to travel through additional
lengths of ﬁber-optic cable.
Such a scheme is already used in practice by the exchange
IEX, which implements a 350-microsecond delay by placing 38 miles of coiled cable between
their matching engine and their point of presence.17 Second, there are some legal questions
pertaining to whether it is possible for FBAs to operate simultaneously on multiple exchanges
in a way that satisﬁes laws as they are currently written, particularly Regulation NMS in the
U.S. In contrast, the SEC has already approved IEX’s universal delay, characterizing it as
de minimis. Third, FBAs require synchronization across exchanges, which in practice might
be diﬃcult to achieve since exchanges are competitors. In contrast, order processing delays
could be implemented in a decentralized way.
Furthermore, it might be useful to implement a universal delay in conjunction with a
qND, for various values of q.
Certain points on the frontier of the feasible set can be
implemented by NDs but only if the number of exchanges is increased beyond X, as in the
spirit of Corollary 6. Some of those points can be implemented by a hybrid mechanism in
this class without the need to vary the number of exchanges.
F.
Order Synchronization in a Dynamic Version of the Model
In the model presented in Section II of the main article, there can be at most a single
liquidity investor present, who trades just a single share. This e↵ectively limits the information investor to trading at a single point in time, and he therefore trades as intensely
as possible at that time, synchronizing his trading in one large “wave.” However, a more
realistic model of trading on long-lived private information would feature multiple liquidity
traders who arrive gradually. This would create the opportunity for an informed trader to
camouﬂage himself by making many small trades over time (`a la Kyle (1985))—trading less
17The NYSE American exchange subsequently adopted essentially the same scheme. A di↵erence is that
their delay is implemented via software instead of hardware.
41

intensely now in order to have less price impact and therefore better terms of trade in the
future.
In this appendix we consider such a dynamic model. While we do not solve this model
completely, we show that in certain regions of the parameter space—in particular, when
trading is fragmented across a suﬃciently large number of exchanges—equilibrium requires
that the informed trader sometimes trade in a large wave even though that gives himself
away. The driving insight is that if he makes many trades at separate times, then each trade
a↵ects the price of the next, regardless of whether those trades occur at the same exchange or
di↵erent exchanges. In contrast, if he makes many trades at the same time by synchronizing
across exchanges, then none of those trades can inﬂuence the price he receives for another.
If many exchanges are available, then such an “ambush” can be large and worthwhile.
We view this analysis as justiﬁcation and motivation for our current approach, which can
be interpreted as a model of a single one of these waves. While the model that we present in
Section II of the main article is more simple in the temporal dimension, it is more complex
in other dimensions, for instance, by capturing latency. Thus, although it does not allow us
to consider how an informed trader might split orders over time, it does allow us to consider
in more detail the issues that arise when such a trader splits orders across exchanges. What
the results of this appendix indicate is that these issues remain relevant even when orders
can be split over time.
One-exchange model.
In the case of one exchange (i.e., X = 1), the model reduces to the
“Glosten-Milgrom model” of Back and Baruch (2004, Section 2). The text in the following
paragraphs is copied almost verbatim from that paper.18 Below, we generalize to multiple
exchanges (i.e., X > 1) by adapting Back and Baruch (2004) in a natural way.
We consider a continuous-time market for a risky asset and one risk-free asset with interest
rate set to zero. A public release of information takes place at a random time ⌧, distributed
as an exponential random variable with parameter r. After the public announcement has
been made, the value of the risky asset, denoted by ˜v, will be either zero or one, and all
positions are liquidated at that price. There is a single informed trader who knows ˜v at date
0. Uninformed (i.e., noise) buy and sell orders arrive as Poisson processes with constant,
exogenously given, arrival intensities β. We denote the order size by δ.
We denote the total number of buy orders by noise traders through time t by z+
t and the
18We also use the notation of Back and Baruch (2004). The model in this appendix is distinct from our
baseline model, which we present and analyze in Section II of the main article, and notation should not be
assumed to have the same meaning across both models.
42

total number of sell orders by noise traders through time t by z−
t , and we set zt = z+
t −z−
t . The
net number of shares bought by noise traders is then ztδ. Similarly, we denote the number
of informed buys by x+
t , the number of informed sells by x−
t , and the net informed orders
by xt = x+
t −x−
t . Finally, we denote the number of net noise and informed orders through
time t by yt. The process y reveals the complete history of anonymous trades. The σ-ﬁeld
generated by {ys￿s ≤t} is denoted by Fy
t . As usual, we denote the left limit of y at time t by
yt−and set ∆yt = yt −yt−. If there is a buy order at date t then ∆yt = 1, and if there is a sell
order then ∆yt = −1. Competition among the market makers implies that any transaction
takes place at price pt ≡E[˜v￿Fy
t ]. The posted ask and bid prices at time t < ⌧are
askt = E[˜v￿Fy
t−,∆yt = +1]
bidt = E[˜v￿Fy
t−,∆yt = −1].
Here, Fy
t−≡￿s<t Fy
s denotes the information available to the market makers just before time
t. The informed trader chooses a trading strategy x to maximize
E￿δ ￿
⌧
0 [˜v −askt]dx+
t + δ ￿
⌧
0 [bidt −˜v]dx−
t ￿˜v￿.
We direct the reader to Back and Baruch (2004) for additional details.
One-exchange equilibrium.
Theorem 2 of Back and Baruch (2004) characterizes an equilibrium of this model. In addition, their Figures 1 and 2 illustrate features of that equilibrium,
computed numerically for certain parameter values. Table IA.II below extracts key features
of the equilibrium from those ﬁgures. The outcome variables recorded in the table are the
informed trader’s equilibrium proﬁts and the initial quotes set by the market maker. The
table’s last four columns correspond to a di↵erent set of parameter values.
Back and Baruch (2004) do not assert that this is the unique equilibrium of the model.
Nevertheless, it seems to be a natural selection, and it is the unique equilibrium on which
they focus their analysis. We therefore proceed under the assumption that this equilibrium
is the appropriate benchmark for our analysis.
Multi-exchange model.
We consider the following multi-exchange adaptation of the Back
and Baruch (2004) model.
Let X denote the number of exchanges.
As in our baseline
model of Section II of the main article, we suppose that noise traders choose an exchange on
which to transact uniformly at random. Thus, uninformed buy and sell orders arrive to each
43

Table IA.II
Numerical Examples Based on Back and Baruch (2004)
This table presents the outcome variables are approximations based on Figures 1 and 2 in
Back and Baruch (2004).
Parameters
r
discount factor
1
1
1
1
p0
prior expectation of ˜v
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
δ
order size
3
1
0.2
0.1
β
noise trader arrival rates
0.0¯5
0.5
12.5
50
Outcome variables
expected proﬁt
0.06
0.19
0.22
0.25
bid0
0.02
0.12
0.36
0.42
ask0
0.98
0.88
0.64
0.58
Fragmentation cuto↵
1.0
1.6
3.0
6.0
exchange as Poisson processes with arrival intensities β￿X. The processes z+
t , z−
t , zt, x+
t , x−
t ,
xt, and yt are deﬁned as before, with the exception that they are now vector-valued, where
each component of the vector corresponds to trading activity on one of the X exchanges.
The posted ask and bid prices at time t < ⌧at exchange i are
aski
t = E[˜v￿Fy
t−,∆yi
t = +1]
bidi
t = E[˜v￿Fy
t−,∆yi
t = −1],
where, as before, Fy
t−≡￿s<t Fy
s denotes the information available to market makers just
before time t.19
Suppose now that the informed trader is prohibited from trading in waves. In other
words, suppose it is a constraint that ∆xt can be nonzero in only one dimension. Under
this constraint, the model can be solved as in the single-exchange case, and “the benchmark
equilibrium” is again as characterized by Back and Baruch (2004). The only di↵erence is
that whenever the informed trader decides to trade, he needs to choose an exchange, a choice
that he makes uniformly at random.
19In summary, market makers are able to update their quotes in response to trades that took place in
the past, regardless of the exchange on which those trades took place. However, they cannot respond in
the same instant that a trade takes place. Moreover, the informed trader is capable of accessing quotes at
multiple exchanges in the same instant and therefore before any of the market makers can respond. This is
as if latency were deterministic and positive, though inﬁnitesimally small.
44

Our approach is to argue that this constraint is binding in certain regions of the parameter
space. For this constraint to be binding, it would be suﬃcient to show that it is proﬁtable for
the informed trader to deviate by trading on all X exchanges immediately, and then never
trade again. The expected proﬁt of such a deviation is p0δX(1−ask0)+(1−p0)δX(bid0 −0).
Because this expression diverges as X →∞, the deviation is proﬁtable if X is suﬃciently
large. We solve for the smallest value of X that makes this deviation proﬁtable. We refer to
this as the fragmentation cuto↵. The last row of Table IA.II shows the fragmentation cuto↵s
corresponding to the four sets of parameter values.
In conclusion, if there is a suﬃcient amount of fragmentation, then the benchmark equilibrium cannot survive when the constraint against waves is lifted. This indicates that in
such cases, equilibrium requires that the informed trader use waves.20,21 In turn, this suggests that the insights delivered by a static model of a single wave may be relevant even
though reality is dynamic.
One of these main insights, which our static model delivers, is that informed traders
are adversely a↵ected by random latency because it enables order anticipation. It seems
intractable to add random latency to this dynamic model. Nevertheless, in the same way
that prohibiting the informed trader from using waves is a binding constraint, it would seem
that random latency—the e↵ect of which is to make it more diﬃcult for the informed trader
to use waves successfully—would adversely a↵ect his proﬁts in a similar way.
Discussion.
We conclude that equilibrium behavior in our current, e↵ectively static
model—the informed trader attempts to achieve cross-exchange synchronization of his
trades—would extend to a dynamic setting. In consequence, the insights generated by our
current approach should extend in a similar way. While these conclusions hinge upon fragmentation being suﬃciently severe, it seems to us that reality is better approximated by that
case, for several reasons:
• Trading is quite fragmented today. Between exchanges and alternative trading systems,
20Note that progressively more extreme amounts of fragmentation are required to make this argument
as δ →0, or as we converge to the “Kyle model” of Back and Baruch (2004, Section 1). This suggests that
while fragmentation of this nature might not alter equilibrium behavior in Kyle models materially, it does
so in Glosten-Milgrom models.
21In addition, several unmodeled forces might further increase the relative attractiveness of waves over
intertemporal order splitting, and thereby further intensify this e↵ect. As one example, there might be costs
associated with splitting orders over time, which could originate from discounting, cognitive costs, trading
algorithm usage fees, etc. As another example, the informed trader might also worry about the possibility of
another trader with the same information, in which case prices would move against him more quickly than
the theory predicts. An early wave would then become more attractive.
45

many stocks are traded on over 30 venues in the U.S. alone.
• The e↵ort that has been devoted to improving the synchronization of order arrivals is a
smoking gun suggestive of the desirability of conducting at least some trading in large
waves. One example of such an e↵ort is the smart order router THOR (Aisen et al.
(2015)), whose development by RBC is chronicled by Lewis (2014).
• Finally, there is evidence that traders do in fact use waves in practice. For instance, 15
percent of all orders included in the data set of Malinova and Park (2017) occur in waves.
The authors also point to institutional di↵erences between Canada and the U.S., arguing
that their ﬁndings may understate the pervasiveness of this phenomenon.
In summary, it is true that traders do “work” large orders over time (`a la Kyle (1985)),
and our current approach—while parsimonious and tractable—prevents us from modeling
that behavior. However, both theoretical and empirical evidence suggest that such traders
nevertheless trade in waves, so that the forces modeled in this paper remain relevant.
G.
The Advantage of a Hyperreal Construction of Time
In this appendix, we explain why the results in the main text hinge on the use of hyperreal
numbers to index time. As mentioned earlier, our approach is tantamount to working in the
limit, as N goes to inﬁnity, of a sequence of models in which the unit interval is divided into
N discrete time periods. An advantage of this approach is that the equilibrium is stationary,
and in particular, the bid-ask spread remains constant at least until the ﬁrst trade occurs.
To demonstrate that this stationarity is true only in the limit, Internet Appendix III.G.1
analyzes a version of the model with a ﬁnite number of time periods, demonstrating where
things go awry. Intuitively, only in the limit will the scale of the latency distribution be
inﬁnitely smaller than the scale of the distribution governing investor arrival times.
In
addition to being a reasonably close approximation of modern trading, this is the crucial
feature for delivering a tractable model with a stationary equilibrium. In contrast, when there
are only a ﬁnite number of time periods, the scales of the two aforementioned distributions
necessarily di↵er by only a ﬁnite multiple.
Building on that analysis, Internet Appendix III.G.2 illustrates a sense in which our
baseline model, with a hyperﬁnite number of time periods, truly corresponds to working in
the limit of a sequence of ﬁnite-period models. This, we believe, highlights that our time
construction is neither masking anything suspicious nor introducing anything contrary to
46

the intuitions that would come out of more conventional time constructions. Rather, our
approach merely attempts to formalize those very intuitions in a simple and tractable way.
G.1. The Finite-Period Model
Given a natural number N ≥3, we deﬁne a set TN = {0, 1
N , 2
N ,...,1}. In the baseline
model, time periods are indexed by the hyperﬁnite set T , which can be thought of as the
limit of TN as N diverges. In this appendix we consider the alternative version of the model
in which time periods are indexed by the ﬁnite set TN.
As in the baseline model, suppose that the minimum latency is
1
N while the maximum
latency is
3
N . Moreover, suppose that the investor’s arrival time is drawn from the uniform
distribution on {0, 1
N ,..., N−3
N }.22 Of particular interest may be the simplest version of this
ﬁnite model, which is the case of N = 3. In that special case, the investor always arrives at
t = 0. Orders he sends at t = 0 arrive at either t = 1
3 or t = 1.
To illustrate the challenges that these models would pose, we analyze the special case
in which there are only two exchanges (X = 2), HFTs always obtain the minimum latency
(pH = 1), and research is costless (c(r) ≡0). Similar challenges would arise in more complex
cases.
Suppose that liquidity investors and information investors continue to behave as in the
equilibrium of the baseline model. In particular, each information investor conducts research
with intensity r = 1 and sends orders to both exchanges immediately upon learning the value
of the security.
Likewise, each liquidity investor sends one order to a randomly chosen
exchange immediately upon arrival. Given this behavior, we can derive, for each t ∈TN, the
probability that both (i) no order arrives at either exchange at all times s < t and (ii) an
information investor order arrives at a given exchange (say, Exchange 1) at time t. We
denote this probability P i
N,t. We can also derive the corresponding probability for liquidity
investor orders, which we denote P l
N,t. As the subsequent analysis will make clear, these
probabilities will be the relevant quantities for determining the zero-proﬁt spread.
• For period t =
1
N and focusing on the information investor case, the event in question
occurs if and only if the investor is an information investor (which occurs with probability
λ) who arrives at time zero (which occurs with probability
1
N−2) and who obtains a short
22Under the alternative assumption that the investor’s arrival time is drawn from the uniform distribution
on TN, some of his orders would arrive after the market close. We therefore assume instead that investors
do not arrive in the last three periods of TN, to ensure that none of the investor’s orders are lost in this way.
In the baseline model, we assume that the investor’s arrival time is drawn from the uniform distribution on
the entirety of T , but this is without consequence because orders are lost with only inﬁnitesimal probability.
47

latency draw for his order sent to the given exchange (which occurs with probability pI).
Given the independence of these events, P i
N,t =
λ
N−2pI.
For period t = 1
N and focusing on the liquidity investor case, the event in question occurs
if and only if the investor is a liquidity investor (which occurs with probability 1−λ) who
arrives at time zero (which occurs with probability
1
N−2) who has the given exchange as
his home exchange (which occurs with probability 1
2), and who obtains a short latency
draw for his order (which occurs with probability pI). Thus, P l
N,t =
1−λ
2(N−2)pI.
If N > 3, then these same probabilities apply to period t = 2
N as well. If N = 3, then these
probabilities are both zero for period t = 2
3.
• For periods t ∈{ 3
N , 4
N ,..., N−2
N } and focusing on the information investor case, the event in
question can occur in either of two ways. First, it occurs if the investor is an information
investor (which occurs with probability λ) who arrives at time t −3
N (which occurs with
probability
1
N−2) and who obtains long latency draws for both orders that he sends (which
occurs with probability (1 −pI)2). Second, it occurs if the investor is an information
investor (which occurs with probability λ) who arrives at time t −1
N (which occurs with
probability
1
N−2) and who obtains a short latency draw for his order sent to the given
exchange (which occurs with probability pI). Thus, P i
N,t =
λ
N−2 [(1 −pI)2 + pI].
For periods t ∈{ 3
N , 4
N ,..., N−2
N } and focusing on the liquidity investor case, the event in
question can occur in either of two ways. First, it occurs if the investor is a liquidity
investor (which occurs with probability 1 −λ) who arrives at time t −3
N (which occurs
with probability
1
N−2) who has the given exchange as his home exchange (which occurs
with probability 1
2), and who obtains a long latency draw for his order (which occurs
with probability 1 −pI). Second, it occurs if the investor is a liquidity investor (which
occurs with probability 1 −λ) who arrives at time t −1
N (which occurs with probability
1
N−2) who has the given exchange as his home exchange (which occurs with probability
1
2) and who obtains a short latency draw for his order (which occurs with probability pI).
Thus, P l
N,t =
1−λ
2(N−2)(1 −pI).
• For period t = 1 and focusing on the information investor case, the event in question
occurs if and only if the investor is an information investor (which occurs with probability
λ) who arrives at time N−3
N
(which occurs with probability
1
N−2) and who obtains long
latency draws for both orders that he sends (which occurs with probability (1 −pI)2).
Thus, P i
N,t =
λ
N−2(1 −pI)2.
48

For period t = 1 and focusing on the liquidity investor case, the event in question occurs
if and only if the investor is a liquidity investor (which occurs with probability 1−λ), who
arrives at time N−3
N
(which occurs with probability
1
N−2), who has the given exchange as
his home exchange (which occurs with probability 1
2), and who obtains a long latency
draw for his order (which occurs with probability 1 −pI). Thus, P l
N,t =
1−λ
2(N−2)(1 −pI).
If N > 3, then these same probabilities apply to period t = N−1
N
as well. If N = 3, then, as
above, these probabilities are both zero for period t = 2
3.
For the purposes of this appendix, suppose that when an exchange receives multiple
orders simultaneously, any orders sent by HFTs are processed ﬁrst. (In the baseline model,
such ties between HFTs and investors do not arise with positive probability on path, but
they may occur here.) Suppose also that HFTs continue to behave as in the equilibrium
of the baseline model. In particular, because there are only two exchanges, snipers send
no orders. Given these assumptions and the earlier assumption that pH = 1, when liquidity
providers set their quotes for a time t, they need only consider orders that may arrive from
liquidity investors or information investors at that time t. They need not consider investor
orders that might arrive after time t because they will be able to update their quotes again
after the period, and they need not consider sniper orders because no such orders are sent.
As in equilibrium of the baseline model, liquidity providers cancel their quotes after a
trade takes place. Thus, the relevant spread for time t is the one that prevails conditional
on no trade having taken place in any earlier time period. As in the baseline, this spread,
which we denote sN,t, is pinned down by a zero-proﬁt condition, which in this case is23
sN,t
2 P l
N,t = ￿1 −sN,t
2 ￿P i
N,t.
23To clarify, the probabilities needed to formulate this zero-proﬁt condition are conditional ones: the
probability that an information investor order (or a liquidity investor order) arrives at a given exchange
at time t conditional on no order having arrived at either exchange at all times s < t. But because the
conditioning event is the same in both cases, we can multiply through by its probability, so that P i
N,t and
P l
N,t become the relevant probabilities.
49

For the cases in which N > 3, we therefore have
sN,t =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
4λ
1 + λ
if t ∈{ 1
N , 2
N }
4λ[pI + (1 −pI)2]
1 −λ + 2λ[pI + (1 −pI)2]
if t ∈{ 3
N , 4
N ,..., N−2
N }
4λ(1 −pI)
(1 −λ) + 2λ(1 −pI)
if t ∈{N−1
N ,1}.
For the case in which N = 3, the expression is the same except that s3,2￿3 is undeﬁned.
Crucially, the breakeven spread sN,t is not constant in t, but rather declines over time (as
depicted in Figure IA.3 for the case in which λ = 0.5 and pI = 0.75).
The intuition for why sN,t fails to be constant is most clearly seen in the case of N = 3, in
which case the investor sends orders only at t = 0. Because a liquidity investor sends a single
order, while an information investor sends multiple orders at once, an information investor’s
minimum latency (where the minimum is taken across the orders he sends) is ﬁrst-order
stochastically dominated by a liquidity investor’s latency. Thus, when no order arrives at
either exchange at t = 1
3, that is a signal that the investor is more likely to be liquiditymotivated, which causes the liquidity provider to set a tighter spread at t = 1. However, this
inference depends fundamentally on the liquidity provider’s knowledge that investor orders
are sent precisely at the time t = 0. In practice, traders would not possess such knowledge and
would therefore be unable to make such inferences. Removing the ability of traders to make
these unrealistic inferences is exactly what is accomplished in the model by increasing N.
In summary, we have illustrated that when time periods are indexed by the ﬁnite set
TN, the spread sN,t will no longer be constant in t. We therefore lose the tractability of
a stationary equilibrium.
This is true even in the simple parametrization of the model
considered above (with X = 2, pH = 1, and c(r) ≡0). Further complications and challenges
arise outside of that special case.
G.2. Convergence
As N diverges, sN,t converges to a constant—namely, to the equilibrium spread of the
baseline model, s∗
LOB—in the pointwise almost everywhere sense depicted in Figure IA.3. At
its core, what increasing N does is to make the scale of the latency distribution progressively
smaller relative to the scale of the distribution governing investor arrival times. Because
latencies are incredibly small in practice—on the order of microseconds—very large values of
N are most realistic. At these large values, sN,t is very nearly constant, so that the challenges
50

stemming from its failure to be perfectly constant would seem to be merely a sideshow that
distracts from the economic forces on which we are trying to focus.
To sidestep these
distractions, our approach is to work directly in the limit, where the spread is perfectly
constant and these challenges do not arise.
G.3. Alternative Trading Mechanisms
This analysis above focuses on one diﬃculty that would arise without a hyperreal construction of time. However, a second diﬃculty is that alternatives to the hyperreal construction do not lend themselves as easily to clean formalizations of the alternative trading mechanisms that we consider. The hyperreal numbers contain inﬁnitesimals that are inﬁnitely
larger than " (e.g., √"). And in modeling NDs and FBAs, we leverage the existence of such
quantities to deliver a clean analysis. Under alternative modeling approaches, analogues
of these quantities would be unavailable. We would then be forced to deal with inelegant
distractions similar to those highlighted by the analysis above, in Internet Appendix III.G.1.
H.
Extension: Large Liquidity Investors
In the baseline model, each liquidity investor seeks to trade just a single share, and
each attempts to do so by trading on only a single exchange, his “home exchange.” In this
appendix, we consider a version of the model in which liquidity investors are heterogeneous in
the number of shares that they seek to trade and in which larger liquidity investors split their
orders across exchanges. We characterize the limit order book equilibrium in this setting,
and we argue that the equilibrium is qualitatively similar to the equilibrium that we derive in
our baseline analysis. In particular, both passive-side and aggressive-side order anticipation
remain features of that equilibrium.
We enrich the model by supposing that the investor may be one of three types (whereas
only two types were possible in the baseline model):
• An information investor, with probability λ. This type is identical to what we referred
to in the baseline model as the information investor type.
• A small liquidity investor, with probability (1 −λ)↵. This type is identical to what we
referred to in the baseline model as the liquidity investor type. In particular, the investor
would have a liquidity demand that is satisﬁed by trading a single share. The investor
would have a single “home exchange” that is chosen uniformly at random from the set
of exchanges, and would be restricted to sending orders only to that exchange.
51

Panel A. N = 3
Panel B. N = 9
Panel C. N = 27
Panel D. N = 81
Figure IA.3.
Breakeven spreads for ﬁnite time periods.
The ﬁgure plots the
breakeven spread sN,t, which is deﬁned in the text, over times t ∈TN for di↵erent ﬁnite
values of N for the special case in which X = 2, pH = 1, c(r) ≡0, λ = 0.5, and pI = 0.75.
52

• A large liquidity investor, with probability (1 −λ)(1 −↵). This type is identical to what
we referred to in the baseline model as the liquidity investor type, but with the following
exceptions. The investor would have a liquidity demand that is satisﬁed by trading two
shares. The investor would have two “home exchanges” that are drawn uniformly at
random (without replacement) from the set of exchanges, and would be restricted to
sending orders only to those exchanges.
To make our analysis of this extension tractable, we assume the following parametric
restrictions. Research is costless (i.e., c(r) ≡0), HFTs always obtain the lowest latency
(i.e., pH = 1), and there are at least three exchanges (i.e., X ≥3). The exact nature of the
equilibrium depends on the parameters and falls into one of two cases.
H.1. Case A
In the ﬁrst case, ↵is close to one, so that the model is close to a special case of the
baseline model. As might then be expected, the equilibrium resembles the equilibrium of the
baseline model. In particular, snipers initiate aggressive-side order anticipation after two or
more trades take place. In terms of the yet-to-be-speciﬁed quantities (s∗
A,1,s∗
A,2), we conjecture that (and subsequently check whether) the following proﬁle of strategies constitutes an
equilibrium. As will become clear, s∗
A,1 should be interpreted as the initial spread, and s∗
A,2
should be interpreted as the “updated spread” that arises in the event that only one trade
takes place in the period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs.
• Investor. If he is a small liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive, then he sends
to his home exchange an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) one share at the price
β (−β).
If he is a large liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive, then he sends to each
of his two home exchanges an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) one share at the
price β (−β).
If he is an information investor, then he conducts research with intensity r = 1. If he
learns that the value of the security is v = 1 (v = −1), he sends to each exchange an
immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) one share at the price 1 (−1).
• Liquidity providers. One liquidity provider is active on the equilibrium path (“the liquidity provider”). At time t = 0, she sends to each exchange a post-only order to buy one
share at the bid −s∗
A,1￿2 and another to sell one share at the ask s∗
A,1￿2. If at any time t a
53

trade occurs at the ask (bid) at exactly one exchange, then she sends replacement orders
for all of her remaining orders to sell (buy) at the price s∗
A,2￿2 (−s∗
A,2￿2), and she sends
cancellations for all of her orders to buy (sell). If by any time t two or more trades have
occurred, then she sends cancellations for all of her remaining orders.
A second liquidity provider who is inactive on path but may be active o↵path is referred
to as “the enforcer.” If at some time t ≥3" prior to which no trade has occurred the LOB
at some exchange consists of anything other than a post-only order to buy one share
at the bid −s∗
A,1￿2 and another to sell one share at the ask s∗
A,1￿2, then she sends such
orders to that exchange, doing so in that same period. And if at some time t ≥3" for
which at time t −" a trade occurred at the ask (bid) at exactly one exchange, the LOB
at some exchange consists of anything other than a post-only order to sell (buy) at the
price s∗
A,2￿2 (−s∗
A,2￿2), then she sends such orders to that exchange.
The remaining liquidity providers remain completely inactive both on and o↵path.
• Snipers. If, by any time t, trades have occurred at the ask (bid) at two or more exchanges,
then each sniper sends to all other exchanges an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell)
one share at the price 1 (−1), doing so in that same period.
Crucially,
given these conjectured equilibrium strategies,
both passive-side and
aggressive-side order anticipation occur in this alternative model. In what follows, we derive
expressions for the quantities (s∗
A,1,s∗
A,2), and we derive restrictions on the parameters—
which we express as a lower bound on ↵—under which the conjectured strategies do indeed
constitute an equilibrium.
We begin by using Bayes’ rule to derive the beliefs that HFTs must possess if the above
conjecture about strategies constitutes a WPBE. In particular, we compute their expectation
of the value of the security in the time period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs. We deﬁne Vn
as the expectation of the value of the security, under HFT beliefs in the time period in which
the ﬁrst trade occurs, conditional on a trade occurring at the ask at exactly n exchanges in
that period. Under these conjectured strategies, Bayes’ rule implies that HFTs must have
the following beliefs:
54

Vn =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
λXpI(1 −pI)X−1
λXpI(1 −pI)X−1 + (1 −λ)↵+ (1 −λ)(1 −↵)2pI(1 −pI)
if n = 1
λ X(X−1)
2
p2
I(1 −pI)X−2
λ X(X−1)
2
p2
I(1 −pI)X−2 + (1 −λ)(1 −↵)p2
I
if n = 2
1
if n ≥3.
(IA17)
Given that the asset value distribution is symmetric about zero, it follows that for the case
of trades at the bid, beliefs are the negative of the aforementioned.
The next step is to derive the zero-proﬁt condition that will pin down the initial spread
s∗
A,1. That condition can be built up from the following three cases:
• First, suppose the investor is a small liquidity investor. Then the investor always completes exactly one trade at the initial quotes. Snipers initiate no additional trades.
• Second, suppose the investor is a large liquidity investor. Then the investor completes
two trades at the initial quotes with probability p2
I + (1 −pI)2 and completes one trade
at the initial quotes with probability 2pI(1 −pI). He therefore completes 2pI + 2(1 −pI)2
such trades in expectation. Snipers initiate trades only in the event that the investor
completes two trades, in which case they complete an additional X −2 trades at the
initial quotes. They therefore complete (X −2)(p2
I +(1−pI)2) such trades in expectation.
• Third, suppose the investor is an information investor. Then just as in the baseline model,
the investor completes XpI +X(1−pI)X trades at the initial quotes in expectation. And
just as in the baseline model, snipers complete an additional X(1 −pI) −X(1 −pI)X −
(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1 such trades in expectation.
Thus, the zero-proﬁt condition for the initial spread s∗
A,1 is
(1 −λ)↵
s∗
A,1
2
+ (1 −λ)(1 −↵)￿2pI + 2(1 −pI)2 + (X −2)(p2
I + (1 −pI)2)￿
s∗
A,1
2
= λ￿X −(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1￿￿1 −
s∗
A,1
2 ￿.
Solving that for the spread, we obtain
s∗
A,1 =
2X ￿λ−(X−1)λpI(1−pI)X−1￿
(X−1)↵λ−2 ((X−1)↵−((X−1)↵−X+1)λ−X+1)p2
I−(X−1)↵−￿(X2−X)λ(1−pI)X−1−2 (X−1)↵+2 ((X−1)↵−X+1)λ+2 X−2￿pI+X .
55

In addition, optimality of the sniper strategy—in particular, optimality of the response
to the situation in which exactly two trades occur in the time period in which the ﬁrst trades
take place—requires that
s∗
A,1
2
≤V2. Plugging in and rearranging, we obtain a lower bound
on the fraction of small liquidity investors, ↵≥¯↵, where
¯↵=
2 (X−1)2p4
I ￿1−pI ￿X−2+2 ￿2 (X−1)￿1−pI ￿X−1−(X−1)2￿1−pI ￿X−2￿p3
I −￿4 (X−1)￿1−pI ￿X−1−￿X2−X￿￿1−pI ￿X−2+4￿p2
I +2 ￿(X−1)￿1−pI ￿X−1+2￿pI −2
2 (X−1)2p4
I ￿1−pI ￿X−2+2 ￿2 (X−1)￿1−pI ￿X−1−(X−1)2￿1−pI ￿X−2￿p3
I −￿4 (X−1)￿1−pI ￿X−1−(X−1)2￿1−pI ￿X−2+4￿p2
I +2 ￿(X−1)￿1−pI ￿X−1+2￿pI −2 .
(IA18)
It only remains to derive the “updated spread” s∗
A,2, which arises in the event that only
one trade takes place in the period in which the ﬁrst trade occurs. To build up the zero-proﬁt
condition that pins it down, we again consider three cases:
• First, suppose the investor is a small liquidity investor. In that case, he will not trade
against the updated quotes.
• Second, suppose the investor is a large liquidity investor. In that case, he will trade one
share against the updated quotes in the event that he traded exactly one share against
the initial quotes. From above, this event occurs with probability 2pI(1 −pI).
• Third, suppose the investor is an information investor. In that case, he will trade X −1
shares against the updated quotes in the event that he traded exactly one share against
the initial quotes. This event occurs with probability XpI(1 −pI)X−1.
And in all cases, snipers will not trade against the updated quotes. Thus, the zero-proﬁt
condition for the updated spread s∗
A,2 is
(1 −λ)(1 −↵)2pI(1 −pI)
s∗
A,2
2
= λXpI(1 −pI)X−1(X −1)￿1 −
s∗
A,2
2 ￿.
Solving for the spread yields
s∗
A,2 =
2(X2 −X)λ(1 −pI)X−1
(X2 −X)λ(1 −pI)X−1 + 2(↵−1)λ −2((↵−1)λ −↵+ 1)pI −2↵+ 2
.
(IA19)
H.2. Case B
In the second case, ↵is further from one, and the equilibrium is somewhat di↵erent
from above.
In particular, snipers wait for a stronger signal of informed trading before
initiating aggressive-side order anticipation—they now wait until after three or more trades
take place. In terms of the yet-to-be-speciﬁed quantities (s∗
B,1,s∗
B,2), we conjecture that (and
56

subsequently check whether) the following proﬁle of strategies constitutes an equilibrium.
As before, s∗
B,1should be interpreted as the initial spread, and s∗
B,2 should be interpreted as
the “updated spread” that arises in the event that only one trade takes place in the period
in which the ﬁrst trade occurs.
The strategies for the investor and the liquidity providers are identical to those in Case A.
However, those for snipers di↵er:
• Snipers.
If, by any time t, trades have occurred at the ask (bid) at three or more
exchanges, then each sniper sends to all other exchanges an immediate-or-cancel order
to buy (sell) one share at the price 1 (−1), doing so in that same period.
Crucially,
given these conjectured equilibrium strategies,
both passive-side and
aggressive-side order anticipation occur in this alternative model.
There may be less
aggressive-side order anticipation than in our baseline analysis because snipers now require
stronger signals to react, but some amount of order anticipation would nevertheless continue
to take place (at least when there are four or more exchanges). In what follows, we derive expressions for the quantities (s∗
B,1,s∗
B,2), and we derive restrictions on the parameters—which
we express as an upper bound on ↵—under which the conjectured strategies constitute an
equilibrium.
The beliefs of HFTs are identical to those speciﬁed by equation (IA17) in Case A. The
next step is to derive the zero-proﬁt condition that pins down the initial spread s∗
B,1. That
condition can be built up from the following three cases:
• First, suppose the investor is a small liquidity investor. Then the investor always completes exactly one trade at the initial quotes. Snipers initiate no additional trades.
• Second, suppose the investor is a large liquidity investor. Then the investor completes
two trades at the initial quotes with probability p2
I + (1 −pI)2 and completes one trade
at the initial quotes with probability 2pI(1 −pI). He therefore completes 2pI + 2(1 −pI)2
such trades in expectation. Snipers initiate no additional trades.
• Third, suppose the investor is an information investor. Then just as in the baseline model,
the investor completes XpI +X(1−pI)X trades at the initial quotes in expectation. And
snipers complete an additional X −XpI −X(1 −pI)X −(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1 −(X −
2)X(X−1)
2
p2
I(1 −pI)X−2 such trades in expectation.
57

Thus, the zero-proﬁt condition for the initial spread s∗
B,1 is
(1 −λ)↵
s∗
B,1
2
+ (1 −λ)(1 −↵)￿2pI + 2(1 −pI)2￿
s∗
B,1
2
= λ￿X −(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1 −(X −2)X(X −1)
2
p2
I(1 −pI)X−2￿￿1 −
s∗
B,1
2 ￿.
Solving the equation above for the spread, we obtain
s∗
B,1 =
2 ￿￿X3−3 X2+2 X￿λp2
I(1−pI)X−2+2 ￿X2−X￿λpI(1−pI)X−1−2 Xλ￿
￿(X3−3 X2+2 X)λ(1−pI)X−2−4 (↵−1)λ+4 ↵−4￿p2
I−2 (X+↵−2)λ+2 ￿(X2−X)λ(1−pI)X−1+2 (↵−1)λ−2 ↵+2￿pI+2 ↵−4.
In addition, optimality of sniper strategy—in particular, optimality of their response to
the situation in which exactly two trades occur in the time period in which the ﬁrst trades
take place—requires that
s∗
B,1
2
≥V2. Plugging in and rearranging, we obtain an upper bound
on the fraction of small liquidity investors, ↵≤¯↵, where ¯↵is as deﬁned in (IA18). Recall
that in Case A, the necessary parametric restriction was just the opposite, that is, ↵≥¯↵.
Thus, for any set of parameter values, either the Case A strategies or the Case B strategies
constitute a WPBE.
It remains to derive the updated spread s∗
B,2. Given that snipers do not trade against
these updated quotes and that strategies for the remaining traders are identical to those of
Case A, the zero-proﬁt condition for the updated spread is as above, that is,
(1 −λ)(1 −↵)2pI(1 −pI)
s∗
B,2
2
= λXpI(1 −pI)X−1(X −1)￿1 −
s∗
B,2
2 ￿.
Therefore, s∗
B,2 = s∗
A,2, as deﬁned in equation (IA19).
I.
Extension: Risk-Averse Information Investor
In this appendix we study equilibrium behavior in the case of a risk-averse information
investor. Relative to our baseline analysis, the primary di↵erence is that such an investor,
conditional on learning the security value, may send orders to a strict subset of the exchanges
(in fact, he may randomize over the cardinality of that set). This is in contrast to the baseline
of risk neutrality in which information investors send orders to all X exchanges. Aside from
this, however, the LOB equilibrium remains similar to our baseline analysis (as described
in Section III of the main article), and most of its qualitative features remain intact. In
particular, aggressive-side and passive-side order anticipation continue to occur on path.
58

Finally, numerical experimentation suggests that the main comparative static continues to
hold: when pH increases, so that HFTs become faster, the spread weakly decreases.
I.1. Model and Equilibrium
For the purposes of this appendix, we modify our setting as follows. Let u be the utility
function of information investors. In contrast to our baseline analysis, we do not assume that
u is linear. Another modiﬁcation is that we allow for the possibility that successful research
results in obtaining only an imperfect signal of the value of the security. Let the security
value be v = ˜v + ". As before, if an information investor conducts research with intensity
r, then he learns ˜v ∼unif{−1,1} with probability r and learns no information otherwise.
However, he does not learn ". This additional price risk has no e↵ect under risk neutrality,
but it may become relevant under risk aversion, which is why we allow for it here. Whereas
we allow shares to be divisible in our baseline analysis, we require them to be indivisible for
the purposes of this appendix. This simpliﬁes some of the derivations without signiﬁcantly
altering the qualitative insights that come out of this analysis.
Let ∆denote the set of probability distributions over {0,1,2,...,X}. A typical element
of ∆will be denoted ⇠= (⇠0,⇠1,⇠2,...,⇠X). In terms of the yet-to-be-speciﬁed quantities
(s∗,r∗,⇠∗)—where s∗∈[0,∞), r∗∈[0,1], and ⇠∗∈∆—we conjecture that (and subsequently
check whether) the following proﬁle of strategies constitutes an equilibrium.
• Investor. If he is a liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive, then he sends to his
home exchange an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) one share at the price β (−β).
If he is an information investor, then he conducts research with intensity r∗. If he learns
that the value of the security is ˜v = 1 (˜v = −1), then he draws a number y ∈{0,1,2,...,X}
from the distribution ⇠∗. Given this realization, he chooses y exchanges uniformly at
random and sends to each of them an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) one share
at the price 1 (−1). He sends no orders if he does not learn ˜v.
• Liquidity providers. One liquidity provider is active on the equilibrium path (“the liquidity provider”). At time t = 0, she sends to each exchange a post-only order to buy one
share at the bid −s∗￿2 and another to sell one share at the ask s∗￿2. If at any time t one
or more trades occur, then she sends cancellation orders for all of her remaining orders,
doing so in that same period.
A second liquidity provider who is inactive on path but may be active o↵path is referred
59

to as “the enforcer.” If at some time t ≥3" prior to which no trade has occurred the LOB
at some exchange consists of anything other than a post-only order to buy one share at
−s∗￿2 and a post-only order to sell one share at s∗￿2, then she sends such orders to that
exchange, doing so in that same period.
The remaining liquidity providers remain completely inactive both on and o↵path.
• Snipers. If, at any time t, trades occur at the ask (bid) at two or more exchanges, then
each sniper sends to all other exchanges an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) one
share at the price 1 (−1), doing so in that same period.
Just as in the baseline of risk neutrality, two conditions must be satisﬁed for the above
to constitute an equilibrium: (i) information investor optimization and (ii) a zero-proﬁt
condition for spread. Below, we characterize what is entailed by these two conditions. Relative to the baseline, the primary di↵erence is that an information investor’s choice of the
number of exchanges to target now becomes nontrivial. Under risk neutrality as in the baseline model, it is optimal to target all exchanges—in terms of the above notation, to choose
⇠∗= (0,0,0,...,1). But under risk aversion, this may no longer be optimal.
To proceed, we begin by deﬁning py(f) as the probability that an investor who sends y
orders receives f ﬁlls, given the aforementioned behavior of the other traders. In the case of
y > 1, py(f) is as follows:
py(f) =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
ypI(1 −pI)y−1py−1
H
if f = 1
￿y
f￿pf
I(1 −pI)y−f + ypI(1 −pI)y−1￿y−1
f−1￿(1 −pH)f−1py−f
H
if f < y
(1 −pI)y + py
I + ypI(1 −pI)y−1(1 −pH)y−1
if f = y
0
otherwise.
In the trivial cases, we have p0(0) = p1(1) = 1.
The ﬁrst requirement for equilibrium derives from a zero-proﬁt condition that the spread
s∗must satisfy. The implied restriction takes essentially the same form as in the baseline
model, although it is not precisely identical unless ⇠∗= (0,0,0,...,1):
X
￿
y=0
⇠∗
y
￿￿￿￿￿￿
(1 −λ)s∗
2 −λr∗￿˜XS(y) + ˜XI(y)￿￿1 −s∗
2 ￿
￿￿￿￿￿￿
= 0,
(IA20)
60

where
˜XI(y) =
y
￿
f=0
fpy(f)
˜XL(y) =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
X −1
if y = 1
ypI(1 −pI)y−1 ￿pH(X −1) + py−1
H (1 −pH)(X −y)￿
otherwise
˜XS(y) =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
0
if y = 0
X −˜XI(y) −˜XL(y)
otherwise.
Echoing the notation used in the baseline analysis, ˜XI(y) and ˜XS(y) represent the expected number of trades made by an information investor and snipers, respectively, conditional on an information investor sending orders to y exchanges. In addition, we use ˜XL(y)
for the expected number of cancellations made by the liquidity provider conditional on an
an information investor sending orders to y exchanges. The intuition for the expressions for
these three quantities is as follows:
• From the deﬁnition of py(f), it follows that ˜XI(y) = ∑
y
f=0 fpy(f).
• Given the strategy proﬁle delineated above, it follows that ˜XL(1) = X −1. In all other
cases, the liquidity provider is successful in cancelling orders only in the event that exactly
one of the information investor’s y orders receives a short latency draw, which occurs with
probability ypI(1 −pI)y−1. Conditional on this event, the liquidity provider is successful
in cancelling at one of the remaining X −1 exchanges if she obtains a short latency draw
for the cancellation order sent there, resulting in pH(X −1) cancellations in expectation.
Finally, py−1
H (1−pH)(X−y) is a correction term to account for the fact that if the liquidity
provider obtains short latency draws for all of the remaining y −1 exchanges targeted
by the information investor, then she also successfully cancels at all of the X −y other
exchanges (even those for which she obtains high latency draws).
• Given the strategy proﬁle delineated above, it follows that ˜XS(0) = 0 and that for y > 0,
˜XI(y) + ˜XL(y) + ˜XS(y) = X.
The second requirement for equilibrium is that the information investor optimally chooses
r and ⇠, taking the spread s∗as given, that is,
(r∗,⇠∗) ∈arg max
r∈[0,1],⇠∈∆
E
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
r
X
￿
y=0
⇠y
y
￿
f=0
py(f)u￿f ￿1 + " −s∗
2 ￿−c(r)￿+ (1 −r)u(−c(r))
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
,
(IA21)
61

where the expectation is taken over ". Given the above, the aforementioned strategy proﬁle
constitutes an equilibrium if the tuple (r∗,⇠∗,s∗) is a solution to the system (IA20) and
(IA21).
I.2. Numerical Example
For the purposes of what follows, we assume that research is costless, i.e., that c(r) ≡0.
Note that the objective (IA21) then becomes linear in r. Moreover, it evaluates to u(0) not
only for a choice of r = 0 but also for a choice of ⇠= (1,0,0,...,0). For these reasons, it is
essentially without loss to focus on solutions in which r∗= 1, in which case (IA21) reduces
to
⇠∗∈arg max
⇠∈∆
E
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
X
￿
y=0
⇠y
y
￿
f=0
py(f)u￿f ￿1 + " −s∗
2 ￿￿
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
.
(IA22)
In what follows, we describe a procedure that allows one to solve for an equilibrium that is
pure (in the sense that ⇠∗is degenerate) if one exists. We then illustrate with a parametrized
example. Further below, we describe a procedure that allows one to solve for an equilibrium
in mixed strategies (in the sense that ⇠∗is nondegenerate) when a pure equilibrium fails to
exist, and we illustrate with the same parametrized example.
Pure strategy equilibria.
We begin by searching for pure strategy equilibria. In these equilibria, the information investor chooses a degenerate distribution ⇠∗, which puts all weight
on a single y∗∈{0,1,2,...,X}. In that case, the problem of ﬁnding an equilibrium reduces
to ﬁnding a pair (y∗,s∗), where s∗is derived from y∗through (IA20) and where y∗is a ﬁxed
point of the equation obtained by plugging (IA20) into (IA22):
y∗∈
arg max
y∈{0,1,2,...,X}
E
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
y
￿
f=0
py(f)u￿f ￿
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr∗( ˜XI(y∗) + ˜XS(y∗))
+ "￿￿
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
.
(IA23)
The objective of this maximization can be interpreted as an information investor’s expected
utility derived by deviating to a choice of y from a putative equilibrium involving a choice
of y∗. The desired ﬁxed points of (IA23) can be derived using a guess-and-verify approach.
Next, we illustrate this guess-and-verify approach in Figure IA.4, under the following
parametric assumptions: (i) u(w) = −exp(−γw), so that γ represents the coeﬃcient of
absolute risk aversion, (ii) " ∼N(0,1), (iii) λ = 0.3, (iv) X = 3, (v) pH = 1, and (vi) pI = 0.5.
But to illustrate the e↵ects of risk aversion, we leave γ unrestricted. The objective in (IA23)
62

now reduces to
Uγ(y ￿y∗) =
y
￿
f=0
py(f)￿−exp￿
−0.7γf
0.7 + 0.3( ˜XI(y∗) + ˜XS(y∗))
+ γ2
2 f 2￿￿.
(IA24)
In terms of this notation, (IA23) can be written as y∗∈arg maxy Uγ(y ￿y∗). The four panels
of Figure IA.4 correspond to di↵erent guesses of y∗. For example, Panel C is based on the
guess y∗= 2. In that panel, when γ = 0.5, utility is highest when y = 2, which establishes
that we do indeed have an equilibrium with y∗= 2 when γ = 0.5. The ﬁgure also reveals
that, in this case, y∗depends on γ as follows:
y∗=
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
3
if γ ∈(0,0.235]
2
if γ ∈[0.249,0.359]
1
if γ ∈[0.467,1.400]
0
if γ ∈[2.000,∞).
(IA25)
This approach does not always isolate an equilibrium in pure strategies, as is illustrated by
the fact that the domain of γ in equation (IA25) does not span all of R+. For the remaining
values of γ, it is nevertheless possible to construct a mixed strategy equilibrium using the
method that we describe next.
Mixed strategy equilibria.
For convenience, we deﬁne V (y ￿s∗) to be the objective of (IA22)
for the case in which ⇠is a degenerate distribution that puts all its weight on y:
V (y ￿s∗) = E
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
y
￿
f=0
py(f)u￿f ￿1 + " −s∗
2 ￿￿
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
.
(IA26)
In words, V provides the expected utility of an information investor from a choice of y
given a postulated equilibrium spread s∗. It will also be convenient to deﬁne ⇡(y,s) as the
proﬁts from providing liquidity at spread s when an information investor sends orders to y
exchanges:
⇡(y,s) = ￿1 −λ￿s
2 −λ￿˜XS(y) + ˜XI(y)￿￿1 −s
2￿.
The following guess-and-verify approach can be used to search for equilibria:
1. For a candidate value y ∈{0,1,2,...,X −1}, compute s∗to solve V (y ￿s) = V (y+1 ￿s),
provided that such a solution exists.
63

Panel A. Guess: y∗= 0
Panel B. Guess: y∗= 1
Panel C. Guess: y∗= 2
Panel D. Guess: y∗= 3
Figure IA.4. Expected Utility of an Information Investor. The ﬁgure illustrates the
guess-and-verify approach for deriving pure equilibria that is described in the text under the
parametric assumptions described in the text. The panels correspond to di↵erent guesses
y∗∈{0,1,2,3}. Within each panel, the lines depict, against the degree of risk aversion γ, the
expected utility Uγ(y ￿y∗), as deﬁned in equation (IA24), of an information investor for the
di↵erent choices of y: (i) y = 0 (solid line), (ii) y = 1 (dashed line), (iii) y = 2 (dotted line),
and (iv) y = 3 (dash-dotted line).
64

2. Deﬁne ⇠∗as the probability distribution with support {y,y + 1} in which ⇠∗
y+1 =
⇡(y,s∗)
⇡(y,s∗)−⇡(y+1,s∗) and ⇠∗
y = 1 −⇠∗
y+1, provided that it is a well-deﬁned probability distribution.
3. Verify that V (y′ ￿s∗) ≤V (y ￿s∗) for all y′ ∈{0,1,2,...,X}. If veriﬁcation succeeds,
then (⇠∗,s∗) corresponds to a mixed strategy equilibrium.
To illustrate,
recall the parametric assumptions considered earlier:
(i) u(w)
=
−exp(−γw), (ii) " ∼N(0,1), (iii) λ = 0.3, (iv) X = 3, (v) pH = 1, and (vi) pI = 0.5. As
evidenced by equation (IA25), our approach does not isolate an equilibrium in pure strategies for γ = 1.5, which lies between the values of γ for which y∗= 0 and y∗= 1.24 Nevertheless,
it is possible to derive an equilibrium in this case by allowing the information investor to
mix over these two adjacent choices for y. Following the guess-and-verify approach described
above, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the spread s∗that makes an information investor indi↵erent between y = 0
and y = 1. The result is s∗= 0.5. We next ﬁnd the probability distribution ⇠∗with support
{0,1} under which the zero-proﬁt spread is s∗. The result is ⇠∗= (0.22,0.78,0,0). It then
only remains to verify that the information investor cannot proﬁtably deviate to choices
y ∈{2,3}, which is easily checked. We use Y ∗to represent the random variable whose distribution is given by ⇠∗. Thus, E[Y ∗] = ∑X
y=0 ⇠∗
yy is the expected number of orders sent by
an information investor, and in this case we have E[Y ∗] = 0.78.
This guess-and-verify approach can similarly be used to identify a mixed strategy equilibrium for the other values of γ that are outside the domain of (IA25). Figure IA.5 illustrates
the result: Panel A plots s∗against γ, and Panel B plots E[Y ∗] against γ. The “ﬂat” parts
of the two panels correspond to the pure strategy equilibria characterized above, and in the
case of Panel B, they align with (IA25). The “sloped” parts of the panels correspond to
mixed strategy equilibria that are computed using the approach described just above.
Comparative static.
Next, we investigate how the equilibrium spread s∗changes as HFT
speed improves (i.e., as pH increases). One of the main results that we are able to prove in
the baseline of risk neutrality is that s∗is weakly decreasing in pH. Although we do not prove
that this result is robust to the inclusion of risk aversion, numerical experimentation suggests
that it may be. To illustrate, we use the approaches outlined in this subsection to compute
equilibria (sometimes in pure strategies and sometimes in mixed strategies) for a selection of
24Indeed, for a guess of y∗= 0, the information investor has a proﬁtable deviation to y = 1 because, using
(IA24), U1.5(0 ￿0) = −1 < −0.69 = U1.5(1 ￿0). And for a guess of y∗= 1, the information investor has a
proﬁtable deviation to y = 0 because U1.5(0 ￿1) = −1 > −1.08 = U1.5(1 ￿1).
65

Panel A. Equilibrium Spread
Panel B. Expected Number of Targeted Exchanges
Figure IA.5.
How equilibrium quantities depend on risk aversion.
The ﬁgure
plots s∗and E[Y ∗] for di↵erent values of γ under the parametric assumptions described in
the text. Each point corresponds to an equilibrium (in either pure or mixed strategies) as
determined by the approach described in the text.
parameters. The results are depicted in Figure IA.6, with Panel A plotting s∗against pH for
a selection of choices for the risk-aversion parameter γ and with all remaining parameters
ﬁxed as in the numerical example analyzed above. Indeed, s∗is weakly decreasing in pH
for all choices of γ. In addition, Figure IA.6 Panel B contains an analogous plot of E[Y ∗],
and in so doing it characterizes the information investor routing behavior that is behind the
scenes in Panel A.
In conclusion, this appendix illustrates how equilibrium would change in the presence
of risk aversion. Speciﬁcally, when the information investor is risk averse, equilibrium loses
the feature that he always targets all exchanges—in terms of the above notation, choosing
⇠∗= (0,0,0,...,1). Nevertheless, equilibrium remains qualitatively similar to the baseline of
risk neutrality in the key respect that aggressive-side order anticipation may still take place.
Furthermore, it appears that the equilibrium spread remains weakly decreasing in pH.
J.
Equilibrium Uniqueness
Recall that the equilibrium in Section III.A of the main article is not unique. In this
appendix, we propose a reﬁnement that we call “plausible equilibrium.” The equilibrium
described in Section III.A is plausible. Although it is not the unique plausible equilibrium,
66

Panel A. Equilibrium Spread
Panel B. Expected Number of Targeted Exchanges
Figure IA.6. How equilibrium quantities depend on HFT speed. The ﬁgure plots
s∗and E[Y ∗] for di↵erent values of γ and pH under the parametric assumptions described
in the text. Each point corresponds to an equilibrium (in either pure or mixed strategies)
as determined by the approach described in the text.
we go on to argue that every plausible equilibrium is identical to it in terms of the spread
and research intensity (s∗
LOB,r∗
LOB), as characterized by Proposition 1.25
To illustrate what plausible equilibrium rules out, consider two of the several alternative
equilibria. First, there is an equilibrium in which no orders are ever submitted: because
any trade requires two parties, no individual trader would have a unilateral incentive to
deviate. Second, there is an equilibrium in which the liquidity provider establishes a spread
wider than s∗
LOB (from which she earns positive proﬁts), and if ever undercut then responds
by immediately shifting to a spread of s∗
LOB thereafter. Other liquidity providers do not
undercut, and indeed they would not obtain positive proﬁts from doing so because they
would own the best quotes for only an inﬁnitesimal length of time. Both of these equilibria
will fail to be plausible. Respectively, they will be ruled out by criteria that we refer to as
“straightforward liquidity taking” and “competitive liquidity provision” below.
DEFINITION 1: A WPBE is plausible if it satisﬁes (i) symmetry, (ii) stationarity, (iii) competitive liquidity provision, (iv) no unnecessary depth, and (v) straightforward liquidity taking
(where these properties are deﬁned below).
We deﬁne symmetry to mean that the equilibrium is symmetric with respect to exchanges.
25Analogous statements could be made for the equilibrium selections corresponding to NDs and FBAs.
67

The model is symmetric in this way, and therefore it would seem that the focal equilibria
should be symmetric as well.
Referring to the property that certain aspects of equilibrium behavior do not depend on
calendar time, we formally deﬁne stationarity to mean the following two properties:
• Liquidity providers establish quotes at time zero and send no further orders unless another
order has been processed by an exchange.
• The investor, if he is an information investor, conducts research with a ﬁxed intensity r
regardless of the time period in which he arrives.
We deﬁne competitive liquidity provision to mean that liquidity providers set quotes such
that an ex-ante zero-proﬁt condition holds order by order. Essentially the same assumption
governs how quotes are priced in much of the rest of the rest of the literature (Glosten and
Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985), Glosten (1994)).
Referring to the property that liquidity providers quote only the minimal amount of
depth required to satisfy liquidity investor demand, we formally deﬁne no unnecessary depth
to mean the following two properties:
• Every initial quote established by a liquidity provider is accessed by a liquidity investor
with positive probability on the equilibrium path.
• Liquidity providers, if at some point they believe that no future orders will originate from
information investors, send cancellation orders for their remaining quotes.
Essentially, this criterion means that the presence of liquidity investors is necessary to induce
liquidity providers to post quotes, which is consistent with the no-trade theorem logic of
Milgrom and Stokey (1982).
Referring to the property that investors and snipers submit immediate-or-cancel orders
only in accordance with their expected value for the security given their beliefs, we formally
deﬁne straightforward liquidity taking to mean the following three properties:
• The investor, if he is a liquidity investor with a buying (selling) motive, submits to his
home exchange an immediate-or-cancel order to buy (sell) a single share at a price β
(−β), doing so in the period of arrival. Note that any other trading strategy would be
weakly dominated for this trader type.
• The investor, if he is an information investor who learns that the value of the security is
1 (−1), submits immediate-or-cancel orders to buy (sell) at least one share at the price 1
68

(−1) to at least one exchange, doing so in the period of arrival. If he does not learn the
value, then he does not send any orders.
• Each sniper, if and only if the expected value of the security given his beliefs is greater
(less than) the ask (bid) at an exchange, submits immediate-or-cancel orders to buy (sell)
at least one share to that exchange, where the price speciﬁed by the order is the expected
value of the security given his beliefs.
PROPOSITION 1: A WPBE is plausible if and only if it gives rise to a spread and research
intensity as characterized by Proposition 1.
Proof : Consider a WPBE and suppose that it is plausible.
Let r∗denote the research
intensity of information investors. (By stationarity, r∗is well deﬁned.) Let T1 denote the
time period in which the ﬁrst immediate-or-cancel order arrives at an exchange (if such an
order arrives). Let s∗denote the initial spread set by liquidity providers. By stationarity,
this spread is maintained until T1, and by symmetry, it is the same for all exchanges. Most
of the following arguments focus on the ask side of the LOB, but the bid side analysis is
symmetric.
We ﬁrst observe that all orders arriving at time T1 must have been sent by the investor. To
see this, it suﬃces to show that no sniper submits any order at any time before T1. Applying
Bayesian updating, the expected value of the security given HFT beliefs must be zero at all
times before T1. Moreover, by symmetry of bid and ask, the bid is nonpositive and the ask
is nonnegative at all times before T1. Combining these observations with straightforward
liquidity taking for snipers, we obtain the desired conclusion.
Combining the above observation with the fact that a liquidity investor sends just a
single order, we conclude that no liquidity investor order arrives after T1. It follows from no
unnecessary depth that liquidity providers send cancellations at time T1 for any remaining
quotes. In addition, by straightforward liquidity taking for liquidity investors, any liquidity
investor orders that do arrive at T1 are for exactly one share. It then also follows from no
unnecessary depth that the initial depth quoted by liquidity providers must consist of one
share on each side of the book for each exchange.
For the following arguments, we focus on the case in which T1 ∈{3",4",5",...,1}. Of
course, it is also possible that T1 ∈{",2"}, but because this latter case arises with only
inﬁnitesimal probability, it can be ignored without loss. Fix any time t ∈{3",4",5",...,1}.
We consider various probabilities associated with orders arriving at a given exchange at such
a time:
69

• We consider the probability that T1 = t and that a buy order sent by a liquidity investor
arrives at a given exchange at that time. By straightforward liquidity taking for liquidity
investors, the probability is
1
2X(N+1)(1 −λ). In this event, the order is for exactly one
share, and the expected value of the security is zero.
• We consider the probability that T1 = t and that a buy order sent by an information
investor arrives at a given exchange at that time. By straightforward liquidity taking for
information investors and symmetry, the probability is at least
1
2X(N+1)λr∗. In this event,
the arriving order is for at least one share and the expected value of the security is one.
Suppose that at an immediate-or-cancel order to buy arrives at a given exchange at T1.
Applying Bayesian updating, the expected value of the security under HFT beliefs must be
in the interval
￿
λr∗
1 −λ + λr∗,1￿.
Thus, by competitive liquidity provision, the initial quotes set by liquidity providers must
be such that, at each exchange, exactly one share is quoted at the ask, where the ask is
s∗
2 ∈￿
λr∗
1 −λ + λr∗,1￿.
(IA27)
Again, ﬁx any time t ∈{3",4",5",...,1}. Now consider instead various probabilities associated with orders arriving to the market:
• We consider the probability that T1 = t, with a buy order sent by a liquidity investor
arriving to the market at that time. By straightforward liquidity taking for liquidity
investors, the probability is
1
2(N+1)(1 −λ). In this event, the order is for exactly one
share, exactly one such order arrives, and the expected value of the security is zero.
• We consider the probability that T1 = t, with a buy order sent by an information investor
arriving to the market at that time. By straightforward liquidity taking for information
investors, the probability is at least
1
2(N+1)λr∗. In this event, each arriving order is for at
least one share, multiple such orders may arrive simultaneously, and the expected value
of the security is one.
Suppose that exactly one immediate-or-cancel order to buy arrives to the market at T1.
Applying Bayesian updating, the expected value of the security under HFT beliefs must be
in the interval
￿0,
λr∗
1 −λ + λr∗￿.
70

Comparing this to equation (IA27) and applying straightforward liquidity taking for snipers,
we conclude that in this case, snipers do not send any orders at time T1.
Suppose that two or more immediate-or-cancel orders to buy arrive to the market at T1.
Applying Bayesian updating, the expected value of the security under HFT beliefs must be
one.26 Comparing this to equation (IA27) and applying straightforward liquidity taking for
snipers, we conclude that in this case, each sniper sends immediate-or-cancel orders at time
T1 to every exchange at which the initial quotes remain available.
Suppose the investor is an information investor who learns that the value of the security
is v = 1. The investor earns a proﬁt of 1 −s∗￿2 for every share that he buys, and so he
optimally attempts to maximize his traded volume. Because one share is quoted at the ask
of each exchange, the investor optimally selects a quantity of one for each of the orders
that he sends. By symmetry, the only question is how many exchanges to target. Given the
aforementioned behavior of liquidity providers and snipers, if he sends orders to y exchanges,
then as in the proof of Proposition 1, he expects to receive the following number of ﬁlls:
FLOB(y) = ypI + y(1 −pI)y + (1 −pH)(y −1)ypI(1 −pI)y−1.
By Lemma 1, this function is weakly increasing on the domain of positive integers, so it is
indeed optimal to submit orders to target all exchanges. He then obtains F(X) = XI ﬁlls in
expectation. And given the above, an information investor’s expected proﬁts conditional on
a choice of research intensity r are
rXI ￿1 −s∗
2 ￿−c(r).
Thus, it is necessary for plausible equilibrium that
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿rXI ￿1 −s∗
2 ￿−c(r)￿.
(IA28)
Given the aforementioned behavior of the investor and snipers, then as in Section III.A
of the main article, liquidity provider proﬁts are zero only if
(1 −λ)s∗
2 = λr∗(XI + XS)￿1 −s∗
2 ￿.
26This does not formally follow from Bayesian updating if information investors always target only a
single exchange. Nevertheless, if X ≥2, then we can adapt some of the following arguments to rule out the
possibility that information investors always target only a single exchange. Moreover, if X = 1, then HFT
beliefs at such information sets are irrelevant.
71

Thus, it is also necessary for plausible equilibrium that
s∗=
2λr∗(XI + XS)
1 −λ + λr∗(XI + XS).
(IA29)
Together, conditions (IA28) and (IA29) imply the desired conclusion.
Despite this result, it is worth clarifying that the equilibrium described in Section III.A
of the main article is not the unique plausible equilibrium. For instance, another plausible
equilibrium involves quotes on the various exchanges being maintained by di↵erent liquidity
providers rather than by a single one.
We also conjecture that Proposition 1 could be strengthened. In particular, we conjecture
that the proposition’s conclusion would also apply to a weaker deﬁnition of plausible equilibrium that insists upon only competitive liquidity provision and straightforward liquidity
taking.
72

IV.
Strategic Exchanges
Earlier sections of this paper characterize equilibrium outcomes under several trading
mechanisms. However, this raises the following question: if exchanges choose trading mechanisms for themselves, which of these mechanisms would they adopt? To address this question,
we use the model to formulate a game among the exchanges in which they simultaneously
choose trading mechanisms in a strategic fashion.27 We use spread minimization as a proxy
for proﬁt maximization, and we assume that traders behave as described in the main text to
determine the spreads that prevail under a proﬁle of trading mechanisms. We ﬁnd that it is
a Nash equilibrium for all exchanges to use 1-ND, wherein all noncancellations are delayed
by a random amount. However, the same is not true of the other mechanisms we consider.28
In Internet Appendix IV.C, we attempt to reconcile this with the LOB’s position as the
prevailing industry standard.
A.
Exchange Game
In this section, we deﬁne the “exchange game,” in which exchanges choose trading mechanisms for themselves. To deﬁne this game, which we denote Γexchange, we specify players,
strategy sets, and payo↵s.
Players.
The players of Γexchange are the exchanges {1,...,X}.
Strategy sets.
A pure strategy in Γexchange for an exchange is a trading mechanism that it
selects for itself. For concreteness, we assume that the available mechanisms are limited to
those already considered: LOB, qND for q ∈[0,1], and FBAs, where the details of these
mechanisms are as speciﬁed in the main text. Nevertheless, we conjecture that the results
27Of course, in practice exchanges must also make a number of other choices: the speed and trading
infrastructure they provide, the fees they charge, etc.
Addressing those issues, however, would require
signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to our existing model. For that reason, we focus on the choice of trading mechanism
for the purpose of this extension.
28Budish, Lee, and Shim (2019) study a similar question, but both their ﬁndings and their approach di↵er
from ours. In their model, the “exchange game” is a prisoner’s dilemma: each exchange has a unilateral
incentive to adopt a mechanism that eliminates sniping in response to public news (i.e., FBAs, yet equally
NDs), but when all exchanges eliminate sniping they are no longer able to monetize co-location services, as
they might if the LOB were maintained. Whereas we model the “exchange game” as a one-shot interaction,
they model it as a repeated interaction and select the equilibrium in which the collusive outcome (i.e., LOBs)
arises, maintained by Nash reversion. Thus, whereas our ﬁndings predict a trend toward NDs (and 1-ND
in particular), they predict that—in lieu of any regulatory intervention—the LOB status quo will remain in
place indeﬁnitely.
73

stated here would continue to hold even if additional mechanisms were available. We use
m = (m1,...,mX) to denote a proﬁle of trading mechanisms.
Payo↵s.
Although our model does not provide a means to measure exchange proﬁts, spread
minimization seems to be a plausible proxy for proﬁt maximization. According to an old
industry saying, “liquidity begets liquidity.” That is, a liquid exchange (in the model, an
exchange with small spreads) attracts more investors and therefore becomes even more liquid.29 Spread minimization (i.e., limiting adverse selection) can initiate this virtuous cycle
and thereby attract investors, and it therefore seems likely to be a primary driver of an
exchange’s choice of mechanism.30
For any proﬁle of trading mechanisms, we suppose that the investor and HFTs interact on
the exchanges as in the baseline model. If exchanges all choose the same trading mechanism,
then Propositions 1, 3, and 4 describe the resulting spreads.
If exchanges choose heterogeneous trading mechanisms, then additional work is needed
to characterize the equilibrium of the continuation game so as to derive the resulting proﬁle
of spreads. As before, (i) snipers send immediate-or-cancel orders to each exchange after
observing two trades, (ii) the liquidity provider sends cancellations to each exchange after
observing one trade, (iii) the liquidity provider sets the spread so that she earns zero proﬁts,
(iv) each liquidity investor submits a single order to his home exchange in the period of
his arrival, buying or selling in correspondence with the direction of his trading desire, and
(v) each information investor chooses research intensity optimally and submits orders in the
period of his arrival. However, there may be some subtleties in how information investors
route orders. Before, when all exchanges used the same trading mechanism, an information
investor could do no better than sending orders to all exchanges.
Now, he may ﬁnd it
optimal to avoid an exchange if that exchange carries a relatively high risk of “tipping his
hand” before he can obtain ﬁlls elsewhere.
For any proﬁle of trading mechanisms m = (m1,...,mX), let s(m) = (s1(m),...,sX(m))
denote the corresponding proﬁle of spreads, which is pinned down by the play of the traders in
the continuation game. We deﬁne the proﬁle of payo↵s in Γexchange from m as ⇡(m) = −s(m).
29This force is not captured by the model of this paper because liquidity investors are quite inelastic: they
divide equally among exchanges and, so long as the spread is below a certain level, trade only a ﬁxed amount.
For a model that does allow for some elasticity, see, for example Baldauf and Mollner (forthcoming).
30Another natural proxy for proﬁt maximization is volume maximization. Di↵erent results would prevail
if we were to deﬁne exchange payo↵s using that proxy. In particular, the Pareto-dominant Nash equilibrium
would be for all exchanges to use (synchronized) FBAs. However, since that result would rely quite heavily
on the inelasticity of investor demand in the model, spread minimization is our preferred proxy.
74

B.
Results
In this section, we analyze the exchange game Γexchange. We ﬁnd that if exchanges are
strategic in their choice of trading mechanism in the way described here, then the 1-ND
equilibrium survives. Moreover, if certain conditions are satisﬁed, then the same is not true
of the equilibria under the other mechanisms: LOB, qND for q < 1, and FBAs.
Those
equilibria fail to survive because exchanges, by deviating to 1-ND, can reduce their spread.
One of these conditions is c′(0) < 1, which ensures that information investors always ﬁnd it
optimal to do some amount of research. Proposition 2 formalizes these statements.31
PROPOSITION 2: The following statements are true.
(i) It is a Nash equilibrium of Γexchange for all exchanges to use 1-ND.
(ii) If c′(0) < 1 and X ≥2, then it is not a Nash equilibrium of Γexchange for all exchanges
to use qND for any q ∈[0,1).
(iii) If c′(0) < 1 and X ≥2, then it is not a Nash equilibrium of Γexchange for all exchanges
to use FBAs.
(iv) If c′(0) < 1 and X ≥2, then is not a Nash equilibrium of Γexchange for all exchanges to
use the LOB.
Proof of Proposition 2 : Part (i). To prove that it is a Nash equilibrium for all exchanges to
use 1-ND, it suﬃces to show that no single exchange has a proﬁtable deviation. When all
exchanges use 1-ND, an information investor is able to obtain a ﬁll at only one exchange,
no matter how he routes orders, snipers do not trade, and the equilibrium spread is s∗
1ND, as
characterized by Proposition 3.
If one exchange deviates to any other trading mechanism, then the information investor
would again be able to obtain a ﬁll at only one exchange, no matter how he routes orders.
Moreover, all exchanges would be alike in that none would feature adverse selection exerted
by snipers.32 Therefore, the equilibrium spread would again be s∗
1ND. Because this deviation
would not a↵ect the spreads, it is not proﬁtable.
Parts (ii) to (iv). To establish these three claims, it suﬃces to show that 1-ND would be a
proﬁtable deviation in each scenario. Part of the argument is common to each of the three
31We conjecture that the following are also true.
1-ND is a dominant strategy in Γexchange for each
exchange. If c′(0) < 1 and X ≥2, then 1-ND is the unique dominant strategy in Γexchange for each exchange.
32Snipers submit orders only after two trades have taken place. Because the information investor can
obtain only a single ﬁll before the liquidity provider cancels all remaining quotes, snipers submit no orders
on path. Thus, although the LOB permits snipers to exert adverse selection in general, this does not occur
in the scenario in which one exchange deviates to the LOB while all other exchanges continue to use 1-ND.
75

claims, and we establish it here. We then establish the remaining parts of each argument
separately below.
Suppose it is the case that (i) all exchanges use qND for q < 1, in which case the equilibrium spread is s∗
qND, as characterized by Proposition 3, (ii) all exchanges use FBAs, in which
case the equilibrium spread is s∗
FBA, as characterized by Proposition 4, or (iii) all exchanges
use the LOB, in which case the equilibrium spread is s∗
LOB, as characterized by Proposition 1.
Similar to the proof of Corollary 2, the assumption that c′(0) < 1 implies that equilibrium
research intensity is positive, which implies that the equilibrium spread is positive as well.
If one exchange deviates to 1-ND, then when an information investor routes orders, he
must choose between (i) obtaining a ﬁll only on the 1-ND exchange, and (ii) obtaining ﬁlls
only on (some of) the other exchanges. There are then two cases. In the ﬁrst case, the
information investor never routes to the 1-ND exchange. In that case, the spread on that
exchange is zero. Because the spread was positive before, the deviation is indeed proﬁtable.
It therefore only remains to analyze the second case, in which the information investor
sometimes routes to the 1-ND exchange. We let γ∗∈(0,1] denote the endogenously chosen
probability that the information investor routes to the 1-ND exchange, so that with probability 1−γ∗he routes to all the other exchanges. We also let x denote the deviating exchange.
Below, we characterize the resulting proﬁle of spreads for each scenario, and we argue that
in each, the deviation is indeed proﬁtable for exchange x.
Part (ii). Deﬁne
X′
qND = qX−1 +
X−1
￿
x=1
￿X −1
x
￿(1 −q)xqX−1−x (xpH(1 −pI)x + x[1 −pH(1 −pI)]),
where X′
qND is the expected number of ﬁlls obtained by an information investor, conditional
on learning the value of the security and routing orders to the X −1 exchanges still using
qND. The proﬁle of spreads in this scenario must satisfy
s∗
x =
2λγ∗r∗X
1 −λ + λγ∗r∗X
s∗
−x =
2λ(1 −γ∗)r∗X
X−1X′
qND
1 −λ + λ(1 −γ∗)r∗X
X−1X′
qND
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿r ￿1 −s∗
x
2 ￿−c(r)￿
1 −s∗
x
2 ≤X′
qND ￿1 −s∗
−x
2 ￿.
76

From the fourth equation, which is necessary given that the information investor sometimes
routes to exchange x, we obtain γ∗≤1￿X.33
Next, deﬁne s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) as the solution to the system
s∗=
2λr∗[⌦XqND + (1 −⌦)]
1 −λ + λr∗[⌦XqND + (1 −⌦)]
(IA30)
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿r[⌦XqND + (1 −⌦)]￿1 −s∗
2 ￿−c(r)￿.
(IA31)
Since c′(0) < 1 rules out the possibility of a corner solution with no research, we must have
r∗(⌦) > 0. On that domain, s is, other things equal, strictly increasing in ⌦(because XqND > 1
when q < 1) and weakly increasing in r. Moreover, applying Topkis’ Theorem to (IA31), we
ﬁnd that, other things equal, r is weakly increasing in ⌦and weakly decreasing in s. By
combining these observations, we conclude that s∗(⌦) is strictly increasing in ⌦.
Notice that s∗
qND corresponds to s∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 1. In addition, since γ∗≤1￿X,
we have that s∗
x is weakly less than s∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 0. We therefore have s∗
x < s∗
qND,
so the deviation is proﬁtable in this case as well.
Part (iii). The argument is similar to that used in Part (ii) of the proof. The proﬁle of
spreads in this scenario must satisfy
s∗
x =
2λγ∗r∗X
1 −λ + λγ∗r∗X
s∗
−x =
2λ(1 −γ∗)r∗X
1 −λ + λ(1 −γ∗)r∗X
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿r ￿1 −s∗
x
2 ￿−c(r)￿
1 −s∗
x
2 ≤(X −1)￿1 −s∗
−x
2 ￿.
From the fourth equation, which is necessary given that the information investor sometimes
routes to exchange x, we obtain γ∗≤1￿X.34
33To see that γ∗≤1￿X, observe that if γ∗> 1￿X, then the left-hand side would be less than
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr,
while the right-hand side would be greater than
(1 −λ)X′
qND
1 −λ + λrX′
qND
, which is a contradiction because X ≥2
implies that X′
qND ≥1.
34To see that γ∗≤1￿X, observe that if γ∗> 1￿X, then the left-hand side would be less than
1 −λ
1 −λ + λr,
77

Next, deﬁne s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) as the solution to the system
s∗=
2λr∗[⌦X + (1 −⌦)]
1 −λ + λr∗[⌦X + (1 −⌦)]
(IA32)
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿r[⌦X + (1 −⌦)]￿1 −s∗
2 ￿−c(r)￿.
(IA33)
Since c′(0) < 1 rules out the possibility of a corner solution with no research, we must have
r∗(⌦) > 0. On that domain, s is, other things equal, strictly increasing in ⌦(because X ≥2)
and weakly increasing in r. Moreover, applying Topkis’ Theorem to (IA33), we ﬁnd that,
other things equal, r is weakly increasing in ⌦and weakly decreasing in s. By combining
these observations, we conclude that s∗(⌦) is strictly increasing in ⌦.
Notice that s∗
FBA corresponds to s∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 1. In addition, since γ∗≤1￿X,
we have that s∗
x is weakly less than s∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 0. We therefore have s∗
x < s∗
FBA,
so the deviation is proﬁtable in this case as well.
Part (iv). Deﬁne
X′
I = (X −1)￿pI + (1 −pI)X−1 + (1 −pH)(X −2)pI(1 −pI)X−2￿
X′
S = (X −1)￿1 −pI −(1 −pI)X−1 −(1 −pH)(X −2)pI(1 −pI)X−2 −pH(X −2)pI(1 −pI)X−2￿,
where X′
I is the expected number of ﬁlls obtained by an information investor, conditional
on learning the value of the security and routing orders to the X −1 exchanges still using
the LOB. Likewise, X′
S is the expected number of ﬁlls obtained by snipers, conditional on
an information investor arriving, learning the value of the security, and routing orders to the
X −1 exchanges still using the LOB. The argument is similar to that used in Part (ii) of the
while the right-hand side would be greater than
(1 −λ)(X −1)
1 −λ + λr(X −1), which is a contradiction because X ≥2.
78

proof. The proﬁle of spreads in this scenario must satisfy
s∗
x =
2λγ∗r∗X
1 −λ + λγ∗r∗X
s∗
−x =
2λ(1 −γ∗)r∗X
X−1(X′
I + X′
S)
1 −λ + λ(1 −γ∗)r∗X
X−1(X′
I + X′
S)
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿rX′
I ￿1 −s∗
−x
2 ￿−c(r)￿
1 −s∗
x
2 = X′
I ￿1 −s∗
−x
2 ￿.
From the fourth equation, which is necessary given that the information investor sometimes
routes to exchange x, we obtain s∗
x ≤s∗
−x.
Next, deﬁne s∗(⌦) and r∗(⌦) as the solution to the system
s∗=
2λr∗￿⌦(XI + XS) + (1 −⌦) X
X−1(X′
I + X′
S)￿
1 −λ + λr∗X ￿⌦(XI + XS) + (1 −⌦) X
X−1(X′
I + X′
S)￿
(IA34)
r∗∈arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿r [⌦XI + (1 −⌦)X′
I]￿1 −s∗
2 ￿−c(r)￿.
(IA35)
Since c′(0) < 1 rules out the possibility of a corner solution with no research, we must
have r∗(⌦) > 0.
On that domain, s is, other things equal, strictly increasing in ⌦and
weakly increasing in r.35 Moreover, applying Topkis’ Theorem to (IA35), we ﬁnd that, other
things equal, r is weakly increasing in ⌦and weakly decreasing in s.36 By combining these
observations, we conclude that s∗(⌦) is strictly increasing in ⌦.
Notice that s∗
LOB corresponds to s∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 1. In addition, s∗
−x is weakly less
than s∗(⌦) evaluated at ⌦= 0. We therefore have s∗
−x < s∗
LOB. In addition, as argued above,
s∗
x ≤s∗
−x. We conclude that s∗
x < s∗
LOB, so the deviation is proﬁtable in this case as well.
These results are driven primarily by the observation that 1-ND is extremely e↵ective
at limiting adverse selection, for two reasons. First, it eliminates the adverse selection that
comes from sniper orders. Second, it puts an information investor in a diﬃcult situation
when it comes to order routing. Because of the large variability in execution time under 135To show that s is strictly increasing in ⌦, it suﬃces to verify that XI + XS >
X
X−1(X′
I + X′
S). After
plugging in for these expressions, we see that it suﬃces to verify that (X −1)(1−pI)X−1 is strictly decreasing
in X on the domain where X ≥2 and pI ≥0.5, which is indeed the case.
36To show that r is weakly increasing in ⌦, it suﬃces to verify that XI ≥X′
I. This is a consequence of
Lemma 1.
79

ND, it is only with inﬁnitesimal probability that he can achieve an execution at both a 1-ND
exchange and any other exchange. This reduces the number of ﬁlls that he can obtain on
1-ND exchanges and, in addition, makes those exchanges relatively less attractive to him. In
consequence, 1-ND also tends to reduces the adverse selection that comes from information
investor orders.
The ﬁrst part of the proposition is proven by showing that if all exchanges are using 1ND, then an exchange cannot further reduce its spread by deviating to another mechanism.
The other parts are proven by showing that if all exchanges are using another mechanism,
then an exchange can reduce its spread by deviating to 1-ND.
For the negative results, we must assume there are X ≥2 exchanges, for otherwise all
mechanisms would give rise to the same equilibrium spread. Similarly, the role of assuming
c′(0) < 1 is to eliminate the possibility of zero research intensity in equilibrium, in which
case there would be no spread and therefore no room for a proﬁtable deviation.
C.
Discussion
Consistent with the result of this section, there does seem to be some momentum building for mechanisms resembling 1-ND. Indeed, several industry participants have already
proposed modiﬁcations to their order matching rules that would incorporate random delays
of non-cancellations or similar categories of orders. (See Internet Appendix VI.A for details.)
Nevertheless, the LOB remains the standard industry practice. While this would seem to
be in conﬂict with our result, the discrepancy might be explained by the fact that the industry
has been recently transformed by the rise of HFT and a drastic increase in fragmentation.
Indeed, because all mechanisms lead to the same outcome in the absence of fragmentation
(i.e., if X = 1), one might conclude that the LOB became a disequilibrium choice only
recently, and exchanges may not yet have had suﬃcient time to adjust to the new trading
conditions. Moreover, a number of forces—regulatory barriers, switching costs, resistance
from clientele—may be hindering adjustments in the trading mechanism. As a result, we
cautiously interpret Proposition 2 as a statement about what to expect in the long run.
This result also has policy implications. If the ﬁnancial industry will ultimately settle at
an equilibrium in which all exchanges adopt 1-ND, then a regulator might wish to speed the
transition to that equilibrium by endorsing that mechanism. This would have the beneﬁt
of reducing the amount of time spent at the ineﬃcient LOB equilibrium, which is o↵the
frontier of the tradeo↵between liquidity and information production.
80

V.
Beneﬁts of Informative Prices
This appendix discusses rationales for the social value of informative prices—and in turn
fundamental research. In the model, traders are indi↵erent to the timing of resolution of
uncertainty.
However, to the extent that in practice traders prefer earlier resolution of
uncertainty, they would beneﬁt from more informative prices.
Moreover, informative prices may also be a positive externality for economic agents not
trading the security. By conveying information to real-world decision-makers, more informative prices can improve the eﬃciency of resource allocation in the wider economy. The
literature has identiﬁed several channels through which this may occur.
The idea that informative prices are vital to the eﬃcient distribution of resources dates
back to at least Hayek (1945). This is especially true in the case of “equity-dependent”
ﬁrms (i.e., ﬁrms able to raise funds only through equity issuance). Such a ﬁrm may be
discouraged from undertaking an eﬃcient investment in the event that its stock price—and
thus its cost of capital—falls far below its fundamental value, which is less likely if prices
are more informative, for two reasons. First, with less information, prices are less closely
tied to the fundamental value, which raises the probability of a large di↵erence between the
two. Second, with less information, prices may be depressed overall, as investors demand a
higher return to hold the security, as in Easley and O’Hara (2004). Myers and Majluf (1984)
provide a formal model in which imperfect pricing can lead a ﬁrm to bypass an eﬃcient
project. Moreover, Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) and Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007)
ﬁnd empirical evidence for such e↵ects. In addition, because lenders use stock prices in
setting the terms at which they will lend to a ﬁrm (e.g., Merton (1974)), this force might
not be limited to equity-dependent ﬁrms, but rather might apply more generally.
Next, the incentive channel refers to the idea that more informative prices assist a board
of directors in gauging a manager’s performance, thereby enabling them to provide better
incentives for the manager and in turn raising the manager’s e↵ort. This idea was ﬁrst proposed by Baumol (1965), and it was later formalized in models by Diamond and Verrecchia
(1982), Fishman and Hagerty (1989); and Holmstr¨om and Tirole (1993). Furthermore, Kang
and Liu (2008) and Ferreira, Ferreira, and Raposo (2011) ﬁnd empirical evidence consistent
with the predictions of these models.
Baumol (1965) also proposed the learning channel, whereby more informative prices
provide better feedback to ﬁrm managers, thus enabling them to make better decisions.
Dow and Gorton (1997), Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999) and Lin, Liu, and Sun (2019)
81

provide theoretical models of this channel. Luo (2005), Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007),
Kau, Linck, and Rubin (2008), Bakke and Whited (2010), Foucault and Fresard (2014),
and Lin, Liu, and Sun (2019) ﬁnd empirical evidence consistent with the operation of this
channel.
There may also exist other channels through which informative prices increase economic
eﬃciency beyond those speciﬁcally discussed above. In particular, the information contained
in prices may be used by other real-world decision-makers, including employees, customers,
suppliers, regulators, and blockholders, all of whom take actions that may inﬂuence the
eﬃciency of resource allocation.37 See Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012) for a thorough
review of the literature on the e↵ects of ﬁnancial markets on the real economy.
37For example, Subrahmanyam and Titman (2001) develop a model of some of these dependencies, and
Faure-Grimaud and Gromb (2004) argue that more informative prices increase the incentives of blockholders
to take actions that increase the value of the company. Additionally, several papers document a relationship
between informative prices and economic eﬃciency without identifying a particular channel.
Examples
include Wurgler (2000) and Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004).
82

VI.
Alternative Mechanisms in Practice
This appendix reports on real-world examples of trading mechanisms that resemble either
NDs or FBAs.
None of the mechanisms used in practice match exactly the theoretical
proposals that we analyze in this paper, but not all those di↵erences are of economic import.
Generally speaking, departures from our theoretical analysis tend to be cosmetic in nature
in the case of NDs but economically meaningful in the case of auctions.
A.
Noncancellation Delay Mechanisms in Practice
Mechanisms related to ND have been recently implemented in practice by two Canadian
exchanges. (In Table IA.III we summarize these and other ND implementations and proposals.) Aequitas NEO Exchange, a new Canadian equities exchange that opened in March
2015, applies a random delay of 3 to 9 milliseconds to immediate-or-cancel orders from traders
whom they have classiﬁed as “latency sensitive traders” (Aequitas NEO Exchange (2016)).
Six months later, the incumbent, TMX Group, followed suit on one of its platforms, the TSX
Alpha Exchange. That exchange applies a random delay of 1 to 3 milliseconds to all orders
except post-only orders and cancellations thereof (Alpha Trading Systems Limited Partnership (2016)).38 In Europe, the Eurex exchange has recently announced that they will begin
a pilot study in which a deterministic delay of 1 millisecond (for German equity options)
or 3 milliseconds (for French equity options) will be applied to all liquidity-removing orders
(Deutsche B¨orse Group (2019)). Similarly, the London Metal Exchange has announced plans
to implement a deterministic delay of 8 milliseconds for all orders except for cancellations
on their LMEprecious platform (London Metal Exchange (2019)). The Moscow Exchange
launched an experimental order book for the USD/RUB currency pair, which features a randomized delay of between 2 and 5 milliseconds for non-cancellation orders (Moscow Exchange
(2019)).
In the U.S., Intercontinental Exchange recently submitted a proposal to implement a
delay of 3 milliseconds to liquidity-taking orders for gold and silver daily futures (ICE Futures
U.S. (2019)). Before its acquisition by NYSE, the Chicago Stock Exchange submitted a
proposal to implement a delay of 350 microseconds to market orders, marketable limit orders,
and certain related cancel messages (Chicago Stock Exchange (2016, 2017)). More recently,
EDGA has proposed a delay of four milliseconds for all liquidity-removing orders (Cboe
38See Chen et al. (2017) and Anderson et al. (2018) for empirical analyses of the TSX Alpha delay.
83

EDGA Exchange (2019)).
In addition, NASDAQ PHLX once proposed to implement a
delay of 5 milliseconds to marketable orders (NASDAQ OMX PHLX (2012)), although they
subsequently withdrew that proposal.
Additionally, Interactive Brokers advocated in an
open letter that the SEC mandate a random delay of 10 to 200 milliseconds for orders that
would remove liquidity (Peter↵y (2014)).
These implementations and proposals di↵er both from each other and from our proposal
in terms of the exact orders that are delayed.
In particular, while we propose to delay
all noncancellations, most of these proposals exempt nonmarketable limit orders from the
delay. While this has the advantage of subjecting fewer orders to delay, it also complicates
the mechanism, because the decision of whether to delay may hinge on the current state of
the LOB, rather than simply on the order type. Nevertheless, exempting non-marketable
limit orders from the delay would not alter equilibrium outcomes within the model.
Also similar in spirit to NDs is the 350-microsecond delay that IEX applies to all incoming
orders (IEX Group (2018a)). A popular class of order types provided by IEX are peg orders,
which rest in the IEX LOB at prices deﬁned in reference to the national best bid and o↵er
(NBBO). Because the NBBO is not subject to the delay but instead updated in real time,
those orders are protected from snipers. A di↵erence is that IEX’s design only protects peg
orders in this way, whereas NDs protect standard limit orders as well. IEX’s design therefore
has drawbacks: (i) fewer orders are protected from aggressive-side order anticipation, and
(ii) an incentive is created for traders to switch from standard limit orders to peg orders,
which could disrupt the price discovery process. IEX initially operated as an alternative
trading system, but in 2016 it became an exchange, the primary e↵ect of which was that its
quotes then received trade-through protection.39 Similarly, the NYSE American exchange
subsequently adopted virtually the same mechanism (NYSE (2018)).
Also similar to ND is the “ideal latency ﬂoor” mechanism (Melton (2015)), which was
adopted in 2016 by Thomson Reuters Matching, a foreign exchange venue. The mechanism
operates by batching noncancellation orders, and then releasing them to the LOB in a
randomized sequence.
NDs are also similar in spirit to “last look,” a common practice in several other foreign
exchange markets, whereby dealer platforms have the ability to retroactively cancel trades
within a short window of time.
Last look has recently been subject to criticism.
One
argument against the practice is that it enables information leakage: a market maker can
observe its clients’ intentions, acquiring any information therein, even without ﬁlling their
39See Hu (2019) for an empirical analysis of when IEX became an exchange.
84

orders (Foreign Exchange Professionals Association (2015)). NDs, in contrast, are immune
to this criticism. With NDs, a trader observes the orders of its counterparties only if a trade
occurs.
B.
Auction-Based Trading Mechanisms in Practice
Mechanisms related to the FBA design of Section V.B of the main article are currently
in use by a small number of venues. In what follows we describe such implementations and
contrast them with the proposal of Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) (“the proposal”),
which also guides our analysis in the text. To our knowledge, the implementations closest
to the proposal are:
(i) the Cboe Europe Equities Periodic Auctions Book (Cboe Global Markets (2015)),
(ii) the London Stock Exchange Turquoise Plato Lit Auctions (London Stock Exchange
(2019)),
(iii) the Goldman Sachs SIGMA X Auction Book (Goldman Sachs (2018)),
(iv) the ITG POSIT Auction (Investment Technology Group (2017)), and
(v) the Frankfurt Stock Exchange Continuous Auction with Specialist (Deutsche B¨orse
Group (2017)).
These implementations di↵er from the proposal in certain speciﬁcs. These auctions do not
occur at ﬁxed points in time but rather, variously, at randomized intervals or endogenouslychosen times. And in many cases, the auctions are not sealed-bid in that they make available
indicative price and quantity information prior to clearing. Nevertheless, these implementations resemble the proposal in that they replace LOBs and that auctions can happen
repeatedly over an extended window of time. See Besson, Lasnier, and Falck (2019) for an
empirical analysis of the e↵ects of some of these auction mechanisms.
In addition, some venues have replaced continuous trading with auctions for illiquid
securities, including Euronext (2018), SETSqx at the London Stock Exchange (2015), and
the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange (2018). Several other exchanges have implemented auction
mechanisms to complement continuous trading, for example, to determine prices at the open
(in the morning or after a trading halt) and at the close. However, these implementations
depart considerably from the proposal: (i) they are not frequent, crossing only a handful of
times per day, and (ii) they are not sealed-bid, publishing indicative information about price
or volumes before clearing.
85

Table IA.III
Mechanisms Related to ND Proposed or Implemented in Practice
Venue
Length of Delay
Targets of Delay
E↵ective Date
Implementations
Aequitas NEO Exchange
3–9 milliseconds
Immediate-or-cancel orders
from
IDs
classiﬁed as “latency sensitive traders”
March 27, 2015 –
present
TSX Alpha Exchange
1–3 milliseconds
All but post-only orders and cancellations
thereof
September
21,
2015 – present
Eurex Exchange
1 or 3 milliseconds
Liquidity-removing
orders for German and
French equity options
June
3,
2019
–
present
IEX
350 microseconds
All orders (but not the
NBBO)
October 25, 2013 –
present
Moscow Exchange
2–5 milliseconds
All but cancellation orders for USD/RUB currency pair
April 22,
2019 –
present
NYSE American
350 microseconds
All orders (but not the
NBBO)
July
24,
2017
–
present
Thomson Reuters
0–3 milliseconds
All but cancellation orders
June
5,
2016
–
present
Proposals
Cboe EDGA Exchange
4 milliseconds
Liquidity-removing
orders
TBD
Chicago Stock Exchange
350 microseconds
Market
orders,
marketable
limit
orders,
and
certain
related
cancel messages
N/A
ICE Futures U.S.
3 milliseconds
Liquidity-removing
orders
TBD
London Metal Exchange
8 milliseconds
All but cancellation orders for LMEprecious
TBD
NASDAQ OMX PHLX
5 milliseconds
Marketable orders
N/A
Interactive Brokers
10–200 milliseconds
Liquidity-removing
orders
N/A
86

VII.
Alternative Welfare Criteria
In Section IV of the main article, we characterize the set of feasible outcomes with respect
to two criteria: (i) research intensity, which might be thought of as a suﬃcient statistic for the
positive externalities of ﬁnancial markets and therefore the welfare of unmodeled agents, and
(ii) liquidity investor welfare. Although we intend liquidity investor welfare to be interpreted
as a measure for liquidity—indeed, for mechanisms with a spread, it is related to the spread
through w = β −s￿2—it obviously can also be interpreted as the welfare of a single type of
modeled agent: liquidity investors. In this appendix, we demonstrate that our main ﬁndings
carry over even if we modify this second criterion so as to account for the welfare of other
types of modeled agents as well.
In Internet Appendix VII.A we depart from the previous analysis by taking total investor
welfare (instead of liquidity investor welfare) for the second criterion. Thus, this analysis
also values rents earned from information acquisition. Nevertheless, we obtain analogues
of all key results. Likewise, in Internet Appendix VII.B, we take total trader welfare for
the second criterion. Thus, this analysis also values not only rents earned from information
acquisition but also any proﬁts that HFTs may accrue. Provided that a certain subtlety is
addressed in an appropriate way, we again obtain analogues of all key results.
A.
Total Investor Welfare
In this appendix, we conduct analysis similar to that of Section IV of the main article,
characterizing the set of feasible outcomes, but with respect to a di↵erent set of criteria,
research intensity and total investor welfare.
As before, the social planner recommends a research intensity to the investor and allocates
resources (dollars and shares of the security) among the traders, subject to the same set of
constraints. The feasible set, which we denote F′, consists of the set of research intensities,
r, and investor welfares, w, that can be implemented in this way. Using the same notation
as in Section IV of the main article, the feasible set is deﬁned as follows. The key di↵erence
is in the ﬁrst constraint, where the di↵erence is due to using w to denote expected investor
welfare instead of liquidity investor welfare:
F′ =
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
(r,w) ∃y(✓),∃z(✓),∃{yh(✓)}h∈H,∃{zh(✓)}h∈H such that
(W′), (BB–1), (BB–2), (IR–I), (IR–H), (O)
￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
,
87

where
(W′) w = Er[u(y(✓),z(✓)￿✓)] −λc(r)
(BB–1) (∀✓∈⇥) ∶y(✓) + ∑h∈H yh(✓) = 0
(BB–2) (∀✓∈⇥) ∶z(✓) + ∑h∈H zh(✓) = 0
(IR–I) (∀✓∈⇥) ∶u(y(✓),z(✓)￿✓) ≥0
(IR–H) (∀h ∈H) ∶Er[uh(yh(✓),zh(✓)￿✓)] ≥0
(O) r ∈arg maxˆr∈[0,1] ￿ˆr
2u(y(1),z(1)￿1) + ˆr
2u(y(−1),z(−1)￿−1) + (1 −ˆr)u(y(0),z(0)￿0) −c(ˆr)￿
PROPOSITION 3: The feasible set is F′ = {(r,w) ￿r ∈[0,1],w ∈[λrc′(r) −λc(r),(1 −λ)β −λc(r)]}.
Proof of Proposition 3 : As in the proof of Proposition 2, an initial observation is that the
combination of (BB–1), (BB–2), and (IR–H) is equivalent to the following single constraint:
1 −λ
2
y(B) + 1 −λ
2
y(S) + λr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + λr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + λ(1 −r)y(0) ≤0.
(BB)
The remainder of the proof consists of two parts. First, we show that the set deﬁned in the
proposition constitutes an outer bound for F′. Second, we show that it constitutes an inner
bound for F′.
Part One (Outer Bound). Rewriting (W′), we obtain
w = 1 −λ
2
[y(B) + β {z(B) = 1}] + 1 −λ
2
[y(S) + β {z(S) = −1}]
+ λr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + λr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + λ(1 −r)y(0) −λc(r)
≤(1 −λ)β + 1 −λ
2
y(B) + 1 −λ
2
y(S)
+ λr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + λr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + λ(1 −r)y(0) −λc(r).
Applying (BB), we obtain
w ≤(1 −λ)β −λc(r).
(IA36)
This establishes the desired upper bound on w. To establish the corresponding lower bound,
we begin by rewriting (O) as
r ∈arg max
ˆr∈[0,1]
￿ˆr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + ˆr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + (1 −ˆr)y(0) −c(ˆr)￿,
88

which implies40
r ￿y(1) + z(1)
2
+ y(−1) −z(−1)
2
−y(0)￿≥rc′(r).
(IA37)
Next, we again rewrite (W′)
w = 1 −λ
2
[y(B) + β {z(B) = 1}] + 1 −λ
2
[y(S) + β {z(S) = −1}]
+ λr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + λr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + λ(1 −r)y(0) −λc(r)
= 1 −λ
2
[y(B) + β {z(B) = 1}] + 1 −λ
2
[y(S) + β {z(S) = −1}]
+ λy(0) + λr ￿y(1) + z(1)
2
+ y(−1) −z(−1)
2
−y(0)￿−λc(r).
Applying (IR–I) for ✓∈{B,S,0}, we obtain
w ≥λr ￿y(1) + z(1)
2
+ y(−1) −z(−1)
2
−y(0)￿−λc(r).
Using (IA37), this becomes
w ≥λrc′(r) −λc(r).
(IA38)
Thus, (IA36) and (IA38) imply F′ ⊂{(r,w) ￿w ∈[λrc′(r) −λc(r),(1 −λ)β −λc(r)]}, as desired.
Part Two (Inner Bound). For this part of the proof, we argue that any element of the set
deﬁned in the proposition can be implemented by a contract satisfying all of the constraints
of F′. In what follows, we use rmax to denote the largest r such that there exists a w for
which (r,w) ∈F′. It is deﬁned implicitly by
(1 −λ)β = λrmaxc′(rmax).
40Deﬁne ∆= ￿y(1)+z(1)
2
+ y(−1)−z(−1)
2
−y(0)￿. By assumption, c(⋅) is C1. Any solution to the maximization
problem in (O) must therefore satisfy one of the three conditions (i) r = 0 and c′(0) ≥∆, (ii) c′(r) = ∆, or
(iii) r = 1 and c′(1) ≤∆. In any of these three cases, the claimed inequality holds.
89

Suppose r ∈[0,rmax] and suppose w ∈[λrc′(r) −λc(r),(1 −λ)β −λc(r)]. Let
y(B) = y(S) = w + λc(r) −rc′(r)
1 −λ
−β
z(B) = −z(S) = 1
y(1) = −y(−1) = 0
z(1) = −z(−1) = c′(r)
y(0) = 0
z(0) = 0.
We now argue that these contracts satisfy the constraints (W′), (BB), (IR–I), and (O):
(W′) Plugging in, Er[u(y(✓),z(✓)￿✓)] −c(r) = (1 −λ)￿w + λc(r) −λrc′(r)
1 −λ
−β + β￿+
λrc′(r) −λc(r) = w.
(BB) Plugging in, 1 −λ
2
y(B) + 1 −λ
2
y(S) + λr
2 [y(1) + z(1)] + λr
2 [y(−1) −z(−1)] + λ(1 −
r)y(0) = w + λc(r) −(1 −λ)β, which is nonpositive by assumption.
(IR–I) First, u(y(B),z(B)￿B) = u(y(S),z(S)￿S) = w + λc(r) −λrc′(r)
1 −λ
, which is nonnegative by assumption. Second, u(y(1),z(1)￿1) = u(y(−1),z(−1)￿−1) = c′(r) ≥0. Third,
u(y(0),z(0)￿0) = 0.
(O) Plugging in, (O) becomes r ∈arg max
ˆr∈[0,1]
{ˆrc′(r) −c(ˆr)}. Then by convexity of c(⋅),
the optimality of conducting research with intensity r follows from checking the
ﬁrst-order condition.
We use this characterization of the feasible set to determine whether the various trading
mechanisms implement points on or o↵the frontier of the set. Results along these lines are
analogous to those stated in Sections IV.C and V.C of the main article.
First, Corollary 4 is an analogue of Corollary 2. It states that the LOB generally does not
implement an outcome on the frontier of this alternative feasible set F′. Second, Corollary 5
is an analogue of Corollary 5. It states that NDs and FBAs both do implement outcomes
on the frontier of F′.
COROLLARY 4: If X > 2, pI < 1, and c′(0) < XI, then the LOB outcome is not on the
frontier of F′.
Proof of Corollary 4 : In the LOB equilibrium, investor welfare is related to the spread and
research intensity through w∗
LOB = (1 −λ)(β −s∗
LOB￿2) + λr∗
LOBXI(1 −s∗
LOB￿2) −λc(r∗
LOB).
90

By Proposition 3, an equilibrium outcome lies on the frontier of F′ if and only if w =
(1 −λ)β −λc(r). Therefore, the LOB outcome lies on the frontier of F′ only if the following
relationship holds:
s∗
LOB =
2λr∗
LOBXI
1 −λ + λr∗
LOBXI
.
(IA39)
As before, r∗
LOB is characterized by the ﬁxed point of the correspondence
RLOB(ˆr) = arg max
r∈[0,1]
￿
(1 −λ)rXI
1 −λ + λˆr(XI + XS) −c(r)￿,
where XI and XS are as deﬁned in the statement of Proposition 1. The assumption that
c′(0) < XI ensures that at ˆr = 0, the maximization problem on the right-hand side of the
expression above for RLOB(ˆr) does not have a solution at zero. Consequently, zero is not a
ﬁxed point of that correspondence, and so r∗
LOB > 0. Restating (1), we also have
s∗
LOB =
2λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB(XI + XS).
Given that λ > 0 and r∗
LOB > 0, comparing (IA39) to (1), we conclude that the LOB equilibrium outcome is on the frontier only if XS = 0.
Restating the expression for XS, we
obtain
XS = X(1 −pI) −X(1 −pI)X −(X −1)XpI(1 −pI)X−1
= X(1 −pI)￿
X−1
￿
x=2
￿X −1
x
￿px
I(1 −pI)X−1−x￿.
Given that pI ≥0.5, XS = 0 only if either pI = 1 or X ≤2 (or both).
COROLLARY 5: The following are true:
(i) for all q ∈[0,1], the qND outcome is on the frontier of F′;
(ii) the FBA outcome is on the frontier of F′; and
(iii) if in addition either X ≤2 or pI = 1, then the LOB outcome is on the frontier of F′.
Proof of Corollary 5 : In the equilibria of the LOB, of NDs, and of FBAs, the equilibrium
spread is related to investor welfare and research intensity through w∗= (1 −λ)(β −s∗￿2) +
λr∗X∗(1 −s∗￿2) −λc(r), where X∗denotes the expected number of trades made by an
91

information investor conditional on arriving and learning the value of the security.
By
Proposition 3, an equilibrium outcome lies on the frontier of F′ if and only if w = (1 −λ)β −
λc(r). Therefore, an equilibrium outcome of one of these trading mechanisms lies on the
frontier of F′ if the following relationship holds:
s∗=
2λr∗X∗
1 −λ + λr∗X∗.
(IA40)
Restating equations (1), (4), and (6), we also have
s∗
LOB =
2λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
1 −λ + λr∗
LOB(XI + XS)
s∗
qND =
2λr∗
qNDXqND
1 −λ + λr∗
qNDXqND
s∗
FBA =
2λr∗
FBAX
1 −λ + λr∗
FBAX .
Because XqND is the expected number of trades made by an information investor conditional
on arriving and learning the value of the security under qND, equation (IA40) implies that
the outcome of qND, for all q ∈[0,1], is on the frontier. Similarly, the outcome of FBAs is on
the frontier. Finally, because XI is the expected number of trades made by an information
investor conditional on arriving and learning the value of the security under the LOB, the
LOB outcome is on the frontier if XS = 0, which is the case if either pI = 1 or X ≤2 (or
both).
B.
Total Trader Welfare
In this appendix, we again characterize the set of feasible outcomes, but with respect to
yet a di↵erent set of criteria, research intensity and total trader welfare.
There is, however, one subtlety that must be addressed in order to conduct this analysis,
namely how to compute the criterion of total trader welfare.
In the LOB equilibrium,
positive trading proﬁts are earned by HFTs, but they are divided among the inﬁnite number
of snipers that are active in equilibrium. It is therefore not obvious how to compute the
aggregate proﬁts of HFTs. Mathematically, this question is about how to take the limit that
was alluded to in footnote 9 of the main article. As discussed in that footnote, one should
think of our model as the limit of a sequence of models with ﬁnite numbers of HFTs. But
what is the precise method for taking that limit?
92

Potential answers to this question include two “reasonable extremes.” One possibility is
to consider a sequence of models with a ﬁnite number of snipers NHFT ∈N, each of whom
can participate in the market without needing to pay an entry cost, and then consider the
limit as NHFT →∞. Along this sequence, and thus in the limit, all trades are transfers. So
as long as each liquidity investor trades, total trader welfare equals (1 −λ)β −λc(r). Thus,
the feasible set collapses to a one-dimensional space, and each equilibrium of the model is
trivially on the frontier.
We prefer a di↵erent possibility, however. In particular, we consider a sequence of models
with a positive entry cost c ∈R and where the number of active HFTs is determined by a
free-entry condition. We then consider the limit as c →0. Along this sequence, and thus
in the limit, aggregate HFT proﬁts are zero.41 It follows that the characterization of the
feasible set boils down to that of Internet Appendix VII.A, that is, we continue to obtain
analogues of the key results stated in Sections IV.C and V.C of the main article.
41This approach is consistent with an (unmodeled) HFT arms race in which all potential rents are dissipated by expenditures on speed technology (as in Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015)).
93

VIII.
Mathematical Notation
Name
Description
Model Parameters
X
Number of exchanges∗
λ
Probability of information investor
β
Liquidity investor private transaction motive
pH
Probability an HFT obtains the lower latency
pI
Probability the investor obtains the lower latency
Noncancellation Delay Parameters
δND
Constant component of delay
FND
Distribution of random component of delay
q
Probability of delay having a random component
Other Notation
"
Length of a time period†
T
Set of time periods {0,",2",...,1}
v
Fundamental value of security
s
Bid-ask spread‡
r
Research intensity‡
w
Liquidity investor welfare‡
F
The set of feasible ordered pairs (r,w)
y,z
Number of dollars and number of shares in a portfolio
✓
Investor type
u(y,z￿✓)
Investor utility (gross of research costs)
c(r)
Cost of research
* We also use XI and XS to denote the expected number of trades
made by an information investor and snipers, respectively, under
the LOB conditional on an information investor arriving and learning the value of the security. We further use XqND to denote the
expected number of trades made by an information investor under
qND conditional on arriving and learning the value of the security.
† We also use N to denote the reciprocal of ".
‡ We use stars to denote equilibrium values.
94

REFERENCES
Aequitas NEO Exchange, 2016, Trading functionality guide, https://www.aequitasneo.
com/documents/en/trading-data/neo-exchange-trading-functionality-guide.
pdf.
Aisen, Daniel, Bradley Katsuyama, Robert Park, John Schwall, Richard Steiner, Allen
Zhang, and Thomas L. Popejoy, 2015, Synchronized processing of data by networked
computing resources, US Patent 8,984,137.
Alpha Trading Systems Limited Partnership, 2016, Trading policy manual, http://www.
tsx.com/resource/en/1069.
Anderson, Lisa, Emad Andrews, Baiju Devani, Michael Mueller, and Adrian Walton, 2018,
Speed segmentation on exchanges: Competition for slow ﬂow, Working paper, Bank of
Canada.
Back, Kerry, and Shmuel Baruch, 2004, Information in securities markets: Kyle meets
Glosten and Milgrom, Econometrica 72, 433–465.
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Je↵rey Wurgler, 2003, When does the market matter?
Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent ﬁrms, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118, 969–1005.
Bakke, Tor-Erik, and Toni M. Whited, 2010, Which ﬁrms follow the market? An analysis of
corporate investment decisions, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1941–1980.
Baldauf, Markus, and Joshua Mollner, forthcoming, Trading in fragmented markets, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
Barclays Capital Inc. (Barclays), 2014, Why the smartness of order routing matters in options
trading: How order routing performance impacts the bottom line, https://www.scribd.
com/doc/204351010.
Bartlett, Robert P., and Justin McCrary, 2017, How rigged are stock markets? Evidence
from microsecond timestamps, Working paper, University of California, Berkeley.
BATS
Global
Markets,
Inc.
(BATS),
2016,
Bats
system
performance,
http:
//cdn.batstrading.com/resources/features/bats_exchange_Latency.pdf
Accessed: September 1, 2016.
95

Baumol, William J., 1965, The Stock Market and Economic Eﬃciency (Fordham University
Press).
Berge, Claude, 1963, Topological Spaces: Including a Treatment of Multi-Valued Functions,
Vector Spaces, and Convexity (Courier Dover Publications).
Bertsekas, Dimitri P., and Robert G. Gallager, 1992, Data Networks (2nd Edition) (Prentice
Hall).
Besson, Paul, Matthieu Lasnier, and Antoine Falck, 2019, The beneﬁts of European periodic
auctions beyond MiFID dark trading caps, The Journal of Investing.
Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein, 2012, The real e↵ects of ﬁnancial markets,
Annual Review of Financial Economics 4, 339–360.
Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim, 2014, Implementation details for frequent
batch auctions: Slowing down markets to the blink of an eye, American Economic Review:
Papers & Proceedings 104, 418–424.
Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim, 2015, The high-frequency trading arms race:
Frequent batch auctions as a market design response, Quarterly Journal of Economics
130, 1547–1621.
Budish, Eric, Robin Lee, and John Shim, 2019, Will the market ﬁx the market? A theory
of stock exchange competition and innovation, Working paper, University of Chicago.
Cboe EDGA Exchange, 2019, Notice of ﬁling of a proposed rule change to introduce a
liquidity provider protection on EDGA, SEC Release No 34-86168 https://www.sec.
gov/rules/sro/cboeedga/2019/34-86168.pdf.
Cboe
Global
Markets,
2015,
Cboe
Europe
equities
guidance
note,
periodic
auctions
book,
http://cdn.batstrading.com/resources/participant_resources/
BCE-GuidanceNote_Periodic_Auctions_Final.pdf Accessed: 17 June 2018.
Chen, Haoming, Sean Foley, Michael A. Goldstein, and Thomas Ruf, 2017, The value of a
millisecond: Harnessing information in fast, fragmented markets, Working paper, University of New South Wales.
Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2007, Price informativeness and investment sensitivity to stock price, Review of Financial Studies 20, 619–650.
96

Chicago Stock Exchange, 2016, Notice of ﬁling of proposed rule change to adopt the CHX
liquidity taking access delay, SEC Release No. 34-78860 https://www.sec.gov/rules/
sro/chx/2016/34-78860.pdf.
Chicago Stock Exchange, 2017, Notice of ﬁling of proposed rule change to adopt the CHX liquidity enhancing access delay, SEC Release No. 34-80041 https://www.sec.gov/rules/
sro/chx/2017/34-80041.pdf.
Corvil,
2014,
Electronic trading system performance,
http://corvil.com/content/
resources/04-white-papers/03-electronic-trading-system-performance/
wp-electronic-trading-system-performance.pdf.
Deutsche B¨orse Group, 2017, Xetra release 17.0, market model continuous auction,
http://www.xetra.com/blob/3160700/34bdd76de0cf73ca0e9121fca2edb0d5/data/
Release-17-MM-Continuous-auction_e.pdf Accessed: 31 October 2018.
Deutsche
B¨orse
Group,
2018,
Insights
into
trading
system
dynamics,
http:
//www.eurexchange.com/blob/238346/3d4aa6471c4a964aacc091ced89ffc61/data/
presentation_insights-into-trading-system-dynamics_en.pdf.
Deutsche
B¨orse
Group,
2019,
Passive
liquidity
protection:
Pilot
phase
and
setup
information,
https://www.eurexchange.com/resource/blob/1506528/
0374d7b91e93e8cab7d230247f68ef15/data/er19027e.pdf.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1982, Optimal managerial contracts and
equilibrium security prices, Journal of Finance 37, 275–287.
Dow, James, and Gary Gorton, 1997, Stock market eﬃciency and economic eﬃciency: Is
there a connection?, Journal of Finance 52, 1087–1129.
Durnev, Art, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2004, Value-enhancing capital budgeting
and ﬁrm-speciﬁc stock return variation, Journal of Finance 59, 65–105.
Easley, David, and Maureen O’Hara, 2004, Information and the cost of capital, Journal of
Finance 59, 1553–1583.
Egginton, Jared F., Bonnie F. Van Ness, and Robert A. Van Ness, 2016, Quote stuﬃng,
Financial Management 45, 583–608.
97

Euronext, 2018, Euronext rule book book I: Harmonised rules, https://www.euronext.com/
sites/www.euronext.com/files/harmonised_rulebook_en_2018_07_31_euronext_
dublin.pdf Accessed: 31 October 2018.
Faure-Grimaud, Antoine, and Denis Gromb, 2004, Public trading and private incentives,
Review of Financial Studies 17, 985–1014.
Ferreira, Daniel, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Clara C. Raposo, 2011, Board structure and price
informativeness, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 523–545.
Fishman, Michael J., and Kathleen M. Hagerty, 1989, Disclosure decisions by ﬁrms and the
competition for price eﬃciency, Journal of Finance 44, 633–646.
Foreign Exchange Professionals Association, 2015, Focus on last look, https://fxpa.org/
wp-content/uploads/2016/01/FXPA-lastlook-final.pdf.
Foucault, Thierry, and Laurent Fresard, 2014, Learning from peers’ stock prices and corporate investment, Journal of Financial Economics 111, 554–577.
Gai, Jiading, Chen Yao, and Mao Ye, 2013, The externalities of high frequency trading,
Working paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Gider, Jasmin, Simon N. M. Schmickler, and Christian Westheide, 2019, High-frequency
trading and price informativeness, Working paper, Tilburg University.
Glosten, Lawrence R., 1994, Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable?, Journal of
Finance 49, 1127–1161.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a
specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics
14, 71–100.
Goldman
Sachs,
2018,
Goldman
Sachs
electronic
trading:
SIGMA
X
MTF
participant
manual,
https://gset.gs.com/Sigmaxmtf/Public/GetDocument/
12d3f6c6-df1c-48fb-a141-0285af3f0054?compName=ParticipantDocs
Accessed:
22 July 2019.
Harris, Larry, 2013, What to do about high-frequency trading, Financial Analysts Journal
69, 6–9.
98

Hayek, Friedrich A., 1945, The use of knowledge in society, American Economic Review 35,
519–530.
Hirschey, Nicholas H., 2019, Do high-frequency traders anticipate buying and selling pressure?, Working paper, London Business School.
Holmstr¨om, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1993, Market liquidity and performance monitoring,
Journal of Political Economy 101, 678–709.
Hu, Edwin, 2019, Intentional access delays, market quality, and price discovery: Evidence
from IEX becoming an exchange, DERA Working Paper, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission.
ICE Futures U.S., 2019, Amendments to Rule 4.26 order execution (new passive order
protection functionality) submission pursuant to Section 5c(c)(1) of the act and Regulation 40.6(a), Open Letter to CFTC, https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/
2019-02/ICEFuturessPassiveOrder020119.pdf.
IEX Group,
2018a,
Investors Exchange rule book,
https://iextrading.com/docs/
Investors%20Exchange%20Rule%20Book.pdf.
IEX Group, 2018b, Router stats, https://www.iextrading.com/stats/#router-stats.
Investment Technology Group, 2017, POSIT MTF: FIX and connectivity guidance, https:
//www.virtu.com/uploads/documents/POSIT-MTF-FIX-and-Connectivity-guide_
Updated-06.25.2018.pdf Accessed: 22 July 2019.
Ixia, 2012, Measuring latency in equity transactions, https://intl.ixiacom.com/sites/
default/files/resources/whitepaper/lowlatencywhitepaperbooklet.pdf.
Kakutani, Shizuo, 1941, A generalization of Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem, Duke Mathematical Journal 8, 457–459.
Kang, Qiang, and Qiao Liu, 2008, Stock trading, information production, and executive
incentives, Journal of Corporate Finance 14, 484–498.
Kau, James B., James S. Linck, and Paul H. Rubin, 2008, Do managers listen to the market?,
Journal of Corporate Finance 14, 347–362.
99

Kay,
Rony,
2009,
Pragmatic
network
latency
engineering
fundamental
facts
and
analysis,
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/a19d/
53a533fe78d01f0423f628e4d1688be23e6d.pdf.
KCG Holdings, Inc. (KCG), 2014, The need for speed II.
Kirilenko, Andrei A., and Gui Lamacie, 2015, Latency and asset prices, Working paper,
University of Cambridge.
Korajczyk, Robert A., and Dermot Murphy, 2019, High frequency market making to large
institutional trades, Review of Financial Studies 32, 1034–1067.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
Lehr,
Michael,
2016,
The
latency
di↵erence
between
depth
of
book
and
BBO
feeds,
http://www.maystreet.com/api/files/mst_drive/public/
TheLatencyDifferenceBetweenDepthAndBBO-MayStreet.pdf.
Lewis, Michael, 2014, Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt (W. W. Norton & Company).
Lin, Tse-Chun, Qi Liu, and Bo Sun, 2019, Contractual managerial incentives with stock
price feedback, American Economic Review 109, 2446–68.
London
Metal
Exchange,
2019,
Technical
change
to
LMEselect
FIX
message
processing
for
the
LMEprecious
market
to
introduce
a
ﬁxed
minimum
delay
https://www.lme.com/-/media/Files/News/Notices/2019/05/
19-165-Technical-change-to-LMEselect-FIX-message-processing-for-the-LMEprecious-marke
pdf.
London Stock Exchange, 2015, Factsheet, further improvements to auctions on the SETSqx
trading service,
https://www.lseg.com/sites/default/files/content/documents/
Further%20improvements%20to%20auctions%20on%20the%20SETSqx%20Trading%
20Service.pdf Accessed: 31 October 2018.
London
Stock
Exchange,
2019,
Turquoise
trading
service
description,
https:
//www.lseg.com/sites/default/files/content/documents/Turquoise%20Trading%
20Services%20Description%203.34.9i.PDF Accessed: 6 February 2019.
Luo, Yuanzhi, 2005, Do insiders learn from outsiders? Evidence from mergers and acquisitions, Journal of Finance 60, 1951–1982.
100

Malinova, Katya, and Andreas Park, 2017, Does high frequency trading add noise to prices?,
Working paper, McMaster University.
Melton, Hayden Paul, 2015, Ideal latency ﬂoor, US Patent App. 14/533,543.
Menkveld, Albert J., and Marius A. Zoican, 2017, Need for speed? Exchange latency and
liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 30, 1188–1228.
Mercer, R.L., and P.F. Brown, 2016, System and method for executing synchronized trades
in multiple exchanges, US Patent App. 14/451,356.
Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest
rates, Journal of Finance 29, 449–470.
MIAX Miami International Securities Exchange, 2018, MIAX infrastructure and latest performance numbers, https://www.miaxoptions.com/node/89.
Milgrom, Paul, and Nancy Stokey, 1982, Information, trade and common knowledge, Journal
of Economic Theory 26, 17–27.
Moscow Exchange, 2019, Moscow Exchange to expand FX o↵ering https://www.moex.com/
n23386.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate ﬁnancing and investment decisions when ﬁrms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial
Economics 13, 187–221.
Nanex Research (Nanex), 2014, Perfect pilfering, http://www.nanex.net/aqck2/4661.
html.
NASDAQ OMX PHLX, 2012, Notice of ﬁling of proposed rule change to modify Exchange
Rule 3307 to institute a ﬁve millisecond delay in the execution time of marketable orders
on NASDAQ OMX PSX, SEC Release No. 34-67680 https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/
phlx/2012/34-67680.pdf.
NASDAQ
OMX
Group
(NASDAQ OMX),
2012,
INET
technology
and
the
Nasdaq stock market, http://www.nasdaqtrader.com/Trader.aspx?id=Latencystats Accessed: July 5, 2017.
NYSE, 2018, NYSE Pillar, https://www.nyse.com/pillar.
101

NYSE
Euronext
(NYSE),
2018,
Equities
rules,
http://wallstreet.cch.com/
AmericanTools/PlatformViewer.asp?SelectedNode=chp_1_5&manual=/american/
rules/american-rules/.
Peter↵y, Thomas, 2014, Interactive Brokers Group proposal to address high frequency
trading, Open Letter to SEC, https://www.interactivebrokers.ca/download/SEC_
proposal_high_frequency_trading.pdf.
Shkilko, Andriy, and Konstantin Sokolov, 2019, Every cloud has a silver lining: Fast trading,
microwave connectivity and trading costs, Working paper, Wilfrid Laurier University.
Simon, Leo K., and Maxwell B. Stinchcombe, 1989, Extensive form games in continuous
time: Pure strategies, Econometrica 57, 1171–1214.
SIX
Swiss
Exchange,
2016,
Excellent
latency
and
capacity,
http://www.
six-swiss-exchange.com/download/participants/trading/x-stream_inet_
performance_measurement_details.pdf.
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, and Sheridan Titman, 1999, The going-public decision and the
development of ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Finance 54, 1045–1082.
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, and Sheridan Titman, 2001, Feedback from stock prices to cash
ﬂows, Journal of Finance 56, 2389–2413.
Tel
Aviv
Stock
Exchange,
2018,
TASE
trading
schedule,
illiquid
securities
and
maintenance lists, https://info.tase.co.il/Eng/trading/trading_schedule/Pages/
trading_schedule.aspx Accessed: 31 October 2018.
TMX Group, 2014, Tmx group readies launch of tmx quantum xa on toronto stock exchange,
press release, https://www.tmx.com/newsroom/press-releases?id=59&year=2014.
Topkis, Donald M., 1978, Minimizing a submodular function on a lattice, Operations Research 26, 305–321.
van Kervel, Vincent, 2015, Competition for order ﬂow with fast and slow traders, Review of
Financial Studies 28, 2094–2127.
van Kervel, Vincent, and Albert J. Menkveld, 2019, High-frequency trading around large
institutional orders, Journal of Finance 74, 1091–1137.
102

Weller, Brian M., 2018, Does algorithmic trading reduce information acquisition?, Review of
Financial Studies 31, 2184–2226.
Wurgler, Je↵rey, 2000, Financial markets and the allocation of capital, Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 187–214.
103
