Effect of high-frequency trading on mutual fund performance  
 
Nan Qin and Vijay Singal1 
First draft: March 15, 2016 
This version: November 7, 2022 
 
Abstract 
We find that high-frequency trading (HFT) in stocks held by mutual funds negatively affects fund 
performance: when sorted by HFT intensity of holdings, funds in the top quintile underperform funds 
in the bottom quintile by 2.64% per year. The negative relation can be at least partially explained by 
the illiquidity premium induced by high-frequency traders’ preference for more liquid stocks. This 
reason for underperformance of mutual funds has not been previously explored or documented. In 
addition, we do not find evidence to support the concern that HFT raises trading costs of mutual funds. 
 
KEYWORDS 
high-frequency trading, illiquidity premium, mutual fund performance, trading costs 
JEL CLASSIFICATION 
G12, G14, G23 
 
 
 
1 Nan Qin (nanqin@niu.edu; 815-753-1114) is from the Department of Finance, Northern Illinois University, 236G 
Barsema Hall, 740 Garden Road, DeKalb, IL 60115. Vijay Singal (singal@vt.edu; 540-231-7750) is from the 
Department of Finance, Pamplin College of Business, Virginia Tech, 1016 Pamplin Hall, Blacksburg, VA 240610221. We thank Frank Hatheway from NASDAQ for providing the high-frequency trading data. NASDAQ makes the 
data freely available to academics providing a project description and signing a nondisclosure agreement. We thank 
Jonathan Brogaard, Ryan Riordan, Gjergji Cici, and Lei Zhou for comments and suggestions, as well as conference 
and seminar participants at the 2016 FMA annual meetings, 2019 SFA annual meetings, Carleton University, 
McMaster University, University of Windsor, and Northern Illinois University. All errors are our own. An appendix 
containing additional tables, figures, and details of methodology is available in the supporting materials section online.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

1 
 
Effect of high-frequency trading on mutual fund performance 
Abstract 
We find that high-frequency trading (HFT) in stocks held by mutual funds negatively affects fund 
performance: when sorted by HFT intensity of holdings, funds in the top quintile underperform funds 
in the bottom quintile by 2.64% per year. The negative relation can be at least partially explained by 
the illiquidity premium induced by high-frequency traders’ preference for more liquid stocks. This 
reason for underperformance of mutual funds has not been previously explored or documented. In 
addition, we do not find evidence to support the concern that HFT raises trading costs of mutual funds. 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
High-frequency trading (HFT) has been of interest to practitioners, policymakers, and academic 
researchers over the past two decades. However, there is a lack of consensus about its impact on 
traditional institutional investors. Some academic researchers find that HFT reduces trading costs 
for most market participants (Hendershott, Jones, & Menkveld, 2011; Hendershott & Riordan, 
2013; Goldstein, Kumar, & Graves, 2014; Conrad, Wahal, & Xiang, 2015; Brogaard & Garriott, 
2019; Baldauf & Mollner, 2020; Boehmer, Fong, & Wu, 2021). On the other hand, many studies 
suggest that HFT may increase the trading costs of traditional institutional investors by anticipating 
their trades (Biais, Foucault, & Moinas, 2015; Korajczyk & Murphy, 2019; Van Kervel & 
Menkveld, 2019; Shkilko & Sokolov, 2020; Yang & Zhu, 2020; Bongaerts & Van Achter, 2021; 
Hirschey, 2021). A similar lack of agreement exists among practitioners, and some of them have 
taken actions to protect themselves from HFT.2 Given the importance of institutional investors and 
financial markets, it is important to gain better insight into this topic.  
 
2 For example, in recent years many traditional investors turned to dark pools such as IntelligentCross or exchanges 
such as Investors Exchange to combat predatory high-frequency traders (“Steven Cohen targets high-frequency 
trading with ‘dark pool’ venture,” Wall Street Journal, April 17, 2018). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

2 
 
In this study, we examine the impact of HFT on the performance of U.S. equity mutual 
funds that collectively manage trillions of investment dollars. We approach the role of HFT from 
a different and previously unexplored channel by investigating whether HFT affects crosssectional stock returns through the illiquidity premium and whether mutual funds holding HFTintensive stocks are negatively affected as a consequence.   
As suggested by prior studies, illiquid assets should provide a return premium—that is, 
illiquidity premium—over liquid assets because investors require higher returns to compensate for 
higher trading costs associated with illiquid assets, and the magnitude of the illiquidity return 
premium depends not only on the cost per trade but also on trading frequency of the marginal 
investor (Amihud & Mendelson, 1986; Chalmers & Kadlec, 1998; Amihud et al., 2015; Chen et 
al., 2020). Compared to traders with lower trading frequencies, traders with higher trading 
frequencies are more sensitive to trading costs as they will incur higher trading costs from the same 
asset over the same period. The implication in the context of HFT is that high-frequency traders 
(HFTs) will prefer to trade liquid assets,3 and the presence of intensive HFT will amplify the 
magnitude of the illiquidity premium by lowering the risk-adjusted returns of liquid assets and 
increasing those of illiquid assets.4  
Based on this intuition, we hypothesize that a majority of HFT-intensive stocks are 
relatively liquid and will deliver lower risk-adjusted returns, and therefore mutual funds holding 
such stocks will underperform other funds that do not hold these stocks or hold them in a smaller 
 
3 More precisely, liquidity-taking HFTs should prefer to trade liquid assets to save trading costs, while liquidityproviding HFTs may prefer to trade illiquid assets where more revenue can be collected. However, as reported in 
Baron et al. (2019), liquidity-taking HFTs contribute much more HFT volume than liquidity-providing HFTs. For 
example, in August 2012, 41% of all HFT volume on the E-mini S&P 500 futures market is generated by liquiditytaking high-frequency traders, whereas 15% is generated by liquidity-providing high-frequency traders. The rest of 
the HFT volume is generated by high-frequency traders using both strategies. 
4 It is important to note that the change in the illiquidity premium is not necessarily related to any change in liquidity 
or trading costs. That is, even without any change in the level of liquidity, magnitude of the illiquidity premium could 
still be increased by higher trading frequency. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

3 
 
proportion. For HFTs, the lower return of liquid assets is a reasonable compromise for substantial 
savings from low trading costs. However, for most mutual funds that trade much less frequently, 
the gains from the low trading costs of liquid assets can hardly offset the loss in returns. Therefore, 
HFT intensity in liquid stockholdings of mutual funds will exert a downward pressure on returns 
and consequently lead to underperformance of these funds.  
Our empirical analyses are based on a sample of 3,536 U.S. actively managed equity 
mutual funds and a sample of 8,150 U.S. common stocks during 2003–2018. Following 
Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) and Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015), we use the 
number of quote messages, defined as the number of changes in the best bid or offer quote or size 
across all quote reporting venues in the United States, as our HFT proxy. This proxy captures one 
of the essential features of HFT—a very large number of order submissions and cancellations 
compared to that of non-high-frequency traders (nHFTs). Moreover, it is based on publicly 
available Trade and Quote (TAQ) data so that it covers most U.S. common stocks since 1993. A 
comparison between quote messages and the “NASDAQ data set” (120 stocks randomly selected 
by the NASDAQ in 2008 and 2009) reported in Table A.1 in the Internet Appendix confirms its 
effectiveness—quote messages indeed have a high correlation with actual HFT and significantly 
lower correlations with actual non-high-frequency trading (nHFT). To control for the positive 
relation that arises naturally between firm size and quote messages, we extract the component of 
quote messages that is orthogonal to size and use it as the measure of HFT in this paper. 
We begin our empirical analysis by investigating the relation between risk-adjusted stock 
returns and HFT intensity. Sorting stocks into quintile portfolios by HFT intensity, we find that 
the top quintile (highest HFT intensity) significantly underperforms the bottom quintile by a riskadjusted return of 6.12% per year. We then examine the relation between fund performance and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

4 
 
HFT intensity in fund holdings or trade portfolios and find it to be, again, significantly negative. 
For example, the top quintile of funds sorted by HFT intensity in their holdings underperforms the 
bottom quintile by a risk-adjusted return of 2.64% per year.  
Next, we test the validity of the liquidity-based explanation and find that the negative 
relation between HFT intensity and stock return and that between HFT intensity and fund 
performance become statistically insignificant once we control for the illiquidity premium. More 
importantly, we find that the illiquidity premium is significantly positive in stocks with highly 
intensive HFT but is small and statistically insignificant in remaining stocks. The implication is 
that the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund performance is not simply a 
manifestation of self-selection bias but rather a consequence of HFT. We believe that this is one 
of the critical findings to support our hypothesis that HFT negatively affects stock returns and fund 
performance through its impact on the magnitude of illiquidity premium.  
We conduct a number of tests to preclude alternative explanations. First, we consider the 
possibility that HFT may reduce fund performance by increasing institutional trading costs. We 
find that the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund performance exists even if returns 
of fund holdings, which are not affected by trading costs, are used to replace the net asset value 
(NAV)–based fund returns in the quintile portfolio analysis. 5 In addition, cross-sectional 
regressions show that the difference between fund returns and returns of holdings is not affected 
by HFT intensity. These results suggest that HFT is negatively related to fund performance through 
its impact on cross-sectional stock returns rather than through higher institutional trading costs. 
Second, we consider the possibility that the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund 
performance may be the result of the illiquidity risk premium, the idiosyncratic volatility anomaly, 
 
5 Returns of fund holdings is estimated as the value-weighted return of portfolios created by replicating the holdings 
of mutual funds and assuming zero trading cost. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

5 
 
or an indicator of stock overpricing. To test these possibilities, we add factors that capture each of 
these effects to the Fama-French-Carhart (Fama and French, 1993; Carhart, 1997) four-factor 
model and find that none of these effects can explain the negative relation between HFT intensity 
and fund performance.  
Our paper makes several contributions to the literature of HFT, mutual fund performance, 
and the illiquidity premium. First, our paper is the first to propose that HFT may affect crosssectional stock returns through the illiquidity premium. We thus introduce a new channel through 
which intensive HFT may be detrimental to the performance of traditional institutional investors 
because it makes liquidity more “expensive” to these investors. Therefore, we suggest that 
institutional investors should reduce their investments in HFT-intensive stocks. Second, by 
illustrating that significant illiquidity premium only exists in HFT-intensive stocks, this paper 
provides supporting evidence to the theoretical prediction of Amihud and Mendelson (1986) and 
Chalmers and Kadlec (1998) that, in addition to cost per trade, trading frequency is an important 
determinant of the illiquidity premium. Third, we examine the relation between the “return gap” 
of mutual funds and HFT intensity and do not find evidence of significantly higher institutional 
trading costs imposed by intensive HFT. This is in contrast to recent studies suggesting that HFTs 
may increase institutional trading costs as they cause adverse selection or provide expensive 
liquidity (Biais, Foucault, & Moinas, 2015; Korajczyk & Murphy, 2019; Van Kervel & Menkveld, 
2019; Shkilko & Sololov, 2020; Yang & Zhu, 2020; Bongaerts & Van Achter, 2021; Hirschey, 
2021). Finally, we refine the methodology of measuring HFT intensity by quote messages 
proposed by Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) and Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015) by 
adjusting for stock size. This makes the HFT intensity measure comparable among stocks with 
various sizes.  Our HFT intensity measure is based on publicly available TAQ data so that it covers 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

6 
 
most, instead of a small fraction of, U.S. common stocks. As a result, our paper is, to the best of 
our knowledge, the first to provide comprehensive evidence of the impact of HFT on the 
performance of U.S. institutional investors. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple example to 
illustrate the impact of HFT on expected stock returns. Section 3 describes the data sources, sample 
selection, proxies for HFT, and fund performance evaluation methods. Section 4 presents the 
relation between HFT and fund performance as well as evidence supporting our main hypothesis. 
Section 5 explores possible alternative explanations. Section 6 concludes. 
 
2 IMPACT OF HFT ON EXPECTED STOCK RETURNS: A STYLIZED 
ILLUSTRATION  
Suppose a stock market has only two stocks, A and B, with the same characteristics except for 
liquidity. Stock A has a round-trip trading cost of 25 basis points (bps), while stock B has a trading 
cost of 5 bps. Further assume that there are three possible scenarios based on the presence and 
intensity of HFT: (1) no HFT presence, (2) the presence of less intensive HFT, and (3) the presence 
of more intensive HFT. Annual trading frequencies are assumed to be 1, 15, and 30 in the three 
scenarios, respectively. In addition, the market expected return is assumed to be ERm in the three 
scenarios. 
In the case of no HFT presence, annual trading costs of stock A and B are simply their 
round-trip trading costs—that is, 0.25% and 0.05%, respectively. The illiquidity premium is 
calculated as the difference in annual trading costs of stocks A and B, so it equals to 0.25% – 0.05% 
= 0.20%. The pre-trading-cost expected returns of stocks A and B should reflect the difference in 
trading costs while the average return remains at ERm, the expected market return. Therefore, stock 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

7 
 
A has a pre-trading-cost expected return of ERm + 0.10% while that for stock B is ERm – 0.10%. 
After deducting annual trading costs, the post-trading-cost expected return of both stocks equals 
to ERm – 0.15%.  
                                            No HFT presence 
Stock 
A 
B 
Annual trading frequency 
1 
1 
Trading cost (round trip) 
0.25% 
0.05% 
Annual trading cost 
0.25% 
0.05% 
Illiquidity premium 
0.20% 
Pre-trading-cost expected return 
ERm + 0.10% 
ERm–0.10% 
Post-trading-cost expected return 
ERm + 0.10% – 0.25% = ERm – 0.15% 
ERm – 0.10% – 0.05% = ERm – 
0.15% 
 
 
 
                                                   HFT presence 
  
Lower intensity 
Higher intensity 
Stock 
A 
B 
A 
B 
Annual trading frequency 
15 
15 
30 
30 
Trading cost (round trip) 
0.25% 
0.05% 
0.25% 
0.05% 
Annual trading cost 
3.75% 
0.75% 
7.50% 
1.50% 
Illiquidity premium 
3.00% 
6.00% 
Pre-trading-cost expected return 
ERm + 
1.50% 
ERm – 1.50% 
ERm + 3.00% 
ERm  – 3.00% 
Post-trading-cost expected return 
ERm + 1.50% 
– 3.75% = 
ERm – 2.25% 
ERm – 1.50% – 0.75% = 
ERm – 2.25% 
ERm + 3.00% – 
7.50% = ERm – 
4.50% 
ERm – 3.00% – 
1.50% = ERm – 
4.50% 
 
In the case of low-intensity HFT presence, the annual trading cost of each stock equals 15 
times its round-trip trading cost, so the illiquidity premium increases to 3.00%, which is 15 times 
that in the case of no HFT presence. Moreover, in the case of high-intensity HFT presence, annual 
trading cost of each stock equals to 30 times its round-trip trading cost, so the illiquidity premium 
further increases to 6.00%, which is 30 times that in the case of no HFT presence. Note that the 
expected return after trading costs is the same for stock A and stock B in each of the three scenarios.  
The example illustrates that the presence of HFT increases the illiquidity premium and 
lowers the expected return after trading costs, and this effect is positively related to the intensity 
of HFT. For example, expected return of the liquid stock B would be ERm – 0.10% with no HFT 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

8 
 
presence but would decrease to ERm – 1.50% and ERm – 3.00% in the presence of less- and moreintensive HFT. It is important to note that this effect does not rely on HFT’s potential impact on 
the level of stock liquidity. 
A long-term investor (e.g., a mutual fund) in HFT-intense scenarios will find that stock A 
provides a higher net return than stock B due to its much lower accumulated trading cost. For 
example, a mutual fund, with only one round-trip trading a year, in a high-intensity HFT scenario 
would earn a net return of ERm + 2.75% (= ERm + 3.00% – 0.25% × 1) from stock A but only ERm 
– 3.05% (= ERm – 3.00% – 0.05% × 1) from stock B. In other words, this mutual fund would earn 
5.80% higher return from stock A than from stock B. Thus, mutual funds that either deliberately 
or inadvertently buy and hold high-intensity HFT stocks, such as stock B, would underperform 
(alpha = –3.05%) when evaluated with respect to the benchmark return (ERm). In this paper, we 
intend to provide evidence that supports the scenarios presented in this stylized illustration.   
 
3 DATA AND METHODOLOGY 
3.1 Sample of U.S. equity mutual funds 
The sample of U.S. equity mutual funds is obtained from the Center for Research in Security Prices 
(CRSP) survivor-bias-free U.S. mutual fund database. Quarterly stock holdings of mutual funds 
are obtained from the CRSP mutual fund database and from the S12 database of Thomson Reuters. 
The primary tests of this paper are based on a sample period from January 2003 to December 2018, 
when HFT was relatively intensive.6 Certain robustness tests are based on a prior sample period 
that extended from January 1993 to December 2002, when HFT was less intensive or nonexistent.  
 
6 The NYSE implemented automatic quote dissemination in 2003 to replace manual quote dissemination. The 
transition started in January and finished in May. As a result, HFT in U.S. stocks increased significantly—quote 
messages increased 150% compared to that in 2002, the highest annual growth rate during 2001–2018. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

9 
 
U.S. equity mutual funds are identified by their CRSP objective codes.7 Funds with total 
net assets (TNA) less than $10 million or funds that are younger than three years are removed to 
mitigate data biases such as incubation bias (Evans, 2010). We also exclude funds that invest less 
than 90% in common stocks, sector funds, and exclude fund months where reported fund holdings 
account for less than half of a fund’s TNA because of their potentially different risk exposures.8 
We aggregate all share classes to the fund level and match fund returns and characteristics to their 
quarterly holdings.9 Passively managed funds, including index funds and exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs), are removed from the sample as their managers do not engage in stock selection.10 The 
final sample includes 3,536 actively managed domestic equity mutual funds. 
Panel A of Table 1 summarizes fund characteristics. The average (median) TNA is $1,498 
($309) million, suggesting that fund size is skewed by large funds. Monthly net flow ratio has an 
average of –0.46%.11 The average fund age is 16.66 years. Expense ratio, as the ratio of a fund’s 
operating expenses and total investment, averages 1.30% per year. Fund turnover is measured by 
the minimum of aggregated sales or aggregated purchases of securities during a year divided by 
the fund’s average TNA in the previous 12 months. The average turnover ratio is 74.76% per year. 
Monthly pre-fee return, estimated as monthly post-fee return plus one-twelfth of annual expense 
ratio, averages 0.86%. Panel B of Table 1 contains average fund characteristics by year. At the end 
 
7 To be included into the sample, the CRSP objective code (CRSP_OBJ_CD) of a fund needs to start with “ED,” 
which represents domestic equity funds. 
8 The use of 80% or 70% as threshold for equity holdings does not significantly affect the results of this paper. 
9 Combination of shares classes and matching of fund characteristics and holdings are mainly based on the FundPortfolio Map file provided by the CRSP, the MFLink files provided by the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS), 
and names of share classes. 
10 Passive funds are identified by the CRSP index fund indicator, ETF indicator, and fund names. 
11 Monthly flow ratio of fund i in month t is estimated as 
𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑖,𝑡= 𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡−𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡−1(1 + 𝑅𝑖,𝑡) −𝑀𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡
𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡−1
,                                                        
where 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 is the return of fund i in month t, and 𝑀𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡 is the TNA of all acquired funds in month t. Following 
Chen and Qin (2017), we remove extreme flow ratios (i.e., greater than 50% or smaller than –50% in a month) that 
could be caused by misreported fund mergers and splits. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

10 
 
of 2018, the total size of this fund sample is $3.46 trillion, representing 74% of total market 
capitalization of all U.S. actively managed domestic equity mutual funds.12 
[Insert Table 1 here] 
3.2 Sample of U.S. common stocks 
The stock sample includes 8,150 U.S. common stocks that are listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and 
NASDAQ at any time between January 2003 and December 2018. We remove stocks not in CRSP 
share codes 10 or 11 and remove stock-month observations where the stock price is below $2 at 
the beginning of the month or market value is below $10 million at the end of the prior June. 
Monthly stock returns and characteristics are taken from the CRSP. We follow Amihud et al. (2015) 
in removing extremely large daily and monthly returns.13 Several additional databases are used for 
other variables: Compustat for book value of equity, NYSE TAQ for intraday quote and trade data 
required to estimate HFT proxy and transaction costs, I/B/E/S for the number of analysts and 
dispersion of analyst forecasts, and WRDS at the University of Pennsylvania for Treasury bill rates 
and risk factors. Panel A of Table 2 reports the summary statistics of monthly stock characteristics 
based on a total of 691,999 stock-month observations. 
[Insert Table 2 here] 
3.3 Measures of HFT in individual stocks 
3.3.1 Quote messages as a proxy of HFT 
Following Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) and Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015), we 
use number of quote messages estimated based on the NYSE TAQ data as the proxy for HFT 
 
12 Based on 2019 Investment Company Fact Book published by Investment Company Institute, the total size of all U.S. 
actively managed domestic equity mutual funds at the end of 2018 is $4.65 trillion. 
13 Daily returns are set as missing if they are greater than 200% or if (1 + 𝑟𝑡)(1 + 𝑟𝑡−1) −1 ≤50%, where 𝑟𝑡 or 𝑟𝑡−1 
is greater than 100%. Monthly returns are set as missing if they are above 500% or if they are above 300% and are 
reversed within the following month. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

11 
 
intensity.14 As reported in Panel B of Table 2 and consistent with Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015), 
there is a noticeable difference in quote messages between small and large stocks. The average 
quote update of the smallest 20% stocks (measured by their market value at the end of the previous 
June) is 40,000 per month, whereas that of the largest 20% stocks is 2.42 million. Similar to the 
finding of Baron et al. (2019), Figure A.1 in the Internet Appendix illustrates that HFT grew 
rapidly through 2000–2011, but growth has tapered off since then.  
3.3.2 Correlation between quote messages and HFT 
To validate the use of quote messages as an appropriate proxy for HFT, we estimate the Spearman 
and Pearson correlations between monthly quote messages and actual HFT activities reported in 
the “NASDAQ data set.” As reported in Table A.1 in the Internet Appendix, quote messages is 
highly correlated with actual HFT intensity, while its correlations with nHFT are much lower. In 
Panel A where the actual HFT intensity is measured as a fraction of HFT volume in the total trading 
volume of a stock, the average Spearman (Pearson) correlation between quote messages and actual 
HFT intensity is 88.63% (68.16%). In Panel B where the actual HFT intensity is measured as the 
ratio of HFT share volume to total shares outstanding, the average Spearman (Pearson) correlation 
between quote messages and actual HFT intensity is 66.22% (36.76%), whereas that between 
quote messages and nHFT intensity is –2.42% (–14.68%). The generally lower magnitudes of 
Pearson correlations compared to Spearman correlations indicate nonlinearity in the relation 
between quote messages and actual trading activities. Furthermore, a comparison between Panels 
A and B of Table A.1 indicates that quote messages is closer to a relative measure of HFT, as their 
 
14 The estimation of best bid and ask price is based on quotes reported by a total of 16 exchanges and trading venues 
(TAQ exchange codes A, B, C, D, I, J, K, M, N, P, Q, T, W, X, Y, and Z). To be included in the estimation process, 
a quote must have a mode of 1, 2, 3, 6, 10, or 12. Any quote that has bid price larger than or equal to ask price, bid 
price less than or equal to $0.01, negative ask price, or nonpositive bid or ask size will be removed. Quotes beyond 
regular trading hours are also removed. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

12 
 
correlations with the fraction of HFT volume in total volume are much higher than their correlation 
with share turnover ratio induced by HFT (88.63% vs. 66.22% for Spearman correlation; 68.16% 
vs. 36.76% for Pearson correlation). This difference is more pronounced in the largest stock 
quintile (57.58% vs. 10.03% for Spearman correlation; 56.24% vs. 5.21% for Pearson correlation) 
where HFT is generally more intensive. These observations reaffirm the reasonableness of using 
quote messages as a proxy for relative intensity of HFT. 
3.3.3 Determinants of quote messages 
Examining the determinants of quote messages not only provides useful insights into the behavior 
and preference of HFTs but may also preclude concerns on certain self-selection biases in the 
primary tests. We examine the relation between quote messages and stock characteristics following 
Fama and MacBeth’s (1973) cross-sectional regression: 
𝐿𝑛[𝑄𝑀𝑖,𝑡] = 𝛿𝑿𝒊,𝒕−𝟏+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡,                                                              (1) 
where 𝐿𝑛[𝑄𝑀𝑖,𝑡] is the natural log of quote messages of stock i in month t, and X is a vector of 
control variables including market value (MV), book-to-market ratio (BM) estimated by the same 
approach of Fama and French (1992), stock return over the prior month (RET), share price at the 
beginning of the month (PRC), turnover ratio of the prior month (TO), time-weighted relative 
quoted spread (RQS) of the prior month, the Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity beta (LIQBeta), 
institutional ownership (IO), volatility of the prior month (VOL) estimated as the standard 
deviation of daily returns, number of analysts (ANLY), analyst forecast dispersion (DISP) 
estimated as standard deviation of one-year earnings forecasts divided by the mean estimate, and 
the lagged dependent variable (DV). Most explanatory variables are lagged to ensure that they are 
predetermined and are not affected by the dependent variable. As reported in Table 3, quote 
messages increases by firm size, prior month return, turnover ratio, institutional ownership, and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

13 
 
number of analysts and decreases by stock price and RQS. This is consistent with the common 
understanding that HFTs prefer to trade large and liquid stocks, stocks with more institutional 
investors, stocks with lower share prices, and stocks with more available information.  
[Insert Table 3 here] 
3.3.4 Controlling for the size effect 
Large firms will naturally have more quotes due to their larger investor base and higher volume, 
thus using raw quote messages as a measure to identify HFT-intensive stocks will lead to a bias 
toward large stocks. Inspired by Karpoff and Lou (2010), we estimate an HFT-intensity measure 
that is orthogonal to firm size to solve this problem. Specifically, for each month (quarter), we sort 
all stocks in the sample into deciles based on their market value at the end of the previous June 
and then estimate the following monthly/quarterly cross-sectional regression: 
𝐿𝑛[𝑄𝑀𝑖,𝑡] = ∑𝛽𝑘,𝑡𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑘,𝑡
9
𝑘=1
+ 𝑢𝑖,𝑡,                                                   (2) 
where 𝐿𝑛[𝑄𝑀𝑖,𝑡] is the natural log of quote messages of stock i at month (quarter) t, and 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑘,𝑡 
is a dummy variable that equals to one if firm i is within size decile k in month (quarter) t and zero 
otherwise. Quote messages is log transformed because its relation with firm size is not linear. The 
regression residual, 𝑢𝑖,𝑡, is denoted as the HFT-intensity measure for stock i in month (quarter) t, 
𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑖,𝑡. We also adopt two alternative HFT measures for robustness tests: (1) monthly decile 
ranking of quote messages within each size decile and (2) regression residual that is orthogonal to 
both size and BM.15 
 
15 We modify Equation (2) to estimate an HFT intensity measure that is orthogonal to both size and BM: 
𝐿𝑛[𝑄𝑀𝑖,𝑡] = ∑𝛽𝑘,𝑡𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑘,𝑡
9
𝑘=1
+ ∑𝛾𝑘,𝑡𝐵𝑀𝑖,𝑘,𝑡
9
𝑘=1
+ 𝑢𝑖,𝑡, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

14 
 
 
3.4 Average HFT intensity of fund holdings and trade portfolios 
Conceptually, there could be at least two major channels through which HFT may have an impact 
on mutual fund performance. First, if HFT affects fund performance through its impact on 
institutional trading costs, intensity of HFT in stocks of a fund’s “trade portfolio” should be related 
to subsequent fund performance. Therefore, based on quarterly changes of fund holdings, we 
estimate the HFT intensity of a fund’s trade portfolio (HFTT) in a quarter as follows: 
𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑖,𝑡
𝑇= ∑𝑤𝑖,𝑘,𝑡
𝑇
𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑘,𝑡
𝑁𝑖,𝑡
𝑇
𝑘=1
,                                                       (3) 
where 𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑘,𝑡 is the HFT-intensity proxy for stock k in quarter t, 𝑁𝑖,𝑡
𝑇 is the number of stocks traded 
by fund i in quarter t, and 𝑤𝑖,𝑘,𝑡
𝑇
 is the weight of stock k’s dollar trading volume in the trade 
portfolio of fund i in quarter t: 
𝑤𝑖,𝑘,𝑡
𝑇
=
|∆𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖,𝑘,𝑡|𝑃𝑘,𝑡
∑
|∆𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖,𝑗,𝑡|𝑃𝑗,𝑡
𝑁𝑖
𝑗=1
.                                                  (4) 
Higher HFTT means the fund faces more intensive HFT in stocks it has traded during quarter t. 
Since the holdings database contains only positions held, it is impossible to precisely estimate 
trading volumes of each stock in each quarter. Instead, trading volume of a stock and the total 
trading volume of a fund are estimated as the lower bounds of actual values. 
Second, if HFT affects fund performance through its potential impact on cross-sectional 
stock returns, average intensity of HFT in a fund’s current holdings should be more closely related 
 
where 𝐵𝑀𝑖,𝑘,𝑡 is a dummy variable that equals to one if firm i is within BM decile k in month t and zero otherwise. 
The use of both alternative measures gives qualitatively and quantitatively similar results for the main tests of this 
paper. Results are not reported but are available from the authors. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

15 
 
to subsequent fund performance. Based on quarterly fund holdings, we estimate the weightedaverage HFT intensity of a fund’s holdings (HFTH) in a quarter as follows: 
𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑖,𝑡
𝐻= ∑𝑤𝑖,𝑘,𝑡
𝐻𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑘,𝑡
𝑁𝑖,𝑡
𝐻
𝑘=1
,                                                       (5) 
where 𝑤𝑖,𝑘,𝑡
𝐻 is the weight of stock k in fund i at the end of quarter t, and 𝑁𝑖,𝑡
𝐻 is the number of 
holdings of fund i in quarter t. 
 
3.5 Factor models and fund performance evaluation 
We mainly use the Fama-French-Carhart four-factor (FFC-4) model to measure risk-adjusted 
returns of active mutual funds:  
𝑅𝑖,𝑡−𝑅𝐹,𝑡= 𝛼𝑖+ 𝛽𝑖
𝑀𝐾𝑇(𝑅𝑀𝐾𝑇,𝑡−𝑅𝐹,𝑡) + 𝛽𝑖
𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡+ 𝛽𝑖,𝑇
𝐻𝑀𝐿𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡+ 𝛽𝑖,𝑇
𝑈𝑀𝐷𝑈𝑀𝐷𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡, (6) 
where 𝑅𝑀𝐾𝑇,𝑡, 𝑅𝐹,𝑡, 𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡, 𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡, and 𝑈𝑀𝐷𝑡 are excess return, risk-free return, smallminus-big, high-minus-low, and momentum factors in month t. In addition, to capture the potential 
impact of liquidity on stock and mutual fund performance, we add an illiquidity premium factor 
(illiquid-minus-liquid, IML) to the FFC-4 model to obtain the five-factor FFC-IML model: 
𝑅𝑖,𝑡−𝑅𝐹,𝑡= 𝛼𝑖+ 𝛽𝑖
𝑀𝐾𝑇(𝑅𝑀𝐾𝑇,𝑡−𝑅𝐹,𝑡) + 𝛽𝑖
𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡+ 𝛽𝑖,𝑇
𝐻𝑀𝐿𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡+ 𝛽𝑖,𝑇
𝑈𝑀𝐷𝑈𝑀𝐷𝑡 
+𝛽𝑖,𝑇
𝐼𝑀𝐿𝐼𝑀𝐿𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡.                                                              (7) 
We use RQS as an inverse measure of liquidity and follow a similar approach as in Amihud 
et al. (2015) to construct the IML factor.16 Specifically, at the beginning of each month t, stocks 
are sorted into quintiles based on the average volatility of their daily returns in months t–3 to t–1 
to control for the known volatility effect on cross-sectional stock returns. Within each volatility 
 
16 Volume-weighted relative effective spread (RES) is also used to construct the IML factor in robustness tests. The 
use of RES gives qualitatively and quantitatively similar results in all the relevant tests. Results are not reported but 
are available from the authors. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

16 
 
quintile, stocks are further sorted into deciles based on average RQS in months t–3 to t–1. Valueweighted returns are then estimated for each of these 50 (5 × 10) portfolios in months t+1, t+2, 
and t+3, whereas returns in month t are skipped to avoid potential short-term reversals. The zeroinvestment illiquidity premium factor, IML, is constructed as the difference in returns between the 
five least liquid portfolios and the five most liquid portfolios (across volatility quintiles). During 
the sample period, the IML factor is significantly positive at 0.63% per month (t-value = 3.32).  
 
4 IMPACT OF HFT ON STOCK RETURN AND PERFORMANCE OF 
ACTIVE FUNDS 
In this section, we investigate the relation between HFT and stock return and that between HFT 
and fund performance. We construct long-short portfolios by sorting stocks and funds based on 
HFT intensity and estimate their risk-adjusted returns. Various factor models and specifications 
are used for robustness tests. We also examine the relation between HFT and stock return in terciles 
of stocks sorted by HFT intensity to preclude the possibility of self-selection bias. 
 
4.1 HFT intensity and stock returns 
We examine the relation between HFT intensity and stock returns using an approach consistent to 
the construction of the IML factor described in Section 3.5. In each month t, stocks are sorted into 
quintiles based on the volatility of daily returns over months t–3 to t–1. Within each volatility 
quintile, stocks are further sorted into quintiles based on their HFT intensity over months t–3 to t–
1. Value-weighted returns are then calculated for each of these 25 (5 × 5) portfolios over months 
t+1 to t+3. Return of each HFT-intensity quintile is calculated as the equal-weighted average of 
the returns of the five volatility quintiles within this HFT-intensity quintile. As shown in Panel A 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

17 
 
of Table 4, there is clearly a negative relation between HFT intensity and stock returns—the 
quintile with the highest HFT intensity underperforms that with the lowest HFT intensity by 0.51% 
per month, or 6.12% per year, based on the FFC-4 model. Results based on the capital asset pricing 
model (CAPM) and the FF-3 model are qualitatively and quantitatively similar. Moreover, this 
negative relation is largely reduced and becomes statistically insignificant once the IML factor is 
controlled.  
It is possible that HFT-intensive stocks provide lower FFC-4-adjusted returns merely 
because they are more liquid. To disentangle the effect of HFT intensity from the effect of liquidity 
level on stock returns, we repeat the above tests on quintiles of stocks sorted by their liquidity level 
(inversely proxied by the RQS) in the prior three months, where the HFT quintiles are independent 
of the illiquidity quintiles. As reported in Panel B of Table 4, the negative relation between HFT 
intensity and FFC-4-adjusted stock returns are strong and significant or marginally significant in 
four of the liquidity quintiles. More importantly, consistent with the prediction of the stylized 
illustration in Section 2, this negative relation is generally stronger in quintiles with lower RQS 
(higher liquidity). Therefore, the negative relation between HFT intensity and stock returns 
reported in Panel A cannot be explained by the difference in liquidity levels. Overall, these results 
are consistent with our hypothesis that HFT intensity may affect the illiquidity premium which in 
turn affects expected returns for stocks with different levels of liquidity. 
[Insert Table 4 here] 
4.2 HFT intensity and fund performance 
4.2.1 Baseline quintile portfolio analysis 
At the beginning of each month, all funds in the sample are sorted into quintiles by the average 
HFT intensity in either their trade portfolios (HFTT) or their holdings (HFTH) during the previous 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

18 
 
calendar quarter. For example, HFTT and HFTH in the second quarter of 2013 are used to sort funds 
in July, August, and September 2013. Equal-weighted returns are then calculated for each quintile 
portfolio based on pre-fee or post-fee fund returns, and portfolios are rebalanced monthly.17 The 
risk-adjusted returns are estimated by time-series regressions based on the FFC-4 model. As 
reported in Panel A of Table 5, the four-factor alphas decrease by HFT intensity for all four 
specifications. For example, when sorted by HFTT, funds in the top quintile significantly 
underperform funds in the bottom quintile by a monthly pre-fee alpha of 0.21% (t-value = 2.34), 
or roughly 2.52% annually; when sorted by HFTH, funds in the top quintile significantly 
underperform funds in the bottom quintile by a monthly pre-fee alpha of 0.22% (t-value = 2.40), 
or roughly 2.64% annually. The use of post-fee return makes little difference.  
[Insert Table 5 here] 
4.2.2 Robustness tests 
We conduct robustness tests based on alternative specifications of the quintile portfolio analysis 
and report the 5–1 return spread in Table A.3 of the Internet Appendix. The underperformance of 
funds associated with more-intensive HFT is robust to the use of various factor models, the use of 
value weighting of quintile portfolios, removing the financial crisis period (01/2008–06/2009), or 
the use of the Ferson-Schadt (1996) conditional model. However, there is no underperformance of 
stocks relative to HFT intensity during 1993–2002 when HFT was not intensive or nonexistent.  
In addition, we also examine the relation between HFT and fund performance by estimating 
Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of fund return or FFC-4-adjusted return (alpha) 
on lagged HFT intensity: 
𝑅𝑖,𝑡= 𝛼+ 𝛽𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜹𝑿𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡,                                             (8) 
 
17 The use of equal weighting is to prevent a few very large funds from dominating the test results. Value weighting 
is used in robustness tests and generates qualitatively and quantitatively similar results.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

19 
 
where 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 is the return or alpha of fund i in month t, 𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑖,𝑡−1 is HFT intensity in trade portfolio 
(HFTT) or holdings (HFTH) of a fund, and X is a vector of control variables including fund size 
(TNA), turnover ratio (TO), age (Age), annual expense ratio (ExpRatio), monthly net flow ratio 
(Flow), and lagged dependent variable (DV). Monthly alpha is estimated as the difference between 
fund excess return in that month and the return predicted by factor models, which is the product 
of fund factor loadings and the realizations of those factors in that month. Factor loadings are 
estimated based on time-series regression using pre-fee returns in the previous 36 months. All 
independent variables, except for Age and ExpRatio, are based on the previous month or calendar 
quarter. As reported in Table A.4 of the Internet Appendix, intensive HFT is negatively and 
significantly related to future fund performance in all specifications.  
In sum, intensive HFT is related to significantly lower risk-adjusted returns of actively 
managed mutual funds in both quintile portfolio analysis and Fama-MacBeth (1973) crosssectional regression analysis; this negative relation is robust to different factor models, weighting 
methods, sorting methods, and the use of conditional models. This is consistent with the illiquidity 
premium effect illustrated in Section 2. 
 
4.3 Illiquidity premium as an explanation 
4.3.1 Quintile portfolio analysis after controlling for illiquidity premium 
As shown in Table A.2 and Figure A.2.A in the Internet Appendix and consistent with prior studies, 
we find that level of stock liquidity (inversely measured by RQS or RES) indeed increases by HFT 
intensity. To examine if the illiquidity premium channel proposed in the earlier section of this 
paper could explain the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund performance, we repeat 
the baseline quintile portfolio analysis by using the FFC-IML factor to control for the illiquidity 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

20 
 
premium. As reported in Panel B of Table 5, after controlling for the illiquidity premium, the 5–1 
return spread based on fund pre-fee returns is narrowed from –0.21% to –0.09% (from –0.22% to 
–0.11%) and is no longer statistically significant (t-value = 1.25 or 1.36) when funds are sorted by 
HFTT (HFTH). Moreover, loadings of the IML factor are highly significantly (not reported). 
Therefore, the illiquidity premium explains about one-half of the negative relation between HFT 
intensity and fund performance. Moreover, this result is robustness to many alternative 
specifications (not reported): removing stocks with stock price below $5, IML factor constructed 
using effective spread, and removing the financial crisis period (01/2008–06/2009).  
4.3.2 Distinction between self-selection bias and causality 
The above findings are consistent with our hypothesis, but the direction of causality is uncertain: 
HFT-intensive stocks are likely to be liquid stocks, but lower risk-adjusted returns of these stocks 
may not be caused by HFT. To preclude such a possibility, we examine whether HFT intensity is 
related to the magnitude of illiquidity premium. In particular, we repeat estimation of the illiquidity 
premium based on RQS and terciles of stocks presorted by HFT intensity, where the liquidity 
deciles are independent from the HFT terciles. As reported in Table 6, there is a high illiquidity 
premium of 0.63% per month (adjusted for the FFC-4 factors; t-value = 3.32) in U.S. common 
stocks during 2003–2018, but it is concentrated in the HFT-intensive tercile of stocks and is weak 
and not statistically significant in the other two terciles. This finding is robust to the use of relative 
effective spread as alternative measures of liquidity or sorting liquidity deciles conditional on the 
HFT terciles. Moreover, as reported in Table A.5 in the Internet Appendix and consistent with the 
findings in Table 5, there is no significant illiquidity premium during 1993–2002 when HFT was 
not intensive or nonexistent. Overall, these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that the 
combination of cost per trade and trading frequency determines the illiquidity premium. In addition, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

21 
 
it clearly suggests a causality between intensive HFT and weaker fund performance: without the 
presence of intensive HFT, a significant illiquidity premium would not exist. This is also consistent 
with the finding of Ben-Rephael, Kadan, and Wohl (2015) that illiquidity premium has largely 
diminished in the recent period due to improved market liquidity. 
[Insert Table 6 here] 
The above findings imply that the underperformance of mutual funds associated with 
intensive HFT is not a reasonable compromise to obtain more liquidity. For HFTs who hold and 
trade liquid assets, the lower required return on liquid assets can be offset by substantial savings 
from lower trading costs. However, for most traditional institutional investors who trade much less 
frequently, the gains from lower trading costs of liquid assets cannot offset the loss in expected 
returns, consistent with the illustration in Section 2. Therefore, institutional investors should 
reduce their investments in stocks where HFT intensity is high.  
 
5 ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS 
In this section, we discuss possible alternative explanations for the negative relation between HFT 
and fund performance reported in Section 4. First, we investigate the possibility that HFT increases 
trading costs of mutual funds. Second, we examine whether this negative relation comes from 
liquidity risk premium, the idiosyncratic volatility anomaly, or temporary overpricing. Finally, we 
investigate if funds are forced to hold HFT-intensive stocks due to constraints imposed by their 
activeness or size. 
 
5.1 Institutional trading costs 
5.1.1 Quintile portfolios using return of fund holdings 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

22 
 
If the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund performance is due to higher trading costs, 
then portfolios created by replicating the holdings of mutual funds and assuming zero trading cost 
should not be negatively affected by HFT. To test this hypothesis, we redo the quintile portfolio 
analysis using the return of holdings of funds instead of NAV-based returns.18 The return of 
holdings of fund i in month t, 𝑅𝑖,𝑡
𝐻, is estimated as 
𝑅𝑖,𝑡
𝐻= ∑𝑤𝑖,𝑘,𝑡−1𝑅𝑘,𝑡
𝑁
𝑘=1
,                                                        (9) 
where 𝑤𝑖,𝑘,𝑡−1 is the weight of stock k in fund i at the end of month t–1, and 𝑅𝑘,𝑡 is the return of 
stock k in month t estimated from closing quote midpoint.19 In each month, we follow the same 
approach in Table 5 to sort mutual funds into quintiles based on their HFTT or HFTH in the prior 
calendar quarter. The equally weighted returns of each quintile as well as the 5–1 return spread are 
calculated based on 𝑅𝐻 and are then regressed on the FFC-4 factors.  
Table 7 reports the FFC-4-adjusted returns of quintile portfolios based on holdings. In 
columns (1) and (3), funds are sorted by their lagged HFTT and HFTH, respectively, and trading 
costs are ignored. The 5–1 return spreads are –0.19% per month (t-value = –2.35) in column (1) 
and –0.21% per month (t-value = –2.31) in column (3), so they are of similar magnitudes as the 
ones reported in Table 5. That is, funds associated with intensive HFT significantly underperform 
other funds even if trading costs are assumed to be zero. Therefore, trading costs are not likely to 
be the primary explanation for the negative relation between HFT and fund performance.  
[Insert Table 7 here] 
 
18 About one-half of funds in the sample report their holdings every quarter. For these funds, we assume that the 
monthly trading volume of a stock is one-third of the net share change of that stock during that quarter. For example, 
if fund i holds 100 shares of stock x at the end of March 2013 and holds 130 shares of that stock at the end of June 
2013, then we assume that the share volume of stock x purchased by fund i is 10 in each of April, May, and June 2013, 
and shares of x held by the fund at the end of April, May, and June is 110, 120, and 130, respectively. 
19 The use of returns calculated by closing prices gives very similar results. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

23 
 
However, the above result does not preclude the possibility that HFT may still affect fund 
performance to some extent through its impact on trading costs. In this part, we provide additional 
evidence by estimating total trading costs including both direct trading costs and price impact costs 
and then deducting them from fund returns to see if they make a noticeable difference. Specifically, 
we assume that the direct cost to trade one share of a stock is one-half of its volume-weighted 
average effective spread in that month, and we follow a similar approach as in Breen, Hodrick, 
and Korajczyk (2002) and Korajczyk and Sadka (2004) to estimate the price impact cost.20 As 
reported in columns (2) and (4) of Table 7, when funds are sorted by HFTT, the 5–1 return spread 
is –0.19% per month (t-value = –2.34) after the deduction of trading costs, and this is similar to 
the result reported in column (1) where trading costs are not deducted. Similar results can also be 
found when sorting the funds by HFTH. Overall, these findings imply that HFT’s impact on 
institutional trading costs is not the primary driver of our results. 
5.1.2 Multivariate analysis on the return gap 
To provide more reliable evidence regarding HFT’s impact on institutional trading costs at the 
individual fund level, we estimate Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions to examine 
the impact of HFT on the “return gap” of mutual funds. Following Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng 
(2008), we define the return gap of fund i in month t, 𝑅𝐺𝑖,𝑡, as 
𝑅𝐺𝑖,𝑡= 𝑅𝑖,𝑡−(𝑅𝑖,𝑡
𝐻−𝐸𝑋𝑃𝑖,𝑡),                                                  (10) 
where 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 is the NAV-based post-fee return, 𝑅𝑖,𝑡
𝐻 is the return of holdings, and 𝐸𝑋𝑃𝑖,𝑡 is the 
monthly expense ratio. As reported in Panel A of Table 8, the average of the return gap is –0.02%. 
The return gap is then regressed on HFT intensity and other fund characteristics: 
𝑅𝐺𝑖,𝑡= 𝛼+ 𝛽𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜹𝑿𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡,                                        (11) 
 
20 Details of the estimation procedure are provided in Internet Appendix B. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

24 
 
where 𝐻𝐹𝑇𝑖,𝑡−1 is the HFT intensity in trade portfolio (HFTT) or holdings (HFTH) of a fund in the 
prior calendar quarter, and X is a vector of control variables including fund size (TNA), turnover 
ratio (TO), age (Age), monthly net flow ratio (Flow), and annual expense ratio (ExpRatio). As 
reported in Panel B of Table 8, neither HFTT nor HFTH is significantly related to fund return gap. 
Moreover, the use of NAV-based pre-fee return leads to similar results (not reported).  
[Insert Table 8 here] 
Overall, analyses on the fund return gap show no evidence that HFT increases trading costs 
of mutual funds. This is consistent with the findings of Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014) 
that no increase in institutional trading costs has been found following technology upgrades that 
lower the latency of the London Stock Exchange. Moreover, it indicates that the underperformance 
of funds holding HFT-intensive stocks is caused by lower risk-adjusted returns of the stocks held 
by those funds. Therefore, in the rest of this section we focus on HFT intensity in stocks held by 
the funds (HFTH) rather than that in stocks traded by those funds (HFTT). 
 
5.2 Risk premium and market anomalies 
5.2.1 Liquidity risk premium 
Recent studies generally find that HFT reduces liquidity risk (Hendershott & Riordan, 2013). As 
stocks with high liquidity risk earn significant liquidity risk premium (Pástor & Stambaugh, 2003; 
Acharya & Pedersen, 2005), HFT may reduce expected stock returns by reducing liquidity risk. 
To control for this liquidity risk premium effect, we add the Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity 
risk factor (PS) to the FFC-4 model and use this alternative five-factor model to evaluate the 
performance of quintile portfolios formed by HFTH. As reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 
9, controlling for liquidity risk premium has no impact on the 5–1 return spread. Moreover, loading 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

25 
 
of the PS factor is not statistically significant (not reported). Therefore, liquidity risk is unlikely to 
explain the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund performance.  
5.2.2 Idiosyncratic volatility anomaly 
HFT has been found to increase stock price volatility (Boehmer, Fong, & Yu, 2021). As illustrated 
in Figure A.2.B in the Internet Appendix, HFT intensity is strongly and positively correlated with 
volatility. Therefore, it is possible that the main finding of this paper comes from the idiosyncratic 
volatility (IVOL) anomaly—HFT reduces stock returns and fund performance because it increases 
IVOL. To examine this possibility, we follow Ang et al. (2006) to create a zero-investment 
portfolio to capture the IVOL anomaly and add the IVOL factor to the four-factor model to 
evaluate performance of portfolios sorted by HFT intensity. The IVOL of a stock in a month is 
estimated as the standard deviation of daily return residuals by the Fama-French three-factor model, 
and the IVOL factor is constructed by an approach similar to that of the IML factor. During the 
sample period, the IVOL factor is significantly negative at –0.73% per month (four-factor adjusted; 
t-value = –2.59). As reported in columns (3) and (4) of Table 9, however, controlling for the IVOL 
factor has little impact on the 5–1 return spread, and the loading on the IVOL factor is not 
statistically significant when explaining the 5–1 return spread. Therefore, idiosyncratic volatility 
is unlikely to explain the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund performance.  
5.2.3 Temporary overpricing 
HFTs deliberately select stocks for trading. If HFTs prefer to trade overpriced stocks, then the 
negative relation between HFT intensity and fund performance merely reflects a selection bias. 
Although plausible, this is an unlikely explanation for the following reasons. First, there is no 
known reason to suspect that HFTs would prefer overpriced stocks.21 Second, after the initiation 
 
21 The literature generally finds that HFT increases intraday price efficiency by trading in the direction of permanent 
price changes and in the opposite direction of transitory pricing errors (Brogaard, Hendershott, & Riordan, 2014) and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

26 
 
of the 2008 short-sale ban, short-banned stocks generally experienced overpricing (Autore, 
Billingsley, & Kovacs, 2011), but nonshort HFT volume declined rather than increased (Brogaard, 
Hendershott, & Riordan, 2017).22 This contradicts the notion that HFTs prefer to trade overpriced 
stocks. Nevertheless, we use short interest ratio (SIR), defined as the ratio of shares held in short 
positions to total shares outstanding, as a proxy for overpricing to construct a factor capturing 
future price correction of temporarily overpriced stocks. Many empirical studies, such as Asquith, 
Pathak, and Ritter (2005), consider SIR to reflect investors’ perception about overpricing. The SIR 
factor is constructed by an approach similar to that of the IML factor, and it is significantly negative 
over the sample period (–0.77% per month with t-value of –4.45). As reported in columns (5) and 
(6) of Table 9, controlling for the SIR factor has little impact on the 5–1 return spread, implying 
that the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund performance is unlikely to be caused by 
HFTs’ preference to overpriced stocks, if any. 
[Insert Table 9 here] 
5.3 Possible constraints faced by fund managers 
Why are fund managers holding HFT-intensive stocks when these stocks deliver lower returns? 
It’s possible that fund managers are not aware of the lower returns associated with these stocks, 
but it’s also possible that certain constraints force fund managers to hold these stocks. For example, 
some closet indexers may have to hold a large number of HFT-intensive stocks as such stocks 
represent significant fractions of market indices tracked by these managers. An active manager 
 
that intensive HFT is associated with intraday price series that is closer to random walk (Conrad, Wahal, & Xiang 
2015). Thus, it is reasonable to believe that HFTs are interested in mispriced stocks and are actively involved in price 
discovery by buying underpriced stocks and selling overpriced ones. However, like nHFTs, HFTs face short sale 
constraints—it is easier to buy than to sell. Therefore, there is more reason to believe that HFTs prefer underpriced 
stocks instead of overpriced ones if HFTs have a preference for mispricing at all. 
22 As reported by Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2017), the average relative HFT volume declined from 23.91% 
(of the total volume) to 15.53% for short-banned stocks, whereas average HFT short volume declined by only 5.63% 
(of the total volume). Therefore, average nonshort HFT volume declined by 2.75% (of the total volume). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

27 
 
may also have to invest in many HFT-intensive stocks when managing a large portfolio due to the 
heavy presence of HFTs in so many stocks. We examine these possibilities by repeating our 
baseline quintile portfolio analysis on subsamples of more versus less active funds and large versus 
small funds. In Panel A of Table 10, in each month all funds in the sample are sorted into quartiles 
by the active shares measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009) and the top (bottom) quartiles are 
defined as more (less) active funds. In contrast to the hypothesis that less active funds may be 
forced to hold HFT-intensive stocks, the negative relation between HFT intensity and fund 
performance is actually stronger in more active funds. Similarly, results reported in Panel B do not 
support the possibility that large funds may be forced to hold HFT-intensive stocks, as the negative 
relation between HFT intensity and fund performance has roughly the same magnitude in large 
and small funds. In sum, the above results do not support the constraint hypothesis. 
[Insert Table 10 here] 
 
6 CONCLUSION 
HFT has experienced rapid growth over the past two decades, yet our understanding of its impact 
on financial markets and on other market participants is limited. Even though several studies 
suggest that HFT reduces trading costs and improves market efficiency, there is still widespread 
concern regarding its potentially negative impact on the performance of traditional institutional 
investors. The primary channel through which HFTs affect institutional investors is thought to be 
due to predatory trading, which may increase institutional trading costs. Limited availability of 
HFT data for U.S. markets also restricts comprehensive studies on HFT, leading to mixed and 
inconclusive empirical findings. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

28 
 
This paper contributes to the literature by being the first to explore a new channel through 
which HFTs may affect other investors: the illiquidity premium. Since HFTs prefer liquid stocks 
due to their high trading frequency, they make those stocks expensive, thereby causing their returns 
to be lower than those for illiquid stocks. Funds that hold stocks with high HFT intensity may 
underperform other funds or the market. We illustrate this concept by a simple numerical example, 
and we indeed find that intensive HFT in stocks traded or held by funds is related to significantly 
lower risk-adjusted fund returns. Monthly four-factor-adjusted return spread between the top and 
the bottom quintiles of funds sorted by HFT intensity in their holdings is –0.22%. Further analyses 
show that one-half of this negative abnormal return can be explained by the illiquidity premium. 
Among other contributions, we find no impact of HFTs on trading costs of mutual funds. 
Our approach of measuring HFT intensity by quote messages is largely based on that of 
Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) and Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015), but we refine 
the methodology by adjusting for stock size. The HFT measure used in this paper has a high 
correlation with actual HFT activity of the 120-stock NASDAQ sample. As our HFT measure can 
be constructed based on the publicly available NYSE TAQ database, our empirical evidence is 
based on the entire U.S. stock market over a 16-year period instead of the more limited samples 
used in many studies. 
Although the results of this paper ease concern about HFT’s negative impact on trading 
costs of other institutional investors, they reveal other challenges faced by managers of traditional 
investment companies. This paper finds that intensive HFT may be detrimental to the performance 
of traditional institutional investors because it makes liquidity to be more “expensive” to these 
investors. This finding suggests that money managers should be cautious when buying or holding 
stocks that experience highly intensive HFT.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

29 
 
REFERENCES 
Acharya, V. V., & Pedersen, L. H. (2005). Asset pricing with liquidity risk. Journal of Financial 
Economics, 77(2), 375–410. 
Amihud, Y., Hameed, A., Kang, W., & Zhang, H. (2015). The illiquidity premium: International 
evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 117(2), 350–368. 
Amihud, Y., & Mendelson, H. (1986). Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread. Journal of Financial 
Economics, 17(2), 223–249. 
Ang, A., Hodrick, R. J., Xing, Y., & Zhang, X. (2006). The cross-section of volatility and expected 
returns. Journal of Finance, 61(1), 259–299. 
Asquith, P., Pathak, P. A., & Ritter, J. R. (2005). Short interest, institutional ownership, and stock 
returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 78(2), 243–276. 
Autore, D. M., Billingsley, R. S., & Kovacs, T. (2011). The 2008 short sale ban: Liquidity, 
dispersion of opinion, and the cross-section of returns of US financial stocks. Journal of 
Banking & Finance, 35(9), 2252–2266. 
Baldauf, M., & Mollner, J. (2020). High-frequency trading and market performance. Journal of 
Finance, 75(3), 1495–1526. 
Baron, M., Brogaard, J., Hagströmer, B., & Kirilenko, A. (2019). Risk and return in highfrequency trading. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 54(3), 993–1024. 
Ben-Rephael, A., Kadan, O., & Wohl, A. (2015). The diminishing liquidity premium. Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 50(1/2), 197–229. 
Biais, B., Foucault, T., & Moinas, S. (2015). Equilibrium fast trading. Journal of Financial 
Economics, 116(2), 292–313. 
Boehmer, E., Fong, K. Y., & Wu, J. J. (2021). Algorithmic trading and market quality: 
International evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 56(8), 2659–2688. 
Bongaerts, D., & Van Achter, M. (2021). Competition among liquidity providers with access to 
high-frequency trading technology. Journal of Financial Economics, 140(1), 220–249.  
Breen, W. J., Hodrick, L. S., & Korajczyk, R. A. (2002). Predicting equity liquidity. Management 
Science, 48(4), 470–483. 
Brogaard, J., & Garriott, C. (2019). High-frequency trading competition. Journal of Financial and 
Quantitative Analysis, 54(4), 1469–1497. 
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., Hunt, S., & Ysusi, C. (2014). High-frequency trading and the 
execution costs of institutional investors. Financial Review, 49(2), 345–369. 
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., & Riordan, R. (2014). High-frequency trading and price discovery. 
Review of Financial Studies, 27(8), 2267–2306. 
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., & Riordan, R. (2017). High-frequency trading and the 2008 shortsale ban. Journal of Financial Economics, 124(1), 22–42. 
Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance, 52(1), 
57–82. 
Chalmers, J. M., & Kadlec, G. B. (1998). An empirical examination of the amortized 
spread. Journal of Financial Economics, 48(2), 159–188. 
Chen, X., Huang, J. Z., Sun, Z., Yao, T., & Yu, T. (2020). Liquidity premium in the eye of the 
beholder: An analysis of the clientele effect in the corporate bond market. Management 
Science, 66(2), 932–957. 
Chen, Y., & Qin, N. (2017). The behavior of investor flows in corporate bond mutual funds. 
Management Science, 63(5), 1365–1381. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

30 
 
Conrad, J., Wahal, S., & Xiang, J. (2015). High-frequency quoting, trading, and the efficiency of 
prices. Journal of Financial Economics, 116(2), 271–291. 
Cremers, K. M., & Petajisto, A. (2009). How active is your fund manager? A new measure that 
predicts performance. Review of Financial Studies, 22(9), 3329–3365. 
Evans, R. B. (2010). Mutual fund incubation. Journal of Finance, 65(4), 1581–1611. 
Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of 
Finance, 47(2), 427–465. 
Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. 
Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), 3–56. 
Fama, E. F., & MacBeth, J. D. (1973). Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal of 
Political Economy, 81(3), 607–636. 
Ferson, W. E., & Schadt, R. W. (1996). Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing 
economic conditions. Journal of Finance, 51(2), 425–461. 
Goldstein, M. A., Kumar, P., & Graves, F. C. (2014). Computerized and high-frequency 
trading. Financial Review, 49(2), 177–202. 
Hendershott, T., Jones, C. M., & Menkveld, A. J. (2011). Does algorithmic trading improve 
liquidity? Journal of Finance, 66(1), 1–33. 
Hendershott, T., & Riordan, R. (2013). Algorithmic trading and the market for liquidity. Journal 
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48(4), 1001–1024. 
Hirschey, N. (2021). Do high-frequency traders anticipate buying and selling pressure? 
Management Science, 67(6), 3321–3345.  
Kacperczyk, M., Sialm, C., & Zheng, L. (2008). Unobserved actions of mutual funds. Review of 
Financial Studies, 21(6), 2379–2416. 
Karpoff, J. M., & Lou, X. (2010). Short sellers and financial misconduct. Journal of Finance, 65(5), 
1879–1913. 
Korajczyk, R. A., & Murphy, D. (2019). High-frequency market making to large institutional 
trades. Review of Financial Studies, 32(3), 1034–1067. 
Korajczyk, R. A., & Sadka, R. (2004). Are momentum profits robust to trading costs? Journal of 
Finance, 59(3), 1039–1082. 
Newey, W. K., & West, K. D. (1987). A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and 
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica, 55(3), 703–708. 
Pástor, L., & Stambaugh, R. F. (2003). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of 
Political Economy, 111(3), 642–685. 
Shkilko, A., & Sokolov, K. (2020). Every cloud has a silver lining: Fast trading, microwave 
connectivity, and trading costs. Journal of Finance, 75(6), 2899–2927. 
van Kervel, V., & Menkveld, A. J. (2019). High-frequency trading around large institutional orders. 
Journal of Finance, 74(3), 1091–1137. 
Yang, L., & Zhu, H. (2020). Back-running: Seeking and hiding fundamental information in order 
flows. Review of Financial Studies, 33(4), 1484–1533. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

31 
 
TABLE 1 Summary statistics of mutual fund characteristics 
 
Panel A: Distribution of fund characteristics 
  
Mean 
Min 
P25 
Median 
P75 
Max 
Number of funds 
3,536 
Number of reported holdings 
102 
1 
40 
61 
94 
2,820 
TNA ($ millions) 
1,498 
10 
94 
309 
1,027 
199,483 
Monthly flow ratio (%) 
–0.46 
–49.95 
–1.48 
–0.59 
0.39 
49.86 
Age (years) 
16.66 
3.00 
8.52 
13.83 
20.26 
94.53 
Annual expense ratio (%) 
1.30 
–0.51 
0.97 
1.23 
1.57 
4.89 
Annual turnover ratio (%) 
74.76 
0.00 
31.10 
57.00 
95.00 
3452.00 
Monthly pre-fee return (%) 
0.86 
–89.86 
–1.38 
1.29 
3.60 
91.05 
Monthly return of holdings (%) 
0.90 
–34.36 
–1.46 
1.27 
3.77 
32.62 
Panel B: Average fund characteristics in each year 
Year 
Number 
of funds 
Number 
of stocks 
held by 
funds 
TNA 
($ millions) 
Monthly 
net flow 
ratio 
(%) 
Age 
(years) 
Annual 
expense 
ratio 
(%) 
Annual 
turnover 
ratio 
(%) 
Monthly 
pre-fee 
return 
(%) 
Monthly 
return 
of 
holdings 
(%) 
2003 
1,579 
86 
976 
0.51 
13.66 
1.59 
87.20 
3.69 
4.02 
2004 
1,682 
88 
1,244 
–0.05 
13.65 
1.55 
81.96 
1.22 
1.13 
2005 
1,701 
88 
1,323 
–0.12 
13.96 
1.51 
80.52 
0.71 
0.64 
2006 
1,727 
89 
1,528 
–0.32 
14.41 
1.45 
85.17 
1.13 
1.05 
2007 
1,743 
90 
1,674 
–0.56 
14.97 
1.40 
83.61 
0.70 
0.53 
2008 
1,844 
99 
1,428 
–0.77 
15.27 
1.37 
97.97 
–3.72 
–3.83 
2009 
1,838 
105 
1,041 
–0.42 
15.35 
1.34 
91.23 
2.63 
2.54 
2010 
2,214 
108 
1,149 
–0.46 
15.67 
1.30 
79.01 
1.80 
2.16 
2011 
2,249 
106 
1,193 
–0.42 
15.91 
1.27 
72.93 
0.03 
0.13 
2012 
2,137 
104 
1,227 
–0.63 
16.62 
1.25 
66.68 
1.32 
1.34 
2013 
2,103 
105 
1,451 
–0.18 
17.40 
1.22 
65.76 
2.66 
2.71 
2014 
2,059 
105 
1,733 
–0.36 
17.96 
1.21 
63.73 
0.77 
0.82 
2015 
2,096 
104 
1,776 
–0.47 
18.50 
1.18 
63.45 
0.02 
–0.01 
2016 
2,077 
104 
1,711 
–0.93 
19.04 
1.16 
62.15 
1.07 
1.25 
2017 
2,013 
107 
1,957 
–0.84 
19.58 
1.12 
60.44 
1.58 
1.60 
2018 
1,992 
113 
2,159 
–0.66 
20.04 
1.09 
60.05 
–0.54 
–0.47 
Note: This table reports summary statistics of characteristics of 3,536 U.S. actively managed equity mutual funds 
during the sample period of 2003–2018. Number of holdings is based on fund holdings reported by the CRSP 
mutual fund database and the Thomson Reuters S12 database. Expense ratio is the ratio of total investment that 
shareholders pay for the fund’s operating expenses, which include 12b-1 fees, possible waivers, and 
reimbursements. Turnover ratio is the minimum of aggregated sales or aggregated purchases of securities divided by 
the average 12-month TNA of the fund. To be included in the samples, a fund must have TNA no less than $10 
million and be more than three years old at the beginning of each month. Panel A shows the distributions of fund 
characteristics. Panel B reports the annual averages of fund characteristics. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

32 
 
TABLE 2 Summary statistics of stock characteristics 
 
Variables 
Mean 
Min 
P25 
P50 
P75 
Max 
Panel A: Monthly stock characteristics over 2003–2018 
  
  
  
Number of stocks 
8,150 
Number of stock months 
691,999 
RET (%) 
0.90 
–97.22 
–5.31 
0.55 
6.53 
440.77 
PRC ($) 
71 
2 
8 
18 
35 
326,000 
MV ($ million) 
4,529 
10 
141 
512 
2,033 
896,472 
B/M 
0.74 
0.00 
0.31 
0.54 
0.87 
94.33 
TO (%) 
17.40 
0.00 
4.96 
11.51 
21.57 
7,100.02 
Volatility (%) 
2.61 
0.00 
1.45 
2.14 
3.20 
46.19 
IVOL (%) 
2.08 
0.00 
1.07 
1.65 
2.57 
44.38 
RQS (%) 
2.06 
0.01 
0.43 
0.97 
2.58 
24.24 
RES (%) 
1.04 
0.00 
0.24 
0.54 
1.31 
35.96 
PIC 
12.39 
0.00 
4.35 
8.81 
15.70 
1,353.31 
SIR (%) 
4.61 
0.00 
0.92 
2.69 
6.14 
90.22 
IO (%) 
57.62 
0.00 
30.30 
63.77 
84.83 
120.00 
ANLY 
9 
2 
4 
7 
12 
56 
DISP (%) 
18.78 
0.00 
1.59 
3.67 
10.09 
27,675.00 
Panel B: Monthly quote updates (×103) over 2003–2018 
  
  
  
All Stocks 
733 
0 
43 
159 
517 
66,452 
1 (Small Stocks) 
40 
0 
4 
17 
47 
11,517 
2 
139 
0 
34 
77 
158 
12,344 
3 
337 
0 
88 
204 
373 
15,160 
4 
726 
0 
170 
397 
738 
33,287 
5 (Large Stocks) 
2,422 
0 
355 
1,000 
2,704 
66,452 
Note: This table reports summary statistics of characteristics of 8,150 U.S. common stocks that were traded on the 
NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ over 2003–2018. To be included in the sample, a stock month must have CRSP share 
code 10 or 11, share price above $2 at the beginning of the month, and market capitalization of at least $10 million 
at the end of the previous June. Panel A shows the distribution of monthly stock characteristics including monthly 
return (RET), share price (PRC), market value (MV), book-to-market ratio (B/M), monthly turnover ratio (TO), 
volatility based on daily returns (Volatility), idiosyncratic volatility by the approach of Ang et al. (2006) (IVOL), 
time-weighted relative quoted spread (RQS), volume-weighted average relative effective spread (RES), five-minute 
price impact cost (PIC) estimated by the approach of Breen, Hodrick, and Korajczyk (2002), short interest ratio 
(SIR), institutional ownership (IO), number of analysts following (ANLY), and analyst forecast dispersion (DISP). 
Panel B reports the average number of monthly quote messages (in thousands) for the whole sample and for each 
size quintile. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

33 
 
TABLE 3 Determinants of quote messages 
 
  
[1] 
[2] 
Intercept 
9.25*** 
1.14*** 
(85.97) 
(15.25) 
Lag[DV] 
0.87*** 
(105.50) 
Ln[MV] 
0.60*** 
0.08*** 
(22.90) 
(9.80) 
BM 
–0.02 
–0.01*** 
(–1.04) 
(–3.23) 
Lag[RET] 
0.60*** 
0.20*** 
(19.40) 
(13.40) 
Ln[PRC] 
–0.39*** 
–0.06*** 
(–10.19) 
(–10.34) 
TO 
1.82*** 
0.15*** 
(34.76) 
(6.51) 
RQS 
–25.27*** 
–3.46*** 
(–17.71) 
(–9.53) 
LIQBeta 
–0.02 
–0.00 
 
(–1.29) 
(–0.36) 
IO 
0.22*** 
0.05*** 
(9.40) 
(7.61) 
Ln[VOL] 
0.04* 
–0.03*** 
(1.86) 
(–9.81) 
Ln[ANLY] 
0.13*** 
0.03*** 
(9.53) 
(13.24) 
DISP 
–0.02** 
0.00 
(–2.38) 
(0.14) 
R2 
0.842 
0.955 
N 
3,604 
3,604 
Note: This table reports the relations between quote messages and stock characteristics based on Fama-MacBeth 
(1973) cross-sectional regressions. The sample consists of 8,150 U.S. common stocks that were traded on the NYSE, 
AMEX, and NASDAQ over 2003–2018. To be included in the sample, a stock month must have CRSP share code 
10 or 11, share price above $2 at the beginning of the month, and market capitalization of at least $10 million at the 
end of the previous June. The dependent variable is the natural log of quote messages of a stock in a month. The 
independent variables include market value of the stock at the previous June (MV), book-to-market ratio (BM), 
lagged monthly stock return (RET), share price at the beginning of a month (PRC), lagged turnover ratio (TO), 
lagged time-weighted relative quoted spread (RQS), the Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity beta (LIQBeta), 
lagged institutional ownership (IO), lagged volatility based on daily returns (VOL), number of analysts following 
(ANLY), lagged forecast dispersion (DISP), and the lagged dependent variable (DV, only in specification [2]). N is 
the average number of stocks in each month. The significance level is based on the time-series variation in the 
monthly regression coefficients over the sample period. The standard errors are adjusted for residual autocorrelation 
and heteroskedasticity based on Newey and West (1987). ***, **, and ** indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 
10% levels, respectively. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

34 
 
TABLE 4 HFT intensity and stock returns 
 
Panel A: Results are based on the entire stock sample 
HFT quintiles 
CAPM alpha 
FF-3 alpha 
FFC-4 alpha 
FFC-IML alpha 
5 (High) 
–0.34*** 
–0.31*** 
–0.29** 
–0.02 
 
(–2.61) 
(–2.65) 
(–2.52) 
(–0.21) 
4 
–0.15 
–0.13 
–0.13 
0.01 
(–1.20) 
(–1.15) 
(–1.11) 
(0.04) 
3 
0.03 
0.04 
0.05 
0.11 
(0.32) 
(0.46) 
(0.53) 
(1.25) 
2 
0.16 
0.17* 
0.19** 
0.22** 
(1.55) 
(1.77) 
(2.03) 
(2.13) 
1 (Low) 
0.19* 
0.19** 
0.21** 
0.15 
 
(1.82) 
(2.14) 
(2.43) 
(1.64) 
5 – 1 
–0.53*** 
–0.50*** 
–0.51*** 
–0.18 
  
(–3.57) 
(–3.43) 
(–3.46) 
(–1.28) 
Panel B: Results are based on subsamples of stocks sorted by illiquidity 
HFT quintiles 
RQS quintiles                    
5 (High) 
4 
3 
2 
1 (Low) 
5 (High) 
0.44* 
–0.16 
–0.34** 
–0.13 
–0.30** 
(1.73) 
(–1.02) 
(–2.19) 
(–0.86) 
(–2.33) 
4 
0.02 
0.09 
0.07 
–0.02 
–0.16 
 
(0.10) 
(0.67) 
(0.62) 
(–0.15) 
(–1.18) 
3 
0.01 
0.21* 
0.06 
0.01 
0.08 
(0.04) 
(1.84) 
(0.52) 
(0.06) 
(0.51) 
2 
0.24 
0.14 
0.19** 
0.14 
0.42** 
(1.53) 
(1.17) 
(2.10) 
(1.03) 
(2.48) 
1 (Low) 
0.23* 
0.15 
–0.02 
0.53*** 
0.29* 
(1.77) 
(1.15) 
(–0.18) 
(3.69) 
(1.73) 
5 – 1 
0.21 
–0.31* 
–0.32** 
–0.66*** 
–0.60*** 
  
(0.96) 
(–1.72) 
(–2.13) 
(–3.71) 
(–2.84) 
Note: This table reports risk-adjusted performance of quintile portfolios of stocks sorted by HFT intensity. The 
sample consists of 8,150 U.S. common stocks that were traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ over 2003–
2018. To be included in the sample, a stock month must have CRSP share code 10 or 11, share price above $2 at the 
beginning of the month, and market capitalization of at least $10 million at the end of the previous June. In Panel A, 
results are based on the entire stock sample. In each month t, stocks are sorted into quintiles based on the volatility 
of daily returns over months t–3 to t–1. Within each volatility quintile, stocks are further sorted into quintiles based 
on their HFT intensity over months t–3 to t–1. Value-weighted returns are then calculated for each of these 25 (5 × 
5) portfolios over months t+1 to t+3, and return of each HFT-intensity quintile is calculated as the equal-weighted 
average of the returns of the five volatility quintiles within this HFT-intensity quintile. Returns are adjusted by the 
CAPM, Fama-French three-factor model (FF-3), Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model (FFC-4), or the FFC-IML 
five-factor model. In Panel B, results are based on subsamples of stocks sorted by the time-weighted relative quoted 
spreads (RQS) over months t–3 to t–1. The HFT quintiles are independent of the RQS quintiles, and FFC-4-adjusted 
returns are reported. The t-statistics given in parentheses are based on Newey-West standard errors. ***, **, and * 
indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

35 
 
TABLE 5 HFT intensity and fund performance: Quintile portfolios  
 
HFT quintiles 
Funds are sorted by HFTT 
  
Funds are sorted by HFTH 
Pre-fee return 
Post-fee return 
 
Pre-fee return 
Post-fee return 
[1] 
[2] 
 
[3] 
[4] 
Panel A: FFC-4 alphas are reported 
  
  
  
  
5 (High) 
–0.11* 
–0.22*** 
–0.13** 
–0.23*** 
 
(–1.97) 
(–3.75) 
 
(–2.13) 
(–3.81) 
4 
–0.04 
–0.15*** 
–0.04 
–0.15*** 
 
(–1.17) 
(–4.06) 
 
(–1.27) 
(–4.39) 
3 
–0.02 
–0.12*** 
–0.03 
–0.14*** 
(–0.62) 
(–3.99) 
(–0.78) 
(–3.47) 
2 
0.03 
–0.07 
0.03 
–0.08 
(0.56) 
(–1.55) 
(0.52) 
(–1.63) 
1 (Low) 
0.09* 
–0.02 
0.10* 
–0.01 
(1.70) 
(–0.29) 
(1.73) 
(–0.17) 
5 – 1 
–0.21** 
–0.20** 
–0.22** 
–0.22** 
  
(–2.34) 
(–2.23) 
  
(–2.40) 
(–2.30) 
Panel B: FFC-IML alphas are reported 
  
  
  
5 (High) 
–0.04 
–0.14** 
–0.04 
–0.15*** 
(–0.65) 
(–2.58) 
(–0.77) 
(–2.64) 
4 
–0.00 
–0.11*** 
0.00 
–0.10*** 
 
(–0.09) 
(–2.84) 
 
(0.03) 
(–2.98) 
3 
0.00 
–0.10*** 
–0.01 
–0.12*** 
(0.06) 
(–3.07) 
(–0.28) 
(–2.80) 
2 
0.02 
–0.09* 
0.02 
–0.09* 
(0.31) 
(–1.72) 
(0.41) 
(–1.74) 
1 (Low) 
0.06 
–0.05 
0.07 
–0.04 
(1.07) 
(–0.89) 
(1.16) 
(–0.68) 
5 – 1 
–0.09 
–0.09 
–0.11 
–0.11 
  
(–1.25) 
(–1.17) 
  
(–1.36) 
(–1.29) 
Note: This table reports risk-adjusted performance of the quintile portfolios based on HFT intensity in the trade 
portfolios or holdings of mutual funds over the previous calendar quarter. The sample includes 3,536 U.S. actively 
managed equity mutual funds over 2003–2018 with greater than $10 million TNA and more than three years old at 
the beginning of each month. Either the post-fee return or pre-fee return, calculated as post-fee return plus onetwelfth of annual expense ratio, is used to estimate portfolio return. All portfolios are equally weighted unless 
otherwise noted. The FFC-4 model and the FFC-IML model are used to evaluate risk-adjusted performance in 
Panels A and B, respectively. In columns (1) and (2), funds are sorted by HFT intensity in their trade portfolio 
(HFTT) of the previous calendar quarter. In columns (3) and (4), funds are sorted by intensity of HFT in their 
holdings (HFTH) of the previous calendar quarter. The t-statistics given in parentheses are based on Newey-West 
standard errors. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

36 
 
TABLE 6 HFT intensity and illiquidity premium 
 
Illiquidity 
deciles 
All stocks 
  
HFT terciles 
 
High 
Medium 
Low 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
10 (High) 
0.46*** 
0.48* 
0.18 
0.49*** 
 
(2.80) 
 
(1.89) 
(0.76) 
(3.12) 
9 
0.08 
0.25 
0.07 
0.03 
 
(0.50) 
 
(0.96) 
(0.36) 
(0.19) 
8 
0.14 
0.22 
0.14 
0.15 
(1.18) 
(1.24) 
(0.99) 
(1.03) 
7 
0.02 
–0.07 
0.21* 
–0.09 
(0.20) 
(–0.34) 
(1.96) 
(–0.74) 
6 
0.14 
–0.13 
0.13 
0.21 
(1.57) 
(–0.71) 
(1.34) 
(1.56) 
5 
0.03 
–0.02 
0.04 
0.13 
(0.30) 
(–0.14) 
(0.34) 
(0.81) 
4 
–0.01 
–0.14 
0.02 
0.15 
(–0.10) 
(–0.87) 
(0.17) 
(1.04) 
3 
0.02 
–0.11 
0.08 
0.17 
(0.16) 
(–0.85) 
(0.82) 
(1.17) 
2 
–0.05 
–0.27* 
0.15 
0.17 
 
(–0.51) 
 
(–1.85) 
(1.40) 
(1.01) 
1 (Low) 
–0.17* 
–0.21* 
–0.03 
0.38* 
(–1.67) 
(–1.84) 
(–0.18) 
(1.68) 
10 – 1 
0.63*** 
0.68** 
0.20 
0.08 
  
(3.32) 
  
(2.45) 
(0.70) 
(0.24) 
Note: This table reports the illiquidity premium in 8,150 U.S. common stocks that were traded on the NYSE, 
AMEX, and NASDAQ over 2003–2018 and in subsamples sorted by HFT intensity. To be included in the sample, a 
stock month must have CRSP share code 10 or 11, share price above $2 at the beginning of the month, and market 
capitalization of at least $10 million at the end of the previous June. In each month t, stocks are sorted into quintiles 
based on the volatility of daily returns over months t–3 to t–1. Within each volatility quintile, stocks are further 
sorted into deciles based on their illiquidity, proxied by the time-weighted relative quoted spreads, over months t–3 
to t–1. Value-weighted returns are then calculated for each of these 50 (5 × 10) portfolios over months t+1 to t+3, 
and return of each illiquidity decile is calculated as the equal-weighted average of the returns of the five volatility 
quintiles within this illiquidity decile. The illiquidity premium is estimated as the monthly return of the illiquidminus-liquid decile portfolio (10 – 1). Results in column (1) are based on the entire stock sample; results in columns 
(2)–(4) are based on subsamples of stocks sorted by HFT intensity where illiquidity deciles are independent of the 
HFT terciles. The t-statistics given in parentheses are based on Newey-West standard errors. ***, **, and * indicate 
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

37 
 
TABLE 7 Performance of quintile portfolios constructed from holdings 
 
HFT 
quintiles 
Funds are sorted by HFTT 
  
Funds are sorted by HFTH 
TC is assumed to be 
zero                  
TC includes QS and 
price impact           
 
TC is assumed to be 
zero                  
TC includes QS and 
price impact           
[1] 
[2] 
 
[3] 
[4] 
5 (High) 
–0.14** 
–0.24*** 
–0.17*** 
–0.26*** 
 
(–2.53) 
(–3.89) 
 
(–2.72) 
(–3.93) 
4 
–0.06* 
–0.15*** 
–0.05* 
–0.13*** 
 
(–1.77) 
(–4.22) 
 
(–1.68) 
(–4.26) 
3 
–0.04 
–0.15*** 
–0.05 
–0.15*** 
(–1.44) 
(–4.52) 
(–1.26) 
(–3.55) 
2 
0.02 
–0.09* 
0.01 
–0.11** 
(0.36) 
(–1.85) 
(0.11) 
(–2.37) 
1 (Low) 
0.08 
–0.04 
0.08 
–0.05 
(1.53) 
(–0.70) 
(1.38) 
(–0.78) 
5 – 1 
–0.22** 
–0.21** 
–0.24** 
–0.22** 
  
(–2.55) 
(–2.33) 
  
(–2.54) 
(–2.20) 
Note: This table reports Fama-French-Carhart four-factor adjusted returns of the quintile portfolios based on HFT 
intensity in the trade portfolios or holdings of mutual funds over the previous month. The sample includes 3,536 
U.S. actively managed equity mutual funds over 2003–2018 with greater than $10 million TNA and more than three 
years old at the beginning of each month. Hypothetical fund return in each month is based on the stock holdings at 
the beginning of the month and the corresponding monthly stock returns. Funds are then sorted into equally 
weighted quintiles by HFT intensity in their trade portfolio (HFTT, columns (1) and (2)) or HFT intensity in their 
holdings (HFTH, columns (3) and (4)) of the previous calendar quarter. In columns (1) and (3), trading costs (TC) 
are assumed to be zero. In columns (2) and (4), trading costs, estimated based on quoted spreads (QS) and price 
impact costs of the stocks traded by the fund in that month, are deducted from portfolio returns. The t-statistics given 
in parentheses are based on Newey-West standard errors. ***, **, and ** indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 
10% levels, respectively. 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

38 
 
TABLE 8 HFT intensity and fund return gap 
 
Panel A: Descriptive statistics 
  
Mean 
Std. dev. 
P10 
Median 
P90 
NAV-based return 
0.71% 
1.55% 
–1.23% 
0.70% 
2.68% 
Return of holdings 
0.73% 
1.72% 
–1.41% 
0.72% 
2.90% 
Return gap 
–0.02% 
0.94% 
–1.12% 
–0.01% 
1.06% 
Panel B: Cross-sectional regression 
  
  
[1] 
[2] 
Intercept 
–0.02 
–0.02 
 
(–0.69) 
(–0.60) 
HFTT 
0.02 
(0.50) 
HFTH 
0.00 
(0.01) 
Ln[TNA] 
0.00* 
0.00* 
(1.69) 
(1.76) 
TO 
–0.18*** 
–0.18*** 
(–6.28) 
(–6.20) 
Ln[Age] 
0.01 
0.01 
(0.94) 
(0.90) 
Flow 
0.03 
0.02 
 
(0.37) 
(0.28) 
ExpRatio 
0.00 
0.00 
(0.45) 
(0.42) 
R2 
0.032 
0.037 
N 
1,304 
1,307 
Note: This table reports the results of Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of the fund return gaps on 
HFT intensity in the trade portfolios (HFTT) or holdings (HFTH) of mutual funds over the previous calendar quarter. 
The sample includes 3,536 U.S. actively managed equity mutual funds over 2003–2018 with greater than $10 
million TNA and more than three years old at the beginning of each month. Following Kacperczyk, Sialm, and 
Zheng (2008), return gap of a fund in a month is estimated as the difference between the fund post-fee return and the 
post-fee return of a hypothetical portfolio based on fund holdings. Panel A reports the descriptive statistics of the 
NAV-based fund post-fee return, post-fee return of holdings, and the return gap. Panel B reports the results of crosssectional regression. The dependent variable is monthly return gap. The independent variables include HFT intensity 
in trade portfolios (HFTT) or holdings (HFTH), fund size (TNA), turnover ratio (TO), age (Age), monthly net flow 
ratio (Flow), and annual expense ratio (ExpRatio). TO is defined as dollar value of net purchases and sales by a fund 
during a quarter estimated from holdings reported by the CRSP mutual fund database and the Thomson Reuters S12 
database. TNA and Age are log transformed. All independent variables are lagged by one quarter except for Age and 
ExpRatio. N is the average number of funds in each month. The t-statistics given in parentheses are based on 
Newey-West standard errors. ***, **, and ** indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

39 
 
TABLE 9 Additional alternative explanations  
 
HFT 
quintiles 
Controlling for the PS factor 
  
Controlling for the IVOL 
factor 
  
Controlling for the SIR factor 
Pre-fee 
return 
Post-fee 
return 
Pre-fee 
return 
Post-fee 
return 
Pre-fee 
return 
Post-fee 
return 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
[6] 
5 (High) 
–0.13** 
–0.23*** 
–0.08* 
–0.19*** 
–0.13** 
–0.23*** 
 
(–2.27) 
(–4.01) 
 
(–1.69) 
(–3.73) 
 
(–2.16) 
(–3.86) 
4 
–0.05 
–0.15*** 
–0.02 
–0.12*** 
–0.04 
–0.14*** 
 
(–1.50) 
(–4.90) 
 
(–0.51) 
(–3.94) 
 
(–1.12) 
(–4.31) 
3 
–0.04 
–0.14*** 
–0.01 
–0.12*** 
–0.03 
–0.13*** 
(–1.22) 
(–4.38) 
(–0.34) 
(–3.06) 
(–0.57) 
(–2.83) 
2 
0.01 
–0.09** 
0.03 
–0.07 
0.03 
–0.07 
(0.36) 
(–2.22) 
(0.72) 
(–1.43) 
(0.57) 
(–1.28) 
1 (Low) 
0.09* 
–0.02 
0.11* 
0.00 
0.10 
–0.00 
(1.75) 
(–0.41) 
(1.92) 
(0.05) 
(1.63) 
(–0.02) 
5 – 1 
–0.22** 
–0.21** 
–0.19** 
–0.19** 
–0.23** 
–0.23** 
  
(–2.49) 
(–2.38) 
  
(–2.26) 
(–2.19) 
  
(–2.44) 
(–2.40) 
Note: This table reports risk-adjusted performance of equally weighted quintile portfolios constructed based on HFT 
intensity in the holdings of mutual funds (HFTH) over the previous calendar quarter. The sample includes 3,536 U.S. 
actively managed equity mutual funds over 2003–2018 with greater than $10 million TNA and more than three 
years old at the beginning of each month. In columns (1) and (2), the Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity risk 
factor (PS) is added to the four-factor model to control for liquidity risk premium. In columns (3) and (4), the 
idiosyncratic volatility factor (IVOL) is added to the four-factor model to control for idiosyncratic volatility 
anomaly. In columns (5) and (6), a short interest ratio factor (SIR) is added to the four-factor model to control for 
the negative abnormal returns associated with heavily shorted stocks. The t-statistics given in parentheses are based 
on Newey-West standard errors. ***, **, and ** indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

40 
 
TABLE 10 Possible constraints faced by fund managers  
 
Panel A: Less active funds versus more active funds 
  
HFT quintiles 
Less active funds 
  
More active funds 
Pre-fee return 
Post-fee return 
 
Pre-fee return 
Post-fee return 
5 (High) 
–0.09** 
–0.19*** 
–0.20** 
–0.33*** 
(–2.14) 
(–4.24) 
(–2.30) 
(–3.74) 
4 
–0.05* 
–0.14*** 
 
–0.07 
–0.19*** 
(–1.91) 
(–5.61) 
(–1.28) 
(–3.45) 
3 
–0.01 
–0.10*** 
0.01 
–0.10** 
 
(–0.53) 
(–5.20) 
 
(0.32) 
(–2.31) 
2 
0.02 
–0.07** 
0.10** 
–0.02 
 
(0.70) 
(–2.08) 
 
(2.02) 
(–0.36) 
1 (Low) 
0.09** 
–0.00 
0.13** 
0.02 
(2.08) 
(–0.06) 
(2.01) 
(0.24) 
5 – 1 
–0.18** 
–0.18** 
–0.33*** 
–0.34*** 
  
(–2.35) 
(–2.33) 
  
(–3.01) 
(–3.08) 
Panel B: Large funds versus small funds 
HFT quintiles 
Large funds 
  
Small funds 
Pre-fee return 
Post-fee return 
 
Pre-fee return 
Post-fee return 
5 (High) 
–0.12** 
–0.21*** 
–0.13** 
–0.25*** 
(–2.22) 
(–3.94) 
(–2.01) 
(–3.80) 
4 
–0.05 
–0.14*** 
–0.04 
–0.16*** 
(–1.51) 
(–4.03) 
(–1.13) 
(–4.32) 
3 
–0.00 
–0.09** 
–0.05 
–0.16*** 
(–0.01) 
(–2.27) 
(–1.17) 
(–4.17) 
2 
0.02 
–0.07 
0.03 
–0.09* 
(0.44) 
(–1.45) 
(0.68) 
(–1.83) 
1 (Low) 
0.10 
–0.01 
0.10* 
–0.02 
(1.59) 
(–0.10) 
(1.86) 
(–0.34) 
5 – 1 
–0.21** 
–0.21** 
–0.23** 
–0.24** 
  
(–2.37) 
(–2.29) 
  
(–2.35) 
(–2.38) 
Note: This table reports risk-adjusted performance of equally weighted quintile portfolios constructed based on HFT 
intensity in holdings of mutual funds (HFTH) over the previous calendar quarter. The sample includes 3,536 U.S. 
actively managed equity mutual funds over 2003–2018 with greater than $10 million TNA and more than three 
years old at the beginning of each month. Either the post-fee return or pre-fee return, calculated as post-fee return 
plus one-twelfth of annual expense ratio, of the funds is used to construct the portfolios. The Fama-French-Carhart 
four-factor model is used to evaluate risk-adjusted performance. In Panel A, in each month all funds in the sample 
are sorted into quartiles by the active shares measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009), and the top (bottom) quartile 
is defined as more (less) active funds. In Panel B, in each month all funds in the sample are sorted into quartiles their 
TNA at the end of the prior month, and the top (bottom) quartile is defined as large (small) funds. The t-statistics 
given in parentheses are based on Newey-West standard errors. ***, **, and ** indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, 
and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

Internet Appendix to Accompany 
Effect of High-Frequency Trading on Mutual Fund Performance  
 
Nan Qin and Vijay Singal 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

1 
 
Internet Appendix A. Additional Empirical Analysis 
FIGURE A.1 Daily quote messages over 2000–2018 
 
Note: This figure shows average monthly quote messages (×103) of 10,375 U.S. common stocks that were traded on 
the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ over 2000–2018. Stocks are categorized into five quintiles based on their market 
capitalization. 
 
 
 
 
1 (small)
2
3
4
5 (large)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

2 
 
FIGURE A.2 Number of stocks across HFT and characteristics quintiles 
 
Panel A: Number of stocks across HFT and liquidity quintiles 
 
 
Panel B: Number of stocks across HFT and volatility quintiles 
 
Note: This figure shows the number of stocks within each independently sorted HFT and liquidity or volatility quintile. 
The sample includes 8,150 U.S. common stocks that were traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ over 2003–
2018. In each month, stocks are sorted into quintiles by their HFT intensity (estimated by Formula (2)) and by their 
time-weighted relative quoted spread (Panel A) or by their volatility estimated from daily returns (Panel B), 
respectively, to obtain 25 (5 × 5) subsamples with potentially unequal number of stocks in each. Number of stocks in 
each subsample is then averaged across the whole sample period and is plotted in the figure. 
 
 
 
5 (High HFT)
3
1 (Low HFT)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
5 (High HFT)
4
3
2
5 (Low HFT)
0
100
200
300
400
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

3 
 
TABLE A.1 Correlations between quote messages and actual HFT 
 
Panel A: Correlation between quote updates and relative volume by HFT and nHFT 
  
  
% of HFT volume 
% of nHFT volume 
  
Spearman 
Pearson 
Spearman 
Pearson 
All stocks 
88.63% 
68.16% 
–88.63% 
–68.16% 
5 (Large stocks) 
57.58% 
56.24% 
–57.58% 
–56.24% 
4 
74.24% 
66.79% 
–74.24% 
–66.79% 
3 
54.78% 
55.60% 
–54.78% 
–55.60% 
2 
53.02% 
51.97% 
–53.02% 
–51.97% 
1 (Small stocks) 
63.21% 
64.52% 
–63.21% 
–64.52% 
Panel B: Correlation between quote updates and turnover ratios by HFT and nHFT 
  
  
HFT volume as % of shr. out. 
nHFT volume as % of shr. out. 
  
Spearman 
Pearson 
Spearman 
Pearson 
All stocks 
66.22% 
36.76% 
–2.42% 
–14.68% 
5 (Large stocks) 
10.03% 
5.21% 
–20.08% 
–15.79% 
4 
44.93% 
44.51% 
–7.01% 
–2.37% 
3 
54.82% 
46.65% 
21.00% 
6.29% 
2 
55.47% 
44.13% 
35.18% 
24.11% 
1 (Small stocks) 
56.76% 
65.58% 
35.03% 
37.17% 
 
Note: This table reports Spearman and Pearson correlations between monthly quote messages and actual HFT 
activities in 120 stocks randomly selected by the NASDAQ in 2008 and 2009. In each of the 24 months in the 
sample period, all the 120 stocks are sorted into quintiles based on their market values at the end of the previous 
June. Fund months with market value less than $10 million at the end of the prior June or share price less than $2 at 
the beginning of the month are removed. The cross-sectional correlations are then estimated for each size quintile in 
each month and the time-series averages are reported. In Panel A, actual HFT activities of a stock are measured by 
ratio of HFT share volume of this stock to total share volume of this stock. In Panel B, actual HFT activities of a 
stock are measured by ratio of HFT share volume of this stock to total shares outstanding of this stock. Correlations 
between quote messages and actual nHFT activities are also reported for comparison. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

4 
 
TABLE A.2 Median stock characteristics by HFT quintiles 
 
HFT quintiles 
1 (Low) 
2 
3 
4 
5 (High) 
RET (%) 
0.54 
0.74 
0.62 
0.43 
0.03 
PRC ($) 
25 
30 
23 
17 
11 
MV ($ million) 
409 
984 
724 
552 
508 
B/M 
0.65 
0.54 
0.54 
0.55 
0.57 
TO (%) 
4.58 
11.17 
13.04 
15.40 
20.71 
Volatility (%) 
1.90 
1.95 
2.16 
2.39 
2.76 
IVOL (%) 
1.48 
1.39 
1.57 
1.80 
2.16 
RQS (%) 
2.34 
0.95 
0.89 
0.81 
0.68 
RES (%) 
1.05 
0.50 
0.50 
0.49 
0.44 
PIC 
9.26 
8.23 
8.40 
9.20 
10.17 
SIR (%) 
1.14 
2.96 
3.41 
3.76 
4.05 
IO (%) 
38.64 
71.50 
73.69 
70.59 
63.03 
ANLY 
6 
7 
7 
7 
8 
DISP (%) 
2.56 
2.76 
3.51 
4.70 
6.89 
 
Note: This table reports the medians of characteristics of 8,150 U.S. common stocks that were traded on the NYSE, 
AMEX, and NASDAQ over 2003–2018. To be included in the sample, a stock month must have CRSP share code 
10 or 11, share price above $2 at the beginning of the month, and market capitalization of at least $10 million at the 
end of the previous June. In each month, stocks are sorted into quintiles based on their HFT intensity over the prior 
three months, and the median of a characteristic is calculated for each quintile. The time-series average of the 
monthly median characteristic is then calculated and reported. Stock characteristics include monthly return (RET), 
share price (PRC), market value (MV), book-to-market ratio (B/M), monthly turnover ratio (TO), volatility based on 
daily returns (Volatility), idiosyncratic volatility by the approach of Ang et al. (2006) (IVOL), time-weighted 
relative quoted spread (RQS), volume-weighted average relative effective spread (RES), five-minute price impact 
cost (PIC) estimated by the approach of Breen, Hodrick, and Korajczyk (2002), short interest ratio (SIR), 
institutional ownership (IO), number of analyst following (ANLY), and analyst forecast dispersion (DISP). 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

5 
 
TABLE A.3 Robustness tests of quintile portfolio analysis 
 
 
Funds are sorted by HFTT 
  
Funds are sorted by HFTH 
Pre-fee return 
Post-fee return 
 
Pre-fee return 
Post-fee return 
[1] 
[2] 
 
[3] 
[4] 
Excess return 
–0.20** 
–0.20** 
–0.24** 
–0.24** 
 
(–2.41) 
(–2.32) 
 
(–2.56) 
(–2.48) 
αCAPM 
–0.20** 
–0.20** 
–0.23** 
–0.22** 
 
(–2.27) 
(–2.18) 
 
(–2.23) 
(–2.15) 
α3 
–0.20** 
–0.20** 
–0.22** 
–0.22** 
(–2.32) 
(–2.22) 
(–2.40) 
(–2.30) 
VW α4 
–0.14* 
–0.13 
–0.22** 
–0.21** 
(–1.74) 
(–1.54) 
(–2.53) 
(–2.35) 
α4 excluding crisis period 
–0.21** 
–0.20* 
–0.24** 
–0.24** 
(–2.03) 
(–1.91) 
(–2.29) 
(–2.19) 
α4 1993–2002 
–0.12 
0.07 
–0.10 
0.09 
  
(–0.61) 
(0.35) 
  
(–0.45) 
(0.40) 
 
Note: This table reports 5–1 return spread of the quintile portfolios based on HFT intensity in the trade portfolios or 
holdings of mutual funds over the previous calendar quarter. The sample includes 3,536 U.S. actively managed 
equity mutual funds over 2003–2018 with greater than $10 million TNA and more than three years old at the 
beginning of each month. Either post-fee return or pre-fee return, calculated as post-fee return plus one-twelfth of 
annual expense ratio, is used to estimate portfolio return. All portfolios are equally weighted unless otherwise noted. 
Funds are sorted by HFTT (HFTH) in columns (1) and (2) ((3) and (4)). The 5–1 return spread based on the excess 
return, the CAPM alpha (αCAMP), the FF-3 alpha (α3), FFC-4 alpha of value-weighted portfolios (VW α4), FFC-4 
alpha based on a sample period excluding the financial crisis period of 01/2008–06/2009, or FFC-4 alpha based on 
the sample period of 1993–2002 are reported. The t-statistics given in parentheses are based on Newey-West 
standard errors. ***, **, and ** indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

6 
 
TABLE A.4 HFT intensity and fund performance: Multivariate analysis 
 
Dependent 
variable 
Intensity of HFT is measured by HFTT 
  
Intensity of HFT is measured by HFTH 
Pre-fee α4  
Post-fee α4  
Pre-fee 
return 
Post-fee 
return 
 
Pre-fee α4  
Post-fee α4  
Pre-fee 
return 
Post-fee 
return 
  
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
Intercept 
0.01 
0.02 
0.77** 
0.78** 
0.01 
0.02 
0.77** 
0.78** 
(0.40) 
(0.46) 
(2.53) 
(2.53) 
(0.37) 
(0.42) 
(2.53) 
(2.53) 
HFTT 
–0.13** 
–0.13** 
–0.19** 
–0.19** 
(–2.29) 
(–2.28) 
(–2.04) 
(–2.04) 
HFTH 
–0.15** 
–0.15** 
–0.25** 
–0.25** 
(–2.34) 
(–2.33) 
(–2.15) 
(–2.15) 
Lag[DV] 
2.41* 
2.39* 
1.76 
1.76 
2.46* 
2.45* 
1.49 
1.48 
(1.79) 
(1.77) 
(0.61) 
(0.61) 
(1.85) 
(1.84) 
(0.52) 
(0.52) 
Ln[TNA] 
–0.11** 
–0.11** 
–0.05 
–0.05 
–0.10** 
–0.10** 
–0.03 
–0.02 
(–2.17) 
(–2.19) 
(–0.77) 
(–0.75) 
(–1.99) 
(–2.00) 
(–0.39) 
(–0.38) 
TO 
–0.00 
–0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
–0.00 
–0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
(–0.35) 
(–0.32) 
(0.40) 
(0.44) 
(–0.38) 
(–0.34) 
(0.32) 
(0.36) 
Ln[Age] 
0.01 
0.01 
0.02 
0.02 
0.01 
0.01 
0.02* 
0.02* 
 
(0.84) 
(0.78) 
(1.46) 
(1.42) 
 
(1.10) 
(1.03) 
(1.91) 
(1.86) 
Flow 
0.36** 
0.36** 
0.52** 
0.52** 
0.35** 
0.35** 
0.48** 
0.48** 
(2.15) 
(2.15) 
(2.27) 
(2.27) 
(2.08) 
(2.09) 
(2.16) 
(2.16) 
ExpRatio 
0.01 
–0.08*** 
–0.00 
–0.08*** 
0.00 
–0.08*** 
–0.00 
–0.09*** 
(0.51) 
(–5.79) 
(–0.02) 
(–3.78) 
(0.29) 
(–6.24) 
(–0.15) 
(–4.40) 
R2 
0.084 
0.084 
0.191 
0.191 
0.095 
0.095 
0.213 
0.213 
N 
1,307 
1,310 
1,320 
1,320 
  
1,310 
1,314 
1,324 
1,324 
 
Note: This table reports results from Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of fund return or risk-adjusted 
return (alpha) on lagged HFT intensity and other fund characteristics. The sample includes 3,536 U.S. actively 
managed equity mutual funds over 2003–2018 with greater than $10 million TNA and more than three years old at 
the beginning of each month. Monthly alpha is estimated as the difference between fund excess return and the products 
of fund factor loadings and the realizations of the factors, where factor loadings are estimated based on regression 
using returns in the previous 36 months. The independent variables include HFT intensity in trade portfolios (HFTT, 
in columns (1)–(4)) or holdings (HFTH, in columns (5)–(8)), fund size (TNA), turnover ratio (TO), age (Age), annual 
expense ratio (ExpRatio), monthly net flow ratio (Flow), and lagged dependent variable (DV). TO is defined as dollar 
value of net purchases and sales by a fund during a quarter estimated from holdings reported by the CRSP mutual 
fund database and the Thomson Reuters S12 database. TNA and Age are log transformed. All independent variables 
are lagged by one quarter except for Age and ExpRatio. N is the average number of funds in each month. The 
significance level is based on the time-series variation in the monthly regression coefficients over the sample period. 
The standard errors are adjusted for residual autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity based on Newey and West (1987). 
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

7 
 
TABLE A.5 HFT intensity and illiquidity premium, 1993–2002 
 
Illiquidity 
deciles 
All stocks 
  
HFT terciles 
 
High 
Medium 
Low 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
10 (High) 
0.50** 
0.77*** 
0.37* 
0.45* 
 
(2.10) 
 
(3.17) 
(1.76) 
(1.77) 
9 
0.45*** 
0.39 
0.60** 
0.40*** 
 
(2.84) 
 
(1.11) 
(2.49) 
(2.68) 
8 
0.16 
0.07 
0.22 
0.23 
(0.89) 
(0.31) 
(0.81) 
(1.28) 
7 
0.25 
0.35 
0.35 
0.01 
(1.21) 
(1.44) 
(1.21) 
(0.04) 
6 
0.13 
0.47** 
0.20 
–0.09 
(0.73) 
(2.10) 
(0.83) 
(–0.54) 
5 
0.19 
0.04 
0.24 
0.45** 
(1.04) 
(0.20) 
(1.11) 
(2.23) 
4 
0.14 
0.04 
0.22 
0.27 
(0.72) 
(0.16) 
(1.03) 
(1.45) 
3 
0.06 
0.05 
0.08 
0.17 
(0.44) 
(0.27) 
(0.45) 
(0.70) 
2 
0.05 
0.11 
–0.00 
0.33* 
 
(0.37) 
 
(0.55) 
(–0.02) 
(1.91) 
1 (Low) 
0.69*** 
0.81*** 
0.24 
0.57** 
(3.65) 
(3.77) 
(0.94) 
(2.29) 
10 – 1 
–0.19 
–0.03 
0.12 
–0.11 
  
(–0.50) 
  
(–0.09) 
(0.33) 
(–0.29) 
 
Note: This table reports the illiquidity premium in 8,150 U.S. common stocks that were traded on the NYSE, 
AMEX, and NASDAQ over 1993–2002, and in subsamples sorted by HFT intensity. To be included in the sample, a 
stock month must have CRSP share code 10 or 11, share price above $2 at the beginning of the month, and market 
capitalization of at least $10 million at the end of the previous June. In each month t, stocks are sorted into quintiles 
based on the volatility of daily returns over months t–3 to t–1. Within each volatility quintile, stocks are further 
sorted into deciles based on their illiquidity, proxied by the time-weighted relative quoted spreads, over months t–3 
to t–1. Value-weighted returns are then calculated for each of these 50 (5 × 10) portfolios over months t+1 to t+3, 
and return of each illiquidity decile is calculated as the equal-weighted average of the returns of the five volatility 
quintiles within this illiquidity decile. The illiquidity premium is estimated as the monthly return of the illiquidminus-liquid decile portfolio (10 – 1). Results in column (1) are based on the entire stock sample; results in columns 
(2)–(4) are based on subsamples of stocks sorted by HFT intensity where illiquidity deciles are independent of the 
HFT terciles. The t-statistics given in parentheses are based on Newey-West standard errors. ***, **, and * indicate 
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. 
  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

8 
 
Internet Appendix B. Estimation of the Total Trading Costs 
We assume that the direct cost to trade one share of a stock is one-half of its volume-weighted 
average effective spread in that month. Thus, trading q shares at price p with relative effective 
spread of k incurs a direct cost of 𝑘𝑝𝑞. Following a similar approach as in Breen, Hodrick, and 
Korajczyk (2002) and Korajczyk and Sadka (2004), we estimate price impact cost (PIC) as 
𝑃𝐼𝐶= ∫𝑓(𝑝, 𝑞)𝑑𝑞
𝑞
0
,                                                           (𝐵. 1) 
where 𝑓(𝑝, 𝑞) is the price impact cost function, 𝑝 is the prevailing market price of a share, and q 
is number of shares traded. Korajczyk and Sadka (2004) indicate that under the assumptions that 
trade is divided into many infinitesimal trades and that no price reversion occurs over the trading 
period, the Breen, Hodrick, and Korajczyk (2002) price impact cost function is 𝑓(𝑝, 𝑞) = 𝑝(𝑒
𝜆𝑞
𝑆−
1), where 𝜆 is the price impact coefficient and S is the number of shares outstanding. Therefore, 
the total trading cost (TC) is the sum of the direct cost and the price impact cost: 
𝑇𝐶= 𝑘𝑝𝑞+ ∫𝑓(𝑝, 𝑞)𝑑𝑞
𝑞
0
= 𝑘𝑝𝑞+ (𝑝𝑆
𝜆(𝑒
𝜆𝑞
𝑆−1) −𝑝𝑞).                      (𝐵. 2) 
Estimation of the price impact coefficient, 𝜆, is based on net trading volume and quotemidpoint return for each five-minute trading interval. First, all trades are classified as buyer 
initiated or seller initiated based on whether the transaction price is higher or lower than the 
prevailing quote midpoint. Then net turnover (NTO) for a five-minute interval is defined as the 
ratio of net trading volume (buyer-initiated volume less seller-initiated volume times 1,000) to 
shares outstanding, and quote-midpoint return in each five-minute interval is defined as the ratio 
of quote-midpoint (Q) change over the interval to quote midpoint at the beginning of the interval. 
For stock i in month t, we estimate the following regression based on a total of 𝜏𝑖(𝑡) five-minute 
intervals to estimate the impact of its net trading volume on its midpoint return: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427

9 
 
𝑄𝑖,𝜏−𝑄𝑖,𝜏−1
𝑄𝑖,𝜏−1
= 𝛼𝑖𝑡+ 𝜆𝑖𝑡𝑁𝑇𝑂𝑖,𝜏+ 𝜖𝑖,𝜏.                                         (B. 3) 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2726427
