Discussion Paper
Deutsche Bundesbank
No 15/2016
High-frequency trading     
in the Bund futures market 
Kathi Schlepper
Discussion Papers represent the authors‘ personal opinions and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Deutsche Bundesbank or its staff.

Editorial Board: 
 
Daniel Foos 
Thomas Kick 
Jochen Mankart 
Christoph Memmel 
Panagiota Tzamourani 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Wilhelm-Epstein-Straße 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main,  
Postfach  10 06 02, 60006 Frankfurt am Main 
Tel +49  69 9566-0 
Please address all orders in writing to: Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Press and Public Relations Division, at the above address or via fax  +49 69 9566-3077 
Internet http://www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
ISBN  978–3–95729–255–1 (Printversion) 
ISBN  978–3–95729–256–8 (Internetversion) 

Non-technical summary
Research Question
This study examines the role of high-frequency trading (HFT) in the German Bund
Futures market. The main focus of this work is to analyze how the reaction of highfrequency traders (HFTs) to new information aﬀects market prices and price volatility.
Another important aspect of this study is the relationship between HFT and liquidity in
this market. More speciﬁcally, the question whether HFTs continue providing liquidity
also during phases of higher market stress or whether they increasingly withdraw from
markets is investigated.
Contribution
Using a new and extremely high-frequency dataset, this study examines how HFTs react to important news announcements. News announcements in this study refer to the
publication of macroeconomic data (labor market data in the US and ECB interest rate
decisions).
Results
The results suggest that liquidity-taking HFTs trade in the direction of the market trend
and are more active in phases of high volatility. Accordingly, they are also more active
around the release of macroeconomic news than usual. In these situations, HFTs beneﬁt from their speed advantage and trade according to the news surprise in a fraction of
a second and immediately realize their trading proﬁts. Their trades improve the price
discovery process.
However, the faster reﬂection of news in prices comes at the cost
of short-term excessive volatility, which increases the risk of market disruptions. Moreover, my results show liquidity-providing HFTs increasingly withdraw from markets when
volatility rises, either expectedly following macroeconomic news or unexpectedly due to
rising risk aversion.

Nichttechnische Zusammenfassung
Fragestellung
In diesem Papier wird untersucht, welche Rolle der Hochfrequenzhandel am Markt f¨ur
Terminkontrakte auf Bundesanleihen (Bund Futures) spielt. Insbesondere soll analysiert
werden, wie die Reaktion von Hochfrequenzh¨andlern auf neue Informationen die Kurse
ver¨andert und sich auf die Kursschwankungen (Volatilit¨at) auswirkt. Ein weiterer Aspekt
ist der Zusammenhang zwischen dem Hochfrequenzhandel und der Liquidit¨at auf dem
Markt, das heißt die Frage, ob Hochfrequenzh¨andler in turbulenten Marktphasen weiterhin
Liquidit¨at bereitstellen oder sich vermehrt aus dem Markt zur¨uckziehen.
Beitrag
Anhand eines neuen Datensatzes mit hoher Frequenz wird analysiert, wie Hochfrequenzh¨andler auf marktbewegende Nachrichten reagieren. Marktbewegende Nachrichten sind in
dieser Studie die Ver¨oﬀentlichung von makro¨okonomischen Daten (hier: Neu geschaﬀene
Stellen in den USA und EZB-Zinsentscheidungen).
Ergebnisse
Die Ergebnisse deuten darauf hin, dass liquidit¨atsnehmende Hochfrequenzh¨andler grunds¨atzlich in Richtung des Markttrends handeln und in Phasen hoher Volatilit¨at aktiver
sind. Entsprechend partizipieren sie auch um die Ver¨oﬀentlichung von wichtigen makro¨okonomischen Nachrichten ¨uberdurchschnittlich stark am Handel. Dabei nutzen Hochfrequenzh¨andler ihren Geschwindigkeitsvorteil aus und reagieren auf die ¨Uberraschungskomponente der Nachrichten schneller als andere Marktteilnehmer, sodass kurzfristige
Gewinne realisiert werden k¨onnen. Zwar werden die neuen Informationen dadurch schneller in den Kursen reﬂektiert, allerdings erzeugt der Hochfrequenzhandel auch kurzfristige
zus¨atzliche Kursschwankungen, was die Gefahr von Marktverwerfungen erh¨oht. Die Ergebnisse zeigen außerdem, dass sich liquidit¨atsbereitstellende Hochfrequenzh¨andler sowohl
in Phasen ¨uberraschender Volatilit¨at infolge steigender Risikoaversion als auch infolge der
Ver¨oﬀentlichung von makro¨okonomischen Daten zur¨uckziehen. Dies zeigt sich daran, dass
sie in solchen Phasen mehr Handelsauftr¨age l¨oschen als neue generieren.

Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 15/2016
High-Frequency Trading in the Bund Futures Market∗
Kathi Schlepper
Deutsche Bundesbank
Abstract
In this work, I study the impact of high-frequency trading (HFT) on price discovery
and volatility in the Bund futures market. Using a new dataset based on microseconds, the focus of the study is on the reaction of high-frequency traders (HFTs)
to major macroeconomic news events. I show that through their fast and strong
reaction to news, HFTs contribute more to price discovery compared to Non-HFTs,
but also add a higher share to noise than to permanent volatility. Moreover, I ﬁnd
evidence that HFTs tend to supply less liquidity after an unexpected rise in market volatility and prior to upcoming macroeconomic news events. These ﬁndings
suggest that in times of high market stress, HFT behavior may exacerbate intraday
price volatility and amplify the risk of market disruptions in ﬁxed income markets.
Keywords: High-Frequency Trading, Price Discovery, Volatility
JEL classiﬁcation: G10, G12, G14
∗Contact address: Wilhelm-Epstein-Straße 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main. Phone: +49 69 9566 8015.
E-mail: kathi.schlepper@bundesbank.de.
The author would like to thank Mark Weth and Christian
Speck for their comments in the review process of this paper, Christian Schlag for his support and
helpful comments as supervisor at Goethe University Frankfurt as well as Rafael Zajonz for the fruitful
discussions and data cooperation with the Deutsche B¨orse. The author expresses her thanks to the Eurex
for providing the data underlying this study. The paper is substantially a revised version of one chapter
of the author’s dissertation at Goethe University.
Discussion Papers represent the authors’ personal
opinions and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Deutsche Bundesbank or its staﬀ.

1
Introduction
High-frequency trading (HFT) has become a dominant tool in many liquid ﬁnancial markets, such as equity and futures markets. Being considered a subcategory of Algorithmic
trading (AT), high-frequency traders (HFTs) typically invest in technological infrastructure that allows them to process a variety of trading signals and send orders to marketplaces in a fraction of a second. In 2012, HFT accounted for about 40% of the activity
on European and over 50% of US equity markets (see, e.g., TABB Group (2012)).
Their speed advantage enables HFTs to react to new information faster than other
traders (see, e.g., Foucault, Hombert, and Rosu (2015), Zhang (2013)). However, a common point of criticism is that HFTs overreact to important news announcements and
thereby generate excessive short-term volatility. Such episodes of extreme volatility can
even induce so-called “ﬂash events”, characterized by a rapid and strong fall or rise in
asset prices followed by a reversal in a matter of minutes or seconds. Especially since
the US equity ﬂash crash on 6 May 2010, HFT has attracted the attention of academics,
regulators and policy makers around the globe. Recently, similar ﬂash events could also
be observed in ﬁxed income markets. In particular, the Flash rally on 15 October 2014 in
US treasury markets and the Bund tantrum in the German government bond market in
April/ May 2015 have initiated discussions about the resiliency of ﬁxed income markets
and the impact of new market participants like HFTs (BIS (2016a)). Moreover, since
the implementation of unconventional policy measures, such as the broad-based asset
purchase programs in Europe or the US, many observers fear an increased vulnerability
of ﬁxed income markets. Hence, the question whether HFTs’ trading strategies pose an
additional risk to market functioning is especially relevant nowadays. Against this background, diﬀerent regulatory institutions and central banks have investigated the evolution
and potential causes of events like the US Flash rally ((Joint StaﬀReport (2015)) and the
Bund tantrum (BIS (2016a), BIS (2016b)) in detail. The debate has mainly focused on
the impact HFT has on liquidity, price discovery and excessive volatility. To the extent
that HFT aﬀects these features of market quality, it also has implications for ﬁnancial
stability (Benos and Sagade (2013)). Therefore, policy makers and regulators, especially
in the US but lately also in Europe, have been discussing whether stricter regulation
should apply to the HFT practice. However, the market impact HFT and AT activities
have during those events remains diﬃcult to establish and also depends on the strategies
followed by the respective HFT ﬁrm (Joint StaﬀReport (2015)).
Based on a very recent and unique dataset from Deutsche B¨orse on a microsecond
frequency, I study the role of HFTs in the price discovery process in the Bund futures
market. Since macroeconomic news announcements usually have a strong impact on bond
1

prices (see, e.g., Altavilla, Giannone, and Modugno (2014)), I investigate whether HFT
aids or hinders the market’s incorporation of such news into asset prices. If HFTs trade
on information faster than other traders, they should contribute to price discovery by
accelerating the speed at which new information is impounded into prices. However, a
common point of critique is that the fast reaction by HFTs to news may also be associated
with prices overshooting, leading to noise that cannot be related to information about
fundamentals (Benos and Sagade (2013)). Using the methodology by Hasbrouck (1991b)
to decompose the price in its transitory and permanent components allows me to study this
question in detail. Another recent point of criticism is that HFTs supply liquidity when
volatility is low but withdraw from markets when volatility rises (ESMA (2011), ASIC
(2012)). This might pose an additional risk for ﬁnancial stability because if a market
shock induces HFTs to suspend their liquidity provision, the shock may be ampliﬁed.
Hence, in the ﬁnal part of this work, I study the behavior of liquidity-providing HFTs
considering two diﬀerent types of volatility. I distinguish between phases of unexpected
increases in market volatility due to higher risk perception by market participants and
phases of anticipated volatility that follow from macroeconomic news releases in order to
ﬁnd out whether HFT behavior depends on the nature of volatility.
This paper represents the ﬁrst study on the impact of HFT on price discovery and
volatility in European bond markets. The few existing ﬁxed income studies are limited
to US Treasury markets (Jiang, Lo, and Valente (2013), Liu, Lo, Nguyen, and Valente
(2014)) but suﬀer from less granular data. The present study is based on a new Bund
futures dataset from 2013 to 2014 which is in contrast to existing empirical work that
mostly rely on US stock market data (e.g., Gao and Mizrach (2013), Zhang (2013) Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2013)) with some exceptions for FX data (Chaboud,
Chiquoine, Hjalmarsson, and Vega (2012)) that are already several years old. Although
there might still be some useful conclusions to be drawn on the eﬀect of HFT using older
data, HFT activity has developed strongly in the last years. Particularly the dimensions
of speed and latency have changed substantially over the last decade, supporting the need
for data timeliness. A unique HFT ﬂag assigned by Deutsche B¨orse makes it possible to
distinguish the trading behavior of HFTs from that of other market participants, which
is not available in most other studies. The existing literature often relies on proxies for
AT or HFT based on certain data characteristics like reaction times typical for HFT (e.g.,
Jiang et al. (2013), Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011), Zhang (2010)). Moreover,
the data are based on microseconds, which enables a more granular and deep analysis
than in other empirical HFT studies that are at most based on milliseconds (e.g., Brogaard et al. (2013), Gao and Mizrach (2013), Zhang (2013)). Given the improvement in
trading speed over the last years, the extremely high frequency of the Bund futures data
2

is of particular value and helps to understand the reactions of HFTs to major macroeconomic news on a tick-by-tick basis. Since macroeconomic news has been proven to be
a crucial driver of bond price movements on a lower data frequency (see, e.g., Altavilla
et al. (2014), Jones, Lamont, and Lumsdaine (1998)), the analysis of the HFT price impact around important news releases reveals new insights about HFT strategies in these
highly volatile market episodes. Also, to my knowledge the contribution of HFT trading
to the noise- and information-related determinants of the variance has not been studied
around the publication of macroeconomic news before. Moreover, investigating the liquidity supply by HFTs in two diﬀerent volatility environments, i.e. after macroeconomic
news releases and in times of higher risk aversion, allows new insights into HFT market
making behavior. While most existing studies rely on trading volume data to measure
liquidity provision (Brogaard et al. (2013), Chaboud et al. (2012)), this study focuses on
order deletion activity, which is often associated with HFT behavior (e.g., ESMA (2014)).
The major advantage with this approach is that order deletions can be directly related
to volatility, whereas any causal link between trading volume and volatility is hard to
establish as the two variables cannot be considered separately from each other.
In the ﬁrst part of this work, I study the behavior and trading strategies of liquiditytaking (active) and liquidity-providing (passive) HFTs and Non-HFTs (NHFTs), using
one week of increased and one week of low volatility deﬁned as the positive and negative deviation of the German implied volatility index (VDAX) from its average historical
level. I ﬁnd that active HFTs tend to follow momentum strategies, implying that they
trade in the direction of the market return, which can increase intraday price movements.
In contrast, passive HFTs appear to dampen excessive volatility using contrarian trading strategies. During the high-volatility week, active HFTs initiating momentum trades
dominate over passive HFTs such that overall HFTs exacerbate price trends when volatility is already at an increased level. Moreover, the results show that both active and
passive HFTs trade more in times of high volatility, which is broadly consistent with the
ﬁndings by Boehmer, Fong, and Wu (2012) and Benos and Sagade (2013). In particular,
the share of active HFTs in the traded volume rises to above-average levels in the highest
3% of market volatility in both weeks. A possible explanation for this result is that active
HFTs prefer phases of high volatility since their trading strategies are most beneﬁcial
in these times. An alternative explanation is that HFT trading simply generates high
volatility. By contrast, slower traders deem these phases too risky and rather withdraw
from markets.
In the second part, I analyze the trading behavior of HFTs around macroeconomic
news releases using a vector auto-regression (VAR) model based on return and order
ﬂow time series on a second-by-second and tick-by-tick data frequency. Here, the most
3

inﬂuential US and European macroeconomic news, namely the US Nonfarm Payrolls
(NFPs) and ECB rate decisions (Schopen and Missong (2011), Chaboud et al. (2012)),
are taken into account.
The exogeneity of the macroeconomic news (Chaboud et al.
(2012)) and the granularity of this analysis allow to study the link between HFT trading
and volatility more precisely. The results show that liquidity-taking HFTs are the most
active trading group around the release of macroeconomic news and dominate overall HFT
activity, whereas slower active traders rather withdraw from markets a couple of seconds
prior to the news announcement. Active HFTs beneﬁt from their speed advantage and
trade in the direction of the news release within the ﬁrst second after publication and
thereby pick oﬀthe standing limit orders of NHFTs. Analyzing the eﬀect of HFT and
NHFT trading on prices on a tick-by-tick-basis, I ﬁnd that HFT contributes about ﬁve
times more to the price formation process of the Bund futures return in the millisecond
environment following the news release compared to NHFTs, which is similar to previous
ﬁndings (e.g., Hendershott and Riordan (2011), Benos and Sagade (2013), Brogaard et al.
(2013)). Applying variance decomposition methods to the permanent and transitory price
components, my results show that HFT contributes more to noise than to permanent price
volatility, which is in line with an overshooting behavior. This is a new ﬁnding in the
empirical literature and implies that the trading by active HFTs adds signiﬁcantly to price
discovery but also generates disproportionally high short-term volatility through their fast
and aggressive trading in response to macroeconomic news. Given that most of the HFT
news reaction occurs within the ﬁrst second, the ultra-high frequency data are uniquely
suited for this part of the study.
The above results suggest that diﬀerent active HFT strategies dominate in diﬀerent
market environments. While in times of rising unexpected volatility active HFTs tend
to follow momentum strategies, around the release of macroeconomic news they pursue
news trading strategies and react independent of previous price movements.
In the last part, I examine the market making activity of passive HFTs and NHFTs
in times of high and low unexpected volatility as well as around macroeconomic news
releases. The results suggest that deletion activity depends on the nature of uncertainty.
Passive HFTs tend to delete more orders than they submit after market volatility has risen
suddenly, since they fear higher risks to their market making activity. By contrast, passive NHFTs delete fewer orders than average when volatility rises unexpectedly. Against
this evidence, HFTs and, to a lesser extent, also NHFTs already tend to withdraw from
markets several minutes before an upcoming macroeconomic news event. This is because
they anticipate increasing market volatility following macroeconomic news releases and
want to minimize their risk exposure. Even though passive HFTs still participate signiﬁcantly in the traded volume following sudden increases in volatility, my ﬁndings suggest
4

that overall a signiﬁcant part of the liquidity supplied by HFTs disappears quickly as
soon as market uncertainty rises, either expected or unexpected. Also, one can conclude
that NHFTs supply liquidity more continuously than HFTs and are not as sensitive to
changes in the market environment as HFTs.
The present study allows for a better understanding of the role HFT plays in diﬀerent
phases of the market and oﬀers useful implications for market stability. According to
Biais and Foucault (2014), short-term volatility reﬂects the impact of liquidity demand
to a certain extent. Hence, the ﬁnding that under increased market stress HFTs reduce
their liquidity supply and consume more liquidity at the same time suggests that, overall,
HFT trading exacerbates extreme price movements in those periods. This may in turn
increase the risk of ﬂash events that have been observed more frequently in the recent
past, particularly in ﬁxed income markets. Therefore, regulators and policy makers should
indeed think about appropriate tools to strengthen market quality, especially liquidity
supply in phases of increased market stress.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains a literature review, Section 3
describes the data used in this study and explains diﬀerent characteristics of the data.
Section 4 presents the results on the trading strategies of HFTs and their activity related
to market volatility. Section 5 provides the empirical analysis of HFT trading around
news releases and its contribution to price discovery.
Section 6 discusses the role of
passive HFTs as liquidity providers during diﬀerent phases of market volatility. Section
7 concludes.
2
Literature Review
Analyzing the impact of HFT in the government bond market is a very new ﬁeld of
research. The bulk of empirical HFT studies are based on the US stock market, with some
exceptions on FX markets. Given the scarcity of recent high-frequency data, especially
for markets outside the US and for asset classes other than equity, new empirical evidence
is limited. I am aware of only two papers focusing on ﬁxed income markets which both
examine the role of HFT in the US Treasury bond markets (Jiang et al. (2013), Liu
et al. (2014)). Similar to my work, Jiang et al. (2013) study the eﬀect of HFT on bond
market quality aspects around major macroeconomic news announcements from 2004
to 2007. The authors show that HFT increases market volatility during pre- and postannouncement periods. Before the news release, HFT has an adverse eﬀect on market
liquidity and does not enhance the price eﬃciency of US Treasury securities. But after
the information’s arrival, HFT narrows bid-ask spreads and has a positive eﬀect on price
eﬃciency. Liu et al. (2014) examine the impact of HFT on expected returns of US Treasury
5

bonds and document a signiﬁcantly positive relationship between bond expected returns
and a factor capturing HFT intensity in the market.
Empirical research on the role of HFT around news events is generally sparse. Closely
related to my work is the paper by Chaboud et al. (2012), who investigate the impact
of AT in the foreign exchange market around macroeconomic news releases from 2003
through 2007. Using a VAR model they ﬁnd that AT contributes to a more eﬃcient
price discovery process through the elimination of arbitrage opportunities and the faster
incorporation of news into prices. However, human-initiated trades add a larger share
to the variance in exchange rate returns than AT-initiated trades. Although computer
trades tend to be correlated, they ﬁnd no evidence that AT causes excessive volatility.
Focusing on news events in the stock market, Zhang (2013) examines the role of HFTs in
reacting to extreme price changes as well as to ﬁrm-speciﬁc news in US equity markets
from 2008 to 2009. By testing whether HFT order ﬂow has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on stock
returns relative to NHFT order ﬂow, she ﬁnds that HFT orders dominate price discovery
in the short run. In the longer run, however, NHFTs contribute more to price discovery
than HFTs.
Some other recent studies address the role of HFT in the price discovery process
in a broader context.
Brogaard et al. (2013) use a state space model to decompose
price movements for 120 US stocks from 2008 to 2009 into permanent (information) and
temporary (pricing errors) components and to relate changes in both to HFT. The authors
ﬁnd that HFT trades improve price eﬃciency by trading in the direction of permanent and
in the opposite direction of transitory price changes, both on average and on the highest
volatility days. Benos and Sagade (2013) analyze the behavior of HFTs and their impact
on market quality for four UK stocks in a randomly selected 1-week period from 2010-2011.
They ﬁnd that higher price volatility causes HFT activity to increase. Finally, the authors
provide evidence that while HFTs have a higher information-to-noise ratio than NHFTs,
there are instances in which the contribution to information by HFTs is accompanied by
a large absolute noise contribution. The study is one of the few exceptions that analyze
HFT in European ﬁnancial markets. The bulk of empirical literature on HFT are based
on US markets using data from the NASDAQ exchange (e.g., Gao and Mizrach (2013),
Zhang (2013) and Brogaard et al. (2013)). Other studies on European markets comprise
the work by Breckenfelder (2013), who investigates the impact of HFT competition on
market quality in the Swedish stock exchange in 2009 using the OMXS Index obtained
from the NASDAQ OMS Nordic, or the paper by Menkveld (2013), which is based on data
on Dutch local index stocks from 2007 through 2008 and examines the trading strategy
of a large HFT. There is, however, no work so far on European bond markets.
Information on whether trades or orders are placed by a HFT or not is usually scarce.
6

Therefore, a large part of empirical work on HFT uses proxies of HFT and AT, which
are often based on certain data characteristics like reaction times and other properties
typical for HFTs (e.g., Hendershott et al. (2011), Zhang (2010)). For example, Jiang
et al. (2013) and Liu et al. (2014) infer HFT trades and orders on the basis of the reaction
time between order placement and subsequent modiﬁcation and cancellation that exceeds
human ability. Datasets including AT and HFT identiﬁers have become available only
recently. For example, the NASDAQ dataset from 2008 to 2009 used by Gao and Mizrach
(2013), Zhang (2013) and Brogaard et al. (2013) includes an HFT ﬂag which identiﬁes
26 HFT ﬁrms. However, it cannot identify all HFTs, e.g., those that also act as brokers,
but only independent proprietary trading ﬁrms. The dataset used by Chaboud et al.
(2012) exhibits a distinction between humans and computers behind each trade. While
this might have been an appropriate classiﬁcation scheme during the study period from
2003 to 2007, a pure distinction between humans and computers would no longer be
appropriate nowadays. Not only has the trading volume of HFTs in US stock markets
increased dramatically (from 30% in 2005 to more than 50% in 2012, according to a study
by TABB Group (2012)), but also speed and latency have developed strongly in the
last decade. Today, most trades are carried out electronically on highly liquid ﬁnancial
markets, and many business units apply AT strategies which cannot be classiﬁed as HFT,
however, given their speciﬁc characteristics, particularly their lower speed. Only very little
empirical work is based on datasets including the identities of the HFT ﬁrms. Among
these few exceptions are the studies by Benos and Sagade (2013) and Breckenfelder (2013),
which are based on trade data. However, the datasets including an HFT identiﬁer can
often only identify speciﬁc HFT ﬁrms, as in the work by Benos and Sagade (2013), where
only the largest HFT ﬁrms are identiﬁed.
3
Data and Descriptive Statistics
3.1
Bund Futures Dataset
This study is based on Bund futures data from Deutsche B¨orse’s subsidiary Eurex and
comprises two diﬀerent datasets. The ﬁrst dataset consists of one week of relatively high
volatility from 6 to 13 March 2014 and one week of relatively low volatility from 3 to 10
June 2014.1 Each of the 12 trading days consists of all order book activities, including
modiﬁcations, executions, and deletions, that occurred between 8 a.m.
and 10 p.m.
CET. The diﬀerent volatility episodes are deﬁned using the VDAX, which is the implied
1Given the extremely high frequency of the data and the focus on rather short-term aspects of HFT
trading strategies, two weeks of data seem suﬃcient to draw conclusions on HFT trading behavior in
high and low volatility environments.
7

volatility index based on equity options on the German DAX index. In March 2014, when
the Krim crisis induced a period of increased risk aversion on European ﬁnancial markets,
the VDAX reached a level of close to 20, with an average of 17.2 during the 6 days in
March compared to an average level of 14.1 in the previous 6 months. In the low-volatility
period in June, the DAX attained a new all-time high of more than 10,000 points and the
VDAX was at an average level of 13.4 during the 6 days of June compared to an average
level of 16.7 in the previous 6 months. The second dataset comprises single trading days
between July 2013 and June 2014 on which major macroeconomic news was released.
More speciﬁcally, I use the entire trading days of the Bund futures contract from 8:00
a.m. to 10 p.m. when the Nonfarm Payrolls for the US (ﬁrst Friday of each month) and
ECB rate decisions (ﬁrst Thursday of each month) were published. These are the most
relevant US and European macroeconomic news (e.g., Schopen and Missong (2011) and
Chaboud et al. (2012)) which also have the strongest impact on bond market prices.
A large number of studies are based on trade data (e.g., Brogaard et al. (2013), Benos
and Sagade (2013), Breckenfelder (2013)), while the dataset used in this study comprises
the full order book information. Hence, besides best bid and ask prices, limit and market orders submitted and any order activity including cancellations or modiﬁcations are
available. This allows to follow each order from its submission to its execution or deletion.
Moreover, depending on the size of a marketable order, in addition to the best bid/ask
price, further limit orders may be executed, too. This is especially relevant for large orders
that often occur after important macroeconomic news releases. Thus, the information on
all limit orders enables to see how deeply an order hits the order book.
Trade and order timestamps are given in microseconds and ranked within each microsecond. This high data frequency allows for a more granular analysis than in other
empirical HFT studies that are, at most, based on milliseconds (e.g., Brogaard et al.
(2013), Gao and Mizrach (2013), Zhang (2013)). Given that trading speed has improved
steadily in the last years and latency has become more and more important, the extremely
high frequency of the Bund futures data is of particular value and allows to appropriately
study the information processing of prices and the role HFTs play therein.
Furthermore, the dataset includes a dummy variable for HFT. This dummy is based
on a methodology developed by Deutsche B¨orse (see Appendix A.1). The idea is to test
whether the order submission sequencing of a business unit, i.e. the branch of a ﬁrm
that submits the order, exhibits patterns that are typical for HFT participants. More
speciﬁcally, the theoretical random sequencing is calculated by the expected mean arrival
rate of incoming transactions.2
The deviation of the observed transactions from the
2The theoretical random sequencing is derived from the following formula: f(t) = 1
µe
−t
µ , where µ is
the mean arrival rate and t the time interval.
8

expected sequencing is used as selection criterion for being classiﬁed as a latency-sensitive
business unit (HFT). So if the transactions carried out by a speciﬁc business unit exhibit
a latency-sensitive behavior, all orders of this business unit will be classiﬁed as HFT. The
methodology is updated on a continuous basis. One limitation of the data is that they
do not include the identity of the order initiator.
3.2
Characteristics of the Dataset
In the following, several ratios related to the orders submitted by HFTs and NHFTs are
presented.
First, I want to ﬁnd out whether HFTs or NHFTs submit more orders on an absolute
and relative basis and thereby add liquidity to the market. For this purpose, I estimate
the total number of submitted orders as well as the order submission ratio, deﬁned as
the ratio of submitted orders to all activities, including modiﬁcations, deletions and executions. A typical characteristic of HFT is its speed of trading. Hence, in the second step, I
measure the life-time of each order given by the execution time and the deletion time,
i.e. the time that elapses from the order submission to its execution or its cancellation.
Next, I measure the modiﬁcation time, which is the time diﬀerence between an order
submission and subsequent modiﬁcations. Furthermore, I calculate the deletion ratio
and the modiﬁcation ratio, given by the average number of deletions and modiﬁcations
relative to the added orders, respectively, as well as the number of modiﬁcations, deﬁned as the average number of modiﬁcations per order. A typical observation of HFT
activity is the frequent submission and cancellation of limit orders. Hence, I also calculate
the order-to-trade ratio, which reﬂects the overall quoted volume divided by all real
transactions. In this study, volume is measured as the number of Bund futures contracts.
The following results are based on the six trading days of high volatility in March
and the six low-volatility days in June. This allows me to compare the HFT activity in
two diﬀerent market environments. Table 1 displays the calculated numbers and ratios.
According to the ﬁrst row, both trading groups, i.e. HFTs and NHFTs, submit more
orders in the week of relatively higher volatility than in the low-volatility week on an
absolute basis. Relative to other order book activities, HFTs submit more orders than
NHFTs. This ratio is nearly constant across the two weeks. Also, the results show that
during a more volatile market environment it takes, on average, longer for both HFTs and
NHFTs to execute or modify an order. Regarding latency, which is an important factor
of HFT strategies, I ﬁnd evidence that the life-time of an order is much shorter in the
case of HFTs, i.e. it is executed or deleted on average almost twice as fast as for NHFTs.
Other studies focusing on European markets (e.g., ESMA (2014)) also highlight the great
importance of order deletion for HFTs. For example, Hasbrouck and Saar (2009) argue
9

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
A: High Vola
B: Low Vola
Variable
Measure
HFT
NHFT
HFT
NHFT
Orders submissions
Number (million)
1.700
1.352
1.379
1.146
Ratio in %
40.91
33.73
39.65
33.04
Execution time
Median
2.04
3.94
1.75
3.13
Mean
185.70
370.24
152.60
288.60
Deletion time
Median
2.57
3.66
2.43
3.92
Mean
253.15
511.51
286.61
468.16
Deletion ratio in %
Mean
73.51
67.63
68.56
71.25
Modiﬁcation time
Median
3.07
2.01
1.74
1.11
Mean
115.18
66.66
93.70
61.12
Modiﬁcation ratio in %
Mean
36.55
90.68
43.62
95.65
Number of modiﬁcations
Mean
14.99
130.14
76.54
160.34
Order-to-trade ratio
Mean
2.85
2.32
2.50
2.29
This table includes diﬀerent measures describing the characteristics in the trading behavior of HFTs and NHFTs. Most measures are given as the mean or median value for the
6 trading days in March (high vola) and June (low vola). Time is displayed in seconds.
that over one-third of limit orders are canceled within two seconds in the US equity market
and name those “ﬂeeting orders”. The calculated median deletion time of 2.5 seconds is
close to their ﬁndings. This result suggests that the supplied liquidity by HFTs is rather
short-lived.
As Table 1 shows, the median modiﬁcation time is smaller for NHFTs than for HFTs.
This might seem surprising at ﬁrst. But due to technical properties of the exchange’s
trading infrastructure, it generally takes more time to modify an order than to delete
it. Therefore, a high number of modiﬁcations is not typical for HFTs, who focus on the
very short term, but rather for slower algorithmic traders, who are not dependent on
extremely low latency strategies. The much higher average number of modiﬁcations for
NHFTs provides further evidence for the diﬀerent trading approaches. Remarkably, the
discrepancy is even higher during the highly volatile market phase, i.e. NHFTs modify
their orders almost 10 times more often than HFTs. Hence, HFTs seem to prefer canceling
over modifying orders when volatility rises to above-average levels. The order-to-trade
ratio is higher for HFTs in both market phases, implying that the ratio of submitted
orders which lead to a real execution is lower. The diﬀerence is more pronounced in the
10

Figure 1: This ﬁgure depicts the HFT activity as measured by participation in the overall
orders.
Figure 2: This ﬁgure depicts the HFT activity as measured by participation in the overall
traded volume.
high-volatility phase, underlining the higher deletion activity by HFTs relative to real
transactions in these times.
Second, I classify the HFT identiﬁer variable further and distinguish between active
and passive HFTs and NHFTs (liquidity taker and provider).
I deﬁne the liquidityproviding part of the transaction as being the limit order in the order book that was
hit by a marketable order, i.e. a market or another more recent limit order that takes
the opposite side of a trade. The liquidity taker is the market participant that enters
the marketable order. The order of the liquidity taker is immediately executed when it
enters the order book. The sum of active and passive HFTs (NHFTs) constitutes the total
number of HFTs (NHFTs). This classiﬁcation is the same as in, e.g., Brogaard et al. (2013)
or Brogaard (2011). It is important to mention, however, that the division in active and
passive market participants just refers to the cross-section of trades. Hence, unlike Benos
and Sagade (2013), who group traders based on their overall liquidity taking/providing
activity, in the present study the composition of the trading groups (active and passive
HFTs and NHFTs) can vary over time. Thus, a trade from an HFT ﬁrm who mostly
places “aggressive” orders can still be classiﬁed as passive at a speciﬁc point in time if
the ﬁrm places a limit order that is not immediately executed.
According to Figure 1, in March total HFT participation of all orders is over 50%,
but only 3.7% of HFT orders are submitted by active HFTs. However, when considering
the total traded volume (Figure 2), active HFTs contribute with a much higher share of
21.6%. In contrast, the traded volume by passive HFTs is much smaller than their share
11

in the submitted orders, which again reﬂects the signiﬁcant role of order deletions in HFT
activity. In June, during the low-volatility market period, both HFT order submission
activity and trading volume participation is slightly lower than in March.
One can conclude that HFTs seem to be slightly more active and delete signiﬁcantly
more orders in highly volatile market periods. Although HFTs contribute to a larger share
of the traded volume in these periods, a smaller share of their submitted orders leads to
a real transaction as shown by the order-to-trade ratios. The speed advantage of HFTs
is reﬂected in the overall lower execution and deletion time compared to NHFTs.
4
HFT Trading Strategies
4.1
Momentum vs. Contrarian Strategies
In this section, the overall trading behavior of active and passive HFTs and NHFTs in
periods of high and low market stress is investigated. The week in March captures the
high-volatility period and the week in June the low-volatility period.
In the ﬁrst subsection, the question whether HFTs amplify or dampen excessive price
movements by trading in the direction of or opposed to the market return is analyzed. In
the second subsection, I study the relationship of active and passive HFT and NHFT trading activity and volatility within the two market environments. To investigate whether
HFTs rather follow momentum or contrarian strategies and thereby exacerbate or reduce
short-term volatility, I follow the work by Breckenfelder (2013), who proposes several
measures to capture momentum strategies. The measure I apply is given by
Momd = 1
T ΣT
t=1rd,t
V olj
buy,d,t −V olj
sell,d,t
V old,t
,
(1)
where rd,t represents the log mean return over time interval t, V olj
buy,d,t denotes the trading
volume from buy trades for trading group j, where j = 1, ..., 6 (HFT, NHFT, active
HFT/NHFT, passive HFT/NHFT), in time interval t, V olj
sell,d,t captures the trading
volume from sell trades for trading group j in t, and V old,t is the total volume traded in
the futures contract within the same time interval t. The momentum measure constitutes
the sum over the 1-minute intervals for each trading day d and is calculated separately
for each trading group j. It becomes positive when the trading group, e.g., HFTs, buy
(sell) on average with an increasing (decreasing) futures price, and negative when they
trade in the opposite direction of the price movement. Hence, a positive sign signals a
momentum strategy, whereas a negative one would be interpreted as a contrarian strategy.
The average momentum measure is calculated for both weeks to obtain an indication of
12

Table 2: Momentum Measure
A: High Vola
Active HFT
Active NHFT
Passive HFT
Passive NHFT
HFT
NHFT
0.5541***
0.4654***
-0.3658***
-0.6776***
0.1362***
-0.1306***
(0.0211)
(0.02174)
(0.0140)
(0.0212)
(0.0183)
(0.0182)
B: Low Vola
Active HFT
Active NHFT
Passive HFT
Passive NHFT
HFT
NHFT
0.4394***
0.5763***
-0.4093***
-0.6621***
-0.1229***
0.0175
(0.0310)
(0.0259)
(0.0209)
(0.0311)
(0.0067)
(0.0209)
This table shows the results of the momentum measure, which is the product of the
return and the signed net order ﬂow relative to the traded volume, for active HFTs and
NHFTs, passive HFTs and NHFTs as well as overall HFTs and NHFTs. It is calculated
as the mean over all 1-minute time intervals for the week in March and the week in June,
multiplied times 100,000. Positive values indicate momentum, negative values indicate
contrarian strategies. Standard errors are given in parentheses and * denotes signiﬁcant
at 10%, ** denotes signiﬁcant at 5%, *** denotes signiﬁcant at 1%.
the strategies applied by HFTs and NHFTs in phases of high and low volatility.
Table 2 summarizes the results for all six trading groups. As the results show, the
momentum measure for active HFTs exhibits a signiﬁcantly positive coeﬃcient in both
market environments, implying that active HFTs tend to trade in the direction of price
changes. In contrast, passive HFTs on average trade in the opposite direction of contemporaneous price movements, as indicated by their signiﬁcantly negative coeﬃcient.
Using one lag of the return variable does not change the results which implies that active
(passive) HFTs also trade in the direction of (opposed to) past price movements. The
results are in line with Benos and Sagade (2013) and Brogaard et al. (2013), which points
to consistent patterns of HFTs’ trading behavior across diﬀerent markets.
While the
measure for active HFTs (NHFTs) is higher (lower) during the high-volatility week than
in the low-volatility week, passive HFTs and NHFTs do not exhibit any adjustment of
their strategies to the market environment. Interestingly, the overall HFT ratio is signiﬁcantly positive in March and negative in June. This implies that, on average, HFTs follow
momentum strategies on high-volatility days and contrarian strategies on low-volatility
days.
One can conclude that overall HFT activity varies with diﬀerent market environments.
In highly volatile market periods, HFTs overall trade in the direction of the market trend,
while they act as liquidity-providers in periods of low market stress. At the same time
HFTs’ share of the traded volume is higher in volatile market phases. Hence, by trading
in the direction of the market return, active HFTs may amplify intraday price variation,
especially in times of high market uncertainty. Although the contrarian strategies by
13

passive HFTs tend to dampen excessive price ﬂuctuations, they are dominated by momentum trades of active HFTs in those times. Thus, liquidity-providing strategies by
HFTs mainly prevail in tranquil market phases. The question whether active and passive
HFTs trade in the direction of or opposed to the market movement is also analyzed in
the context of macroeconomic news releases in Section 5.
4.2
HFT and Volatility
In the next step, I want to ﬁnd out how the trading behavior of HFTs is related to market
volatility. In order to obtain proper volatility measurements on short time scales, one must
take into account the high variation of tick-by-tick market activity within speciﬁc time
intervals. One of the most common measures in the context of high-frequency data is
the realized variance, which is the sum of squared incremental returns. Zhang, Mykland,
and Ait-Sahalia (2005) propose a method to estimate the realized variance consistently
for predeﬁned subsamples in the presence of microstructure noise. The idea is to divide
a time span, e.g. one day, into non-overlapping time intervals of the same length. Based
on this approach, the realized variance for each 1-minute time interval is given by
Real V art = ΣN
i=1r2
t,i,
(2)
where N is the number of observations in time interval t and r is the log Bund futures
return. In order to link the volatility measure to HFT activity, I build 100 volatility
percentiles based on the realized variance per 1-minute interval for the week in March and
the week in June and calculate the excess HFT and NHFT trading participation ratio per
percentile. The ratio reﬂects the traded volume of active and passive HFTs and NHFTs
divided by the overall trading volume per time interval. Excess trading participation
is deﬁned as deviation of the trading participation ratio per 1-minute interval from the
average ratio of the traded volume over all time intervals for each week.
Figures 3 and 4 depict HFT and NHFT trading activity for the highest 50 volatility
percentiles.3
For the week in March (Figure 3) one can see that active and passive
HFT trading activity is positively related to volatility. This positive relationship is also
statistically signiﬁcant and in line with the ﬁndings by Brogaard et al. (2013). In contrast,
both active and passive NHFT trading activity co-moves negatively with volatility. While
HFTs trade more the higher the volatility, NHFTs trade less compared to their average
share at the overall traded volume. This is in contrast to the results for the week in June,
3To get a clearer picture of the relationship between HFT trading and increasing volatility, I have
only included the highest 50 percentiles. Also, the question whether HFTs are more active in times of
high market stress is at the core of this study. There is no clear relationship between HFT trading and
volatility for the lower 50 percentiles, anyway.
14

where no clear relationship between the volatility percentiles and the HFT and NHFT
trading can be identiﬁed (see Figure 4). However, in the highest 3 volatility percentiles the
ratio of active HFT exhibits a sudden jump, which shows that above a certain volatility
level liquidity-taking HFTs suddenly trade more. At the same time, active NHFTs scale
back their trading activity dramatically. Against this evidence, trading by passive HFTs
and NHFTs does not change with varying volatility levels.
0
-0.04
0.02
-0.02
0.04
50
60
70
80
90
100
Volatility percentiles
Excess active HFT trading ratio
Excess passive HFT trading ratio
(a) HFT
0
-0.04
0.02
-0.02
0.04
50
60
70
80
90
100
Volatility percentiles
Excess active NHFT trading ratio
Excess passive NHFT trading ratio
(b) NHFT
Figure 3: These ﬁgures depict the HFT and NHFT excess trading ratios for the highest
50 volatility percentiles in March.
0
-0.1
-0.05
0.1
0.05
50
60
70
80
90
100
Volatility percentiles
Excess active HFT trading ratio
Excess passive HFT trading ratio
(a) HFT
0
-0.1
0.05
-0.05
0.1
50
60
70
80
90
100
Volatility percentiles
Excess active NHFT trading ratio
Excess passive NHFT trading ratio
(b) NHFT
Figure 4: These ﬁgures depict the HFT and NHFT excess trading ratios for the highest 50
volatility percentiles in June. Excess trading ratio is calculated as the diﬀerence between
the active and passive HFT trading volume participation and the average trading volume
ratios over the entire week. The volatility percentiles are based on 1-minute time intervals.
The results imply that in the most volatile market episodes, liquidity-taking HFTs
seem to trade more, while active slower traders withdraw increasingly from markets. The
evidence is more pronounced for the high-volatility week and is in line with prior work
15

(e.g., Zhang (2010), Boehmer et al. (2012) and Chaboud et al. (2012)). For liquidityproviding participants, the results depend on the week considered. In the low-volatility
week, none of the passive trading groups are sensitive to volatility changes. In the week
of higher market stress, passive HFTs trade more the higher the volatility, while slower
traders again rather withdraw from the market. However, a certain part of this positive
relationship between passive HFTs and volatility can be due to mechanical reasons: a limit
order is more likely to be executed when volatility is high (Benos and Sagade (2013)).
To conclude, the ﬁndings of this section suggest that active HFTs dominate in highvolatility periods and trade more than usual when volatility exceeds a certain level. By
trading in the direction of market movements, they may exacerbate extreme volatility
episodes. In contrast, NHFTs trade less the higher the volatility in a market environment
that is already volatile. On low-volatility days, volatility-dampening passive strategies
dominate overall HFT trading activity. The above results only provide evidence that
excess trading of active HFTs coincides with highly volatile market environments. Based
on this analysis, a conclusion on causality between HFT activity and volatility cannot be
drawn. To establish a causal link between HFT trading and volatility requires appropriate
instruments, which are generally hard to ﬁnd (Biais and Foucault (2014), Benos and
Sagade (2013)). Hence, it could be that HFT trading induces stronger price ﬂuctuations.
But it is also likely that HFTs are rather attracted by higher volatility.
The reason
may be that HFTs engage in trading strategies that are most beneﬁcial when volatility
is high (Benos and Sagade (2013)), which allows them to quickly generate short-term
proﬁts. Hence, in order to obtain a more precise idea about the relationship between
HFT activity and volatility, the following analysis will focus on speciﬁc market episodes,
namely the period around macroeconomic news releases, which constitute a source of high
volatility. As macroeconomic news can be considered as exogenous variables (Chaboud
et al. (2012)) and are announced at a speciﬁc time, the impact of HFT trading on volatility
following the news is easier to establish, especially when the analysis is carried out at a
very granular level.
5
HFT around Macroeconomic News Announcements
5.1
HFT Trading around Macroeconomic News
It is well known that macroeconomic news releases receive especially strong attention in
government bond markets. Among the most relevant macroeconomic news for European
bond markets are the US Nonfarm Payrolls (NFPs), released every ﬁrst Friday of each
month, and the ECB rate decision, released every ﬁrst Thursday of each month (e.g.,
16

Schopen and Missong (2011), Chaboud et al. (2012)). In the following, I analyze the
impact of these macroeconomic news announcements on HFT activity in the Bund futures
market within a one-year period from July 2013 to June 2014. The NFPs are usually
reported at 2:30 pm and ECB rate decisions at 1:45 pm (CET). In order to avoid small
deviations in the actual report time, the time stamp of the ﬁrst news announcement
from Bloomberg is used, which usually corresponds to one second after the anticipated
publication time. A positive macroeconomic data surprise occurs when the announced
number is greater than the analysts’ survey median forecast as reported by Bloomberg,
and a negative one if it is smaller than the forecast median.
(a) HFT Activity
(b) NHFT Activity
Figure 5: These ﬁgures illustrate the average excess HFT activity and the volatility of
the Bund futures around the release of the monthly NFPs including 12 news events from
July 2013 to July 2014.
In the ﬁrst step, I graphically examine HFT trading activity around the publication of
NFPs compared to their average activity on that particular trading day.4 In the second
step, the reaction of HFTs and NHFTs to both NFPs and ECB rate decisions is examined
in an econometric approach.
Figure 5 depicts the trading behavior of active and passive HFTs and NHFTs from 10
seconds prior to 10 seconds after the NFPs release. Apparently, the excess volatility of the
Bund futures return increases strongly immediately after the news release, but already
reaches its normal level of zero after ﬁve seconds. As Figure 5 (a) shows, there is a clear
diﬀerence in the activity of active and passive HFTs. While active HFTs already increase
their trading activity signiﬁcantly several seconds before the data become public where
the ﬁrst peak is reached exactly at the second of the announced publication time, passive
HFTs only increase their trading share to an above-average level one to two seconds after
the news release. However, even 10 seconds after the data are announced, both active
and passive HFTs remain highly active. In contrast, as shown in Figure 5 (b), active and
4In the graphical analysis, I focus only on NFP releases, since the distinction between positive and
negative surprises is more clear-cut in the case of macroeconomic data than for ECB rate decisions.
17

passive NHFTs trade less after the NFP release compared to their average trading activity
over the entire trading day. Interestingly, active NHFTs strongly scale back their activity
already a few seconds before the macroeconomic news is published. A possible reason
for this could be that NHFTs are aware of their disadvantage in speed and their lower
chances of generating gains from short-term trading on the news compared to HFTs.
Next, I analyze whether HFTs trade in or against the direction of the market return
around news events and whether the reaction depends on the nature of the news surprise,
i.e.
a positive or a negative deviation of the NFPs from the market expectation.
A
positive (negative) macroeconomic news surprise usually implies rising bond yields and
falling bond prices due to higher interest rate and inﬂation expectations. Figures 6 and
7 depict the HFT and NHFT signed net order ﬂow and the return in 1-second intervals
around positive and negative NFP releases. The ﬁgures show that immediately after the
news is released (t = 0), the return jumps in the direction of the surprise, stabilizes
shortly afterwards and ﬁnally reaches a level close to the pre-announcement value. As
one can see in Figure 6 (a), the trading of active HFTs co-moves very closely with the
price movement, especially when news releases are positive.5 This picture suggests that
active HFTs sell Bund futures contracts on positive and buy on negative news releases,
which is in line with the ﬁndings by Brogaard et al. (2013) for the US stock market. The
opposed order ﬂow evolution of passive NHFTs suggests that their trades are picked oﬀ
by active HFTs (see Figures 6 and 7 (b)). In contrast, passive HFTs do not change their
trading activity signiﬁcantly around the news releases: their buy and sell trades remain
balanced, which corresponds to a net order ﬂow of nearly zero. Therefore, overall HFT
order ﬂow is positively related to the market return, meaning that HFTs, on average,
take liquidity after macroeconomic news releases. This result contradicts the empirical
evidence by Brogaard et al. (2013) that overall HFTs trade in the opposite direction of
macroeconomic news and so dampen excessive price movements.
5.2
HFT Price Discovery around Macroeconomic News
While the graphical analysis above was helpful to obtain a broad idea of HFT trading
behavior around macroeconomic news events, I study this issue in more detail next. First,
I investigate the impact of macroeconomic news releases on HFT trading behavior in clock
time and then go over to tick time in order to exploit the high granularity of the data.
Second, I analyze the role of HFT in price discovery and its contribution to information
and noise on a tick-by-tick-basis.
5The results for the negative news releases are biased because of a large HFT trade on one day
immediately before the news release. Given the small number of negative news surprises of only ﬁve, this
eﬀect distorts the results.
18

(a) HFT Activity
(b) NHFT Activity
Figure 6: These ﬁgures depict the HFT and NHFT order ﬂow as well as the log return
within 1-second intervals around the release of positive NFPs from July 2013 to July
2014, including seven positive news events. Positive news announcements occur when the
actual NFP number is higher than the median forecast of NFPs. Order ﬂow is calculated
as the diﬀerence between execution quantities from buy trades and sell trades.
(a) HFT Activity
(b) NHFT Activity
Figure 7: These ﬁgures depict the HFT and NHFT order ﬂow as well as the log return
within 1-second intervals around the release of negative NFPs from July 2013 to July
2014, including ﬁve negative news events. Negative news announcements occur when the
actual NFP number is lower than the median forecast of NFPs. Order ﬂow is calculated
as the diﬀerence between execution quantities from buy trades and sell trades.
Analysis in clock time
For the clock time analysis, I build 1-second intervals and calculate the immediate (t = 0)
and the long-term eﬀect (t = 10) of NFP and ECB news announcements on the order ﬂow
of active and passive HFTs and NHFTs. Therefore, I estimate a structural VAR with
excess HFT and NHFT order ﬂow as well as excess return within the 10-minute interval
of the news releases (ﬁve minutes prior to ﬁve minutes after the news releases) using 10
lags, as in Hendershott and Riordan (2011) and Benos and Sagade (2013). Excess order
ﬂow and return are calculated as the diﬀerence between the order ﬂow of the 10-minute
interval and the average values on the entire trading day excluding the event window.
19

This results in the following VAR model including the macroeconomic news as exogenous
variable similar to Zhang (2013) and Chaboud et al. (2012).
rt = α +
l
X
i=1
βiOF hft
t−i +
l
X
i=1
γiOF nhft
t−i
+
l
X
i=1
δirt−i +
l
X
i=0
ψiDi + ϵ1t
OF hft
t
= κ +
l
X
i=1
ηiOF hft
t−i +
l
X
i=1
λiOF nhft
t−i
+
l
X
i=1
νirt−i +
l
X
i=0
φiDi + ϵ2t
OF nhft
t
= ζ +
l
X
i=1
ρiOF hft
t−i +
l
X
i=1
τiOF nhft
t−i
+
l
X
i=1
υirt−i +
l
X
i=0
πiDi + ϵ3t,
(3)
where t denotes the 1-second time interval, OF is the signed net order ﬂow (buyerinitiated minus seller-initiated volume), r is the log return per time interval, and D is the
dummy variable indicating the macroeconomic news. The latter is equal to 1 when news
is released and 0 otherwise. In contrast to most existing HFT literature (e.g., Hendershott
and Riordan (2011), Benos and Sagade (2013), Zhang and Riordan (2011)), instead of
using the mid-price based on quote updates and transactions, I use execution prices as
in Hasbrouck (1993). The reason for this is the following. The density of transactions
is extremely high following certain news events such as the NFP releases, and often a
large number of transactions occur within the same microsecond. In these instances, the
bid-ask spread usually widens substantially due to some very large trades which can often
only be partially executed, so that the execution price adjusts until the limit price of the
large order is reached. Therefore, the execution price varies strongly, while the mid-price
remains constant. Hence, using the mid-price would imply signiﬁcant information loss,
especially around the publication of important macroeconomic news. Moreover, instead
of using the trade direction as in Benos and Sagade (2013) or Hendershott and Riordan
(2011), I include the signed net order ﬂow to account for the fact that large orders might
have a stronger impact on prices than small trades. This seems reasonable given the above
evidence of some large trades, especially by HFTs after major news releases.
The above representation is based on the restriction that NHFT order ﬂow does not
contemporaneously aﬀect HFT order ﬂow or vice versa, which would not be intuitive.
Therefore, one does not need to assume a speciﬁc ordering of the order ﬂow time series
in the VAR. As a robustness check, I switch the orderings of the two order ﬂow time
series, which yields almost identical results. The above VAR model is estimated separately for active and passive trading participants. In order to capture the impact of the
macroeconomic news on the order ﬂow variables, in the ﬁrst step I calculate the dynamic
multipliers using the macroeconomic news as impulse and the order ﬂow variables as responses. In the second step, I estimate the impact of the HFT and NHFT order ﬂow
20

on return and the respective impulse responses. To generate dynamic multipliers and
impulse responses, I invert the above VAR model and apply a Cholesky decomposition
on the variance-covariance matrix Σ to obtain a vector moving average (VMA) form with
orthogonalized error terms



rt
OF hft
t
OF nhft
t


=



a(L)b(L)c(L)
d(L)e(L)f(L)
g(L)h(L)k(L)






e1,t
e2,t
e3,t


+



q(L)
r(L)
u(L)






X1,t
X2,t
X3,t


,
(4)
where the error terms ei,t are mutually orthogonal with etet′ = I. This allows for causal
statements about shocks to one element of et without considering correlations with the
other variables. The lag polynomials a(L) to k(L) represent the impulse response functions of the three variables to shocks, while q(L) to u(L) are dynamic multipliers that
capture the cumulative impact of macroeconomic news on the three variables. The impulse response functions for HFT and NHFT order ﬂow are b(L) and c(L), respectively,
and can be interpreted as an estimate of the permanent price impact of a trade innovation.
Table 3: Impact of News Shocks on Order Flow - Clock-based Analysis
Active HFT
Active NHFT
Passive HFT
Passive NHFT
HFT
NHFT
SR
-0.247*
-0.046
-0.007
0.463***
-0.240
0.398***
(0.152)
(0.159)
(0.136)
(0.157)
(0.159)
(0.159)
LR
0.170
-0.012
-0.397
0.498
-0.249
0.578
(0.383)
(0.458)
(0.384)
(0.466)
(0.487)
(0.486)
LR −SR
0.417
0.034
-0.390
0.035
-0.05
0.18
(0.412)
(0.485)
(0.407)
(0.492)
(0.512)
(0.511)
This table shows the results of the VAR analysis including the macroeconomic news
dummy as exogenous variable. The analysis is carried out on a 1-second frequency. SR
denotes short-run eﬀect, which is the immediate impact of the news dummy on the order
ﬂow of the diﬀerent market participants, LR is the cumulative eﬀect after 10 seconds
and (LR −SR) the diﬀerence between the two. The analysis is carried out for active
and passive HFTs and NHFTs as well as overall HFTs. Standard errors are given in
parentheses and * denotes signiﬁcant at 10%, ** denotes signiﬁcant at 5%, *** denotes
signiﬁcant at 1%.
Table 3 summarizes the results of the impact of NFP and ECB events on the order
ﬂow of active and passive HFTs and NHFTs, given by r(L) and u(L), respectively, based
on 1-second intervals. As the graphical analysis already showed (Figures 6 and 7), only
active HFTs and passive NHFTs exhibit a signiﬁcant reaction to the news release. The
negative SR eﬀect (t = 0) of active HFTs implies that overall they net sell Bund futures
contracts on macroeconomic news releases in the ﬁrst second following the announcement.
Given the majority of positive news events and the stronger reaction of HFTs to positive
surprises we have seen above, the negative coeﬃcient of active HFTs implies that overall
21

they trade in the direction of the market. While their initial reaction is quite strong,
active HFTs already tend to reverse their trading positions right after the SR reaction
(in t = 1), leading to a positive cumulative net trading eﬀect after 10 seconds (Table 3).
As a robustness test, I performed the analysis accounting for positive and negative
news surprises.6 Since this alternative speciﬁcation yields very similar results, I do not
explicitly show them.
The above results reﬂect the typical HFT trading behavior around news events. HFTs
are aware of their advantage in speed and trade on the macroeconomic news surprise
faster than other traders. Given the generally strong market impact of NFP and ECB
news announcements, HFTs can be certain that other traders will also trade according to
the surprise component of the news, but only with a delay. Hence, in case of a positive
news surprise, HFTs are among the ﬁrst traders who sell Bund futures contracts at a
still relatively high price. As soon as slower market participants also react to the news
announcement by selling futures contracts, which ampliﬁes the downward price pressure,
HFTs buy back the contracts at a much lower price and realize short-term trading gains.
This eﬀect is called information arbitrage. Hirschey (2013) provides further support for
this explanation, even though not directly linked to news. The author shows that HFTs
anticipate NHFTs’ future buying and selling pressure and trade ahead of them to proﬁt
from the NHFTs’ subsequent price impact. According to the results, on the other side
of the trades are usually passive NHFTs, indicated by a signiﬁcantly positive coeﬃcient.
When the news is announced, aggressive HFT orders hit their bid limit orders to sell the
Bund futures contract within one second. NHFTs cannot withdraw their limit orders as
fast as HFTs react to the news; this is called adverse selection risk. Hence, traders who
post standing limit orders that do not yet reﬂect the price changes implied by news lose
to HFTs.
As Table 3 shows, the LR eﬀect (after 10 seconds) is not signiﬁcant overall. This
supports the graphical evidence (see Figures 5 to 7 (a)) that HFTs execute their trading
strategies within a few seconds and mostly even within the ﬁrst second following a news
release.
My results are not fully in line with the ﬁndings by Brogaard et al. (2013), who show
that mainly passive HFTs are adversely selected by active HFTs around macroeconomic
news releases using 1-second intervals. The diﬀerent results might be due to the fact
6The dummy variable equals 1 for positive news surprises and −1 for negative surprises. In the case
of the NFPs, a positive news event occurs when the actual employment number lies above the survey
median, and vice versa for negative surprises. For ECB news, I apply two diﬀerent rules. A positive
(negative) surprise of the ECB rate decision occurs if the Bund futures return after one tick following
the decision is lower (higher) than one standard deviation below (above) its 30-tick rolling mean or if the
cumulative return ﬁve ticks after the rate decision is lower (higher) than two standard deviations below
(above) its mean.
22

that they look at stock markets, while I study government bond markets, which usually
show the strongest reaction to macroeconomic data (Altavilla et al. (2014)). Hence, the
reaction of stock returns to such news might diﬀer from that of bond returns. Given that
HFTs know that macroeconomic news can create excessive intraday volatility in bond
markets, they may anticipate higher risks in this market segment and withdraw from the
market before the news is released. Overall, the previous ﬁndings highlight very well HFT
trading strategies around news events from a human observer’s point of view, but they
also suggest that most of the news reactions occur within a few seconds. On some of the
NFP days between July 2013 and June 2014, more than 500 transactions are carried out
within the ﬁrst second after the data are published. In order to get a clearer picture of
the initial reactions by HFTs that usually occur within milliseconds, which is beyond the
scope of human perception, the following analyses are carried out on a tick-by-tick-basis.
Table 4: Impact of News Shocks on Order Flow - Tick Analysis
Active HFT
Active NHFT
Passive HFT
Passive NHFT
HFT
NHFT
SR
-0.089
0.004
-0.019
0.065
-0.099
0.096
(0.304)
(0.237)
(0.160)
(0.346)
(0.292)
(0.316)
LR
-6.715***
-0.875
0.967
5.686***
-5.892***
5.709***
(1.764)
(1.228)
(0.654)
(1.890)
(1.704)
(1.700)
LR −SR
-6.626***
-0.879
0.986
5.621***
-5.793***
5.613***
(1.790)
(1.251)
(0.673)
(1.921)
(1.729)
(1.729)
This table shows the results of the VAR analysis including the macroeconomic news
dummy as exogenous variable. The analysis is carried out on a tick-by-tick basis. SR
denotes the short-run eﬀect, which is the immediate impact of the news dummy on the
order ﬂow of the diﬀerent market participants, LR is the cumulative eﬀect after 10 ticks
and (LR −SR) the diﬀerence between the two. The analysis is carried out for active
and passive HFTs and NHFTs as well as overall HFTs. Standard errors are given in
parentheses and * denotes signiﬁcant at 10%, ** denotes signiﬁcant at 5%, *** denotes
signiﬁcant at 1%.
Analysis in tick time
In the present dataset, the number of ticks within the ﬁrst 10 seconds after the news release
varies between ﬁve trades for one ECB rate decision and 1330 for a speciﬁc NFP event.
Applying a ﬁxed time window does not appropriately account for the strong variability of
trades after a news release, while it allows for a chronological analysis of the news events,
which has been particularly useful in gaining an intial idea of the trading reactions by
HFTs and NHFTs. In a second approach, I replace seconds with number of ticks, i.e. the
SR eﬀect equals the ﬁrst tick after the news is published and the LR eﬀect is set to 10
ticks. This enables me to account for each event that takes place after the news release
23

and complements the above clock time analysis. The time period of the ﬁrst 10 ticks
varies strongly among the single event days and ranges between 60 milliseconds for NFP
events and 12 seconds for some ECB rate decisions. Order ﬂow and return variables are
standardized using mean and standard deviation of the respective Bund futures trading
day.
The estimated eﬀects of the news shocks on HFT and NHFT order ﬂow, i.e. r(L) and
u(L), based on ticks are given in Table 4. Within the ﬁrst 10 ticks, active HFTs trade
exactly in the direction of the market and the cumulative eﬀect expands the more ticks are
considered. The coeﬃcient is signiﬁcant from the second tick on. Comparing the results of
the clock-based and the tick-based analysis shows that the signiﬁcance levels of the eﬀects
are higher overall when using ticks. Particularly, the coeﬃcient after 10 ticks has a higher
explanatory power than the coeﬃcient for the ﬁrst second in the clock-based analysis.
This conﬁrms the presumption that active HFTs already realize their proﬁts by reversing
their positions within the ﬁrst second following the news, which is likely the reason for
the overall weaker impact in the initial 1-second interval. Also, the eﬀect that passive
NHFT orders are hit by active HFT trades is stronger than in the clock-based analysis.
This supports the hypothesis that estimating the trading behavior of HFTs and NHFTs
after news based on trading events rather than time intervals captures the initial trading
reaction more precisely. Performing the analysis using 20 ticks yields similar results.
In the next step, I calculate the impulse responses for HFT and NHFT order ﬂow
on return, given by b(L) and c(L), again for the ﬁrst 10 ticks. Similar to Hendershott
and Riordan (2011) and Chaboud et al. (2012), I limit the analysis to active trading
participants, since they initiate the trades around the news release and thereby mainly
contribute to price discovery. Results are given in Table 5 Panel A. They show that both
HFT and NHFT order ﬂow have a signiﬁcant positive immediate eﬀect on the return.
Based on the ﬁrst tick, the impact of NHFT trading is even slightly greater. While the
positive impact expands for HFTs over the subsequent 10 events, it diminishes slightly
for NHFTs. This result is also shown in Figure 8, which depicts the cumulative impulse
response functions and their 95% conﬁdence intervals of a positive shock to HFT and
NHFT order ﬂow on return from the initial response to 10 steps in the future. The impulse
response function for HFTs after 10 ticks is around ﬁve times as high as for NHFTs. This
implies that an innovation in HFT trading induces a 400% greater price change than an
innovation in NHFT trading, suggesting that HFT trades contain more information than
NHFT trades, which is also conﬁrmed by the signiﬁcantly positive diﬀerence between
HFT and NHFT impulse responses. Moreover, the subsequent adjustment (LR −SR) is
signiﬁcantly positive only for HFT trading. As a robustness test, I performed the analysis
for 20 ticks. The results are very similar to the analysis for 10 ticks (see Appendix A.2).
24

Table 5: Price Impact of Active HFT and NHFT - Tick Analysis
Panel A: Single IRFs
Active HFTs
Active NHFTs
Active HFT - NHFT
SR
0.069**
0.081***
-0.012
(0.031)
(0.032)
(0.045)
LR
0.607***
0.120*
0.486***
(0.063)
(0.067)
(0.092)
LR −SR
0.538***
0.039
0.498 ***
(0.070)
(0.074)
(0.102)
Panel B: Contribution to Permanent and Transitory Variance
Active HFTs
Active NHFTs
Public information
Permanent variance
0.092***
0.004
0.905***
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.031)
Transitory variance
0.334***
0.023
0.643***
(0.037)
(0.065)
(0.088)
Information-to-noise ratio
0.274***
0.158
1.408***
(0.056)
(0.855)
(0.199)
Panel A of this table shows the results of the impulse responses from active HFT and
NHFT order ﬂow on returns using 10 ticks, based on the VAR analysis including the
macroeconomic news dummy as exogenous variable. SR denotes the short-run eﬀect, LR
is the cumulative eﬀect after 10 ticks and (LR−SR) the diﬀerence between the two. Panel
B includes the result of the variance decomposition for the permanent and transitory price
components. It shows the shares of the variance of active HFTs and NHFTs relative to the
eﬃcient and transitory variance, as well as the information-to-noise ratio after 10 ticks.
Standard errors are given in parentheses and * denotes signiﬁcant at 10%, ** denotes
signiﬁcant at 5%, *** denotes signiﬁcant at 1%.
The above results are consistent with news trading strategies by HFTs that rely on
speedy and aggressive trades and are close to the existing empirical evidence: e.g., Jiang
et al. (2013) also ﬁnd that HFT trades are more informative than NHFT trades for US
Treasury bond returns after the announcement of important macroeconomic news. Independent of news releases, Hendershott and Riordan (2011) ﬁnd similar results for diﬀerent
German stocks, and Benos and Sagade (2013) for UK stocks. Also, Brogaard et al. (2013)
show that while both active HFTs and NHFTs trading are positively correlated with permanent price movements, HFT trades are the more informed ones. However, the above
ﬁnding that HFT trades contain more information than NHFT trades relates to milliseconds. Hence, the improvement in price eﬃciency simply reﬂects the fact that through
aggressive HFT trading on the surprise component of the news, the new information is
25

reﬂected into prices by fractions of a second faster than without the presence of HFTs.
To conclude, HFT plays an important role in the price discovery process on a microperspective. Through their advantage in speed that enables them to react faster to news
compared to other traders, HFT trading improves price eﬃciency. The incremental economic beneﬁt of this achievement is diﬃcult to assess, however. Regarding market eﬃciency, it is worth noting that these order ﬂow anticipation strategies pursued by HFTs
might discourage NHFTs to participate in the market during those times. Also, Shorter
and Miller (2014) state that while most empirical literature shows that HFT helps in
price discovery (see also SEC (2014)), order anticipation and momentum ignition strategies pursued by HFTs can potentially exacerbate slower investors’ transaction costs and
can contribute to extreme volatility events. In the next subsection, I will analyze how
the above identiﬁed fast and strong reaction by active HFTs to news contributes to price
volatility. Since volatility can have both a short-term noise and a permanent informationrelated character I will look at both volatility types separately.
Figure 8: This ﬁgure shows the cumulative impulse response functions of active HFTs
and NHFTs for 10 steps as well as the lower and upper conﬁdence levels at 5%.
5.3
HFT Contribution to Information and Noise
In the following, I apply the variance decomposition method proposed by Hasbrouck
(1991b) to assess the impact of HFT and NHFT trading on the fraction of information
and noise. The method is based on the idea that the observed price has a permanent and
a transitory component and is given by
pt = mt + st.
(5)
The permanent price mt follows a random walk mt = mt−1+ωt, where Eωt = 0, Eω2
t = σ2
ω
and Eωtωs = 0 for t̸ = s, and st denotes the transitory component, which is assumed
26

to have no long-term impact on prices. Given the assumption that the eﬃcient price
follows a random walk, st can be referred to as noise, which holds true for any stationary
deviation from a random walk process (Benos and Sagade (2013)). According to the above
decomposition, the return can be expressed as
rt = pt −pt−1 = ∆mt + ∆st.
(6)
Similar to the original approach by Hasbrouck (1993), I use actual transaction prices to
calculate return and variance. Using equations (3) and (4), the permanent price impact
is given by
∆mt = (
∞
X
i=0
ai)e1t + (
∞
X
i=0
bi)e2t + (
∞
X
i=0
ci)e3t.
(7)
Based on 10 lags, the variance of the permanent price impact can be approximated by
σ2
ω = (
10
X
i=0
ˆai)2ˆσ2
e1 + (
10
X
i=0
ˆbi)2ˆσ2
e2 + (
10
X
i=0
ˆci)2ˆσ2
e3.
(8)
Since the error terms are mutually orthogonal, the variances are equal to one. The ﬁrst two
terms are trade-correlated and capture the proportions of the permanent price innovation
related to HFT and NHFT trading activity, while the last term is the contribution to
price discovery that is not related to trading and can be interpreted as public information
(see Hasbrouck (1991a)).
Next, I assess HFT contribution to noise, i.e. the transitory part of the observed
price. Following Hasbrouck (1993) and Benos and Sagade (2013), noise is assumed to
evolve according to a moving average (MA) process of the residuals of the VMA form
st = (
∞
X
i=0
˜ai)e1t + (
∞
X
i=0
˜bi)e2t + (
∞
X
i=0
˜ci)e3t.
(9)
The noise process parameters can be estimated as follows:
˜aj = −
∞
X
v=j+1
av,
˜bj = −
∞
X
v=j+1
bv,
˜cj = −
∞
X
v=j+1
cv.
(10)
Using 10 lags, the estimate for the transitory variance7 is given by
σ2
s = (
10
X
i=0
ˆ˜ai)2ˆσ2
e1 + (
10
X
i=0
ˆ˜bi)2ˆσ2
e2 + (
10
X
i=0
ˆ˜ci)2ˆσ2
e3.
(11)
7Due to the speciﬁc identiﬁcation method of this model, which is based on Beveridge and Nelson
(1981), the estimate represents a lower bound for σs. For details, see Hasbrouck (1993).
27

According to Hasbrouck (1993), the variance of the transitory component can be
interpreted as a measure of market quality, i.e. the lower the transitory variance, the
greater the price eﬃciency. In order to assess the informational eﬃciency of HFT and
NHFT trading, each trader group’s contribution to the overall permanent and transitory
variance, σ2
ω and σ2
s, respectively, are estimated based on the above decomposition.
According to the results in Table 5 Panel B, active HFTs contribute a much higher
share to permanent volatility than NHFTs, whose contribution is basically zero. Since
HFTs’ share relative to the traded volume is about twice as high as for NHFTs around
macroeconomic news, HFTs also add more to the permanent volatility in relative terms.
The result is consistent with the ﬁndings by Chaboud et al. (2012) and Hendershott
and Riordan (2011), who show that HFTs explain more of the variance of returns than
NHFTs in the FX and the US equity market, respectively. However, the present ﬁndings
also indicate that HFT trades add a large amount to noise, which is about 33% after 10
ticks. In contrast, NHFTs make no statistically signiﬁcant contribution to noise. The
information-to-noise ratio for HFTs is far below 1, indicating that HFTs’ fast trading
after the news release contributes much more to transitory volatility than to information.
Similar to my results, Benos and Sagade (2013) ﬁnd that HFTs both contribute a higher
share to information and to noise than NHFTs. However, they obtain information-to-noise
ratios greater than one for the majority of stocks they analyze. Brogaard et al. (2013)
show that HFTs trade in the direction of the permanent and opposed to the transitory
price component which they see as evidence for an improvement in price discovery. My
results are not as conclusive given the large noise contribution of HFT trades. However, it
is important to note that these two studies do not look at macroeconomic news releases,
which is likely an environment where excessive volatility is more common than usual and
where HFTs are more active than on average. Using 20 ticks instead of 10 results in a
higher share of the transitory volatility for HFTs (around 45%) and of the permanent
volatility as well (13%). For NHFTs the contribution to both information and noise is
small and still insigniﬁcant (see Appendix A.2).
The above results are consistent with HFTs following news trading strategies. Since
this requires fast and aggressive trading according to the surprise component of the news,
HFT trades amplify both the beneﬁcial and the harmful determinants of price volatility
around such events. Due to the fast reaction of HFTs, the overall improvement in price
discovery goes hand in hand with an even higher amount of excessive volatility. One
reason for the high noise generation could be that HFTs process the signals they receive
very quickly and overreact to these signals or even interpret them wrongly implying that
their trades may not be entirely informative.
28

6
HFT Liquidity Supply
While in the previous chapter the trading strategies by active HFTs were analyzed, the
ﬁnal part of this study focuses on liquidity-providing (passive) HFTs. A rising concern
among regulators and practitioners has been that HFTs who act as market makers and
supply liquidity only do so in quiet market phases, and tend to withdraw from markets in
stress periods when liquidity is sparse (ESMA (2011), ASIC (2012)). The issue is crucial
for market stability in the sense that if a market shock induces HFTs to suspend their
liquidity provision, this shock might be ampliﬁed (Ait-Sahalia and Saglam (2014)).
In the following, I address this topic by studying changes in HFT liquidity supply in
diﬀerent market environments. More speciﬁcally, I introduce two measures of liquidity
supply and relate these to periods of unexpected volatility due to a rise in risk aversion
and to periods of anticipated volatility around macroeconomic news releases. I use the
term liquidity supply instead of liquidity provision in order to distinguish the order book
activities, such as quoting and cancellations, from the traded volume by passive HFTs,
studied in the previous sections. In the existing literature, the notion “liquidity provision”
also mostly refers to the traded volume (e.g., Chaboud et al. (2012), Brogaard et al.
(2013)), but is also used to analyze quoting and order cancellations, as done by AitSahalia and Saglam (2014).
To account for changes in the volume of quoted orders, I estimate an order deletion
ratio, which I deﬁne as the volume of order cancellations relative to the volume of submitted orders. This ratio gives an indication of the change in the overall liquidity supplied by
passive HFTs and NHFTs. If the ratio is greater than 1, the liquidity supply in a speciﬁc
time interval is reduced.8 To study whether passive HFTs submit fewer orders during
phases of increased volatility than usual, I also calculate the order submission ratio. The
latter is deﬁned as the volume of added orders by trading group divided by the volume
of all activity types, including transactions, modiﬁcations and deletions.
The depth of the data is of particular value in this part of the analysis. Most of the
existing studies that address liquidity supply in diﬀerent market environments are limited
to transaction data (e.g., Chaboud et al. (2012), Brogaard et al. (2013)). Hence, as in
the previous part of this study, they focus on liquidity provision, calculated as the traded
volume by passive market participants.
However, as pointed out by, e.g., Benos and
Sagade (2013), a positive relationship between the volume of executed limit orders and
volatility could also be due to mechanical reasons. In times of stronger market movements,
8The deletion ratio captures the overall supplied liquidity independent of the distance to the current
best bid and oﬀer price. In a more sophisticated approach one could account for this distance and attain
a higher weighting to those orders that are closer to the last price. However, in order to proxy for the
changes in the supplied liquidity in diﬀerent market environments, this measure should also provide useful
insights on a relative basis.
29

limit orders are more likely to be executed. This potential disruption of the results does
not occur when using order deletions and submissions.
Another important beneﬁt of
using deletions and submissions is that there are no endogeneity issues when studying
the impact of volatility on changes in liquidity supply by HFTs. Yet, as discussed by
Chaboud et al. (2012), it is not possible to regress the traded volume by passive market
participants on volatility since the two variables cannot be considered separately from
each other.
In this section, I proceed as follows. First, I look at the deletion ratio for passive HFTs
and NHFTs as aggregate ratio for both trading weeks and per time interval. Second, I
calculate the volatility per 1-minute interval and generate volatility percentiles based
on the intervals.
From this, the deletion and submission ratios per percentile can be
computed. Finally, the excess deletion and submission ratios for ﬁve minutes prior to ﬁve
minutes after the NFP releases based on 1-second intervals are calculated.
According to the descriptive statistics in Table 1, the aggregate deletion activity of
passive HFTs is, on average, signiﬁcantly higher in the high-volatility week in March (77%
versus 72% in June). Also, the deletion ratio in March is slightly higher for HFTs than
for NHFTs, while in the week of June it is the opposite, although the diﬀerence is smaller
than in March. In contrast, NHFTs exhibit the same deletion behavior in both market
phases; they even delete slightly less in the high-volatility week. This highlights the fact
that, on average, HFTs acting as liquidity suppliers indeed tend to withdraw from markets
more than NHFTs when volatility increases unexpectedly. At the same time, both HFTs
and NHFTs seem to submit more orders on an absolute scale in the high-volatility week,
while the ratio relative to all activities is the same in both weeks. Since the deletion ratio
is computed relative to the submitted orders, the deleted volume exceeds the volume of
orders submitted, however.
Next, the deletion ratio per time interval is calculated. Overall, there is a positively
signiﬁcant relationship between the absolute number of deletions both for HFTs and
NHFTs and volatility per minute, which is intuitive since market makers have to adjust
their orders more often when prices vary more frequently. At the same time, absolute
order submission by both trading groups exhibits a positive relationship with volatility as
well. Moreover, in both weeks HFTs exhibit a signiﬁcantly higher deletion and submission
ratio than NHFTs on a minute-by-minute basis.
Figure 9 shows the excess HFT and NHFT deletion ratios for the highest 50 volatility
percentiles out of 100 percentiles for March and June. For both weeks, there is no clear
relationship between the excess deletion ratios and volatility for HFTs and NHFTs. Similar to the results for the trading participation ratios, I ﬁnd a stronger deviation from 0
in both weeks for the highest volatility percentiles. Thereby, HFTs delete more in March
30

and less in June in the most volatile market phases compared to the average deletion ratios. In contrast, NHFTs delete less than average in the highest three percentiles in both
weeks. Excess submission ratios are not depicted since they do not show any evidence of
a relationship with volatility.
0
-0.05
0.05
50
60
70
80
90
100
Volatility percentiles
HFT excess deletion ratio
NHFT excess deletion ratio
(a) March - High Volatility
0
-0.1
-0.05
0.1
0.05
50
60
70
80
90
100
Volatility percentiles
HFT excess deletion ratio
NHFT excess deletion ratio
(b) June - Low Volatility
Figure 9: These ﬁgures depict the HFT and NHFT excess deletion ratios for the highest
50 volatility percentiles in March and June. The excess deletion ratio is calculated as the
diﬀerence between the deletion ratio in a speciﬁc time interval t and the average deletion
ratio over the entire week. The volatility percentiles are based on 1-minute time intervals.
Since the graphical results do not provide a clear relationship between liquidity supply
and volatility, a statistical analysis is carried out next. I therefore create a dummy variable
which equals 1 when the deletion (submission) ratio per time interval is higher than the
mean deletion (submission) ratio over the entire week for HFTs and NHFTs. In order to
test whether the probability of deleting orders increases when volatility picks up suddenly,
I regress the dummy variable on the lagged volatility for the 1-minute intervals. The same
is done for order submissions. Results are given in Table 6.
Apparently, in March HFTs are likely to delete more orders when volatility rises, while
NHFTs tend to delete fewer orders. At the same time, HFTs tend to submit more orders
when volatility rises, while NHFTs are less active. In June, when overall volatility is lower,
both HFTs and NHFTs are likely to delete fewer orders after volatility has risen in the
previous minute. There is weak statistical evidence that order submission also declines
slightly for HFTs when volatility rises.9 Given that overall volatility was very low during
the week of June, an increase in market stress during this time was not a reason for HFTs
to withdraw from markets. The fact that they delete signiﬁcantly more orders in the
highest volatility percentiles in March suggests that there are volatility thresholds above
which HFTs consider the market too risky. Also, in these phases HFTs do not have any
9Results are similar when carrying out the regressions without a time lag.
31

Table 6: Order Deletions and Submissions
Panel A: March
Probit regression
HFT
NHFT
Deletion
578.18***
-293.44***
(120.40)
(109.45)
Submission
576.97***
-746.43***
(119.95)
(126.34)
Panel B: June
Probit regression
HFT
NHFT
Deletion
-1815.34***
-1113.57***
(266.48)
(254.70)
Submission
-185.17*
27.092
(113.33)
(27.211)
This table shows the probit regression results of a dummy variable indicating an aboveaverage deletion (submission) ratio on the ﬁrst lag of the 1-minute volatility. The analysis
is carried out for passive HFTs and NHFTs. Standard errors are given in parentheses and
* denotes signiﬁcant at 10%, ** denotes signiﬁcant at 5%, *** denotes signiﬁcant at 1%.
informational advantage over NHFTs. This implies that they suddenly withdraw from
markets when a certain level of market stress is reached to avoid increased hedging costs
of market making (BIS (2014)). The above results are similar to those by Ait-Sahalia
and Saglam (2014). In a theoretical approach the authors show that HFTs provide plenty
of liquidity in quiet market periods but suddenly decrease their liquidity supply when
volatility rises. I ﬁnd that both deletion and order submission by HFTs rise in times of
higher market stress. However, given that the deletion ratio is calculated with respect to
added orders, the volume of order cancellation seems to rise disproportionately strongly.
Next, excess order deletions around NFP releases are analyzed. As shown by Figure
10, both HFTs and NHFTs cancel more orders than on average in the minutes before the
NFP event. However, while for HFTs the deletion activity is highly pronounced during
the entire ﬁve minutes before the macroeconomic news release, NHFTs’ deletion activity
increases immediately before the event.
The diﬀerence between the HFT and NHFT
excess deletion ratio is positively signiﬁcant during this episode as well.
There is no
statistical relationship between excess volatility and deletions, however. Figure 11 shows
the excess order submission by HFTs and NHFTs around the NFP news releases. One
can see a divergent movement in the order submissions between HFTs and NHFTs. While
HFTs seem to submit more orders than usual a few minutes before the news release, they
scale back their supplied liquidity strongly within the minute before the news is released.
This is supported by a weakly signiﬁcant negative relationship between order submission
and volatility for HFTs.
At the same time, NHFTs submit many more limit orders
32

0
2
4
6
8
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
Seconds around macro news announcement
Excess deletion HFT
Excess deletion NHFT
Figure 10: This ﬁgure depicts the HFT and NHFT excess deletion ratios per second
around the NFP news releases.
immediately before the NFP release. Similarly, Chaboud et al. (2012) ﬁnd that HFTs
do not increase liquidity provision as much as human traders in the minute following the
macroeconomic news announcement in terms of traded volume.
0
-0.2
0.2
0.6
0.4
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
Seconds around macro news announcement
Excess submission HFT
Excess submission NHFT
Figure 11: This ﬁgure depicts the HFT and NHFT excess submission ratios per second
around NFP news releases.
To conclude, the above analysis yields slightly diﬀerent results for HFT and NHFT
liquidity supply depending on whether anticipated volatility due to previously announced
macroeconomic news or unpredicted market stress as, e.g., in the week of March is considered. While passive HFTs tend to delete more limit orders as soon as market volatility
rises suddenly, they know that macroeconomic news releases usually create high market
33

volatility and therefore already withdraw from markets several minutes before the event
due to the risk of being adversely selected. Nonetheless, under both types of stress, HFTs
overall supply less liquidity. By contrast, liquidity-providing NHFTs do not show a clear
reaction to increased market stress.
7
Conclusion
In this study, I examine the impact of HFTs for price discovery and excessive volatility
around major macroeconomic news releases. I further analyze HFTs’ trading behavior
and their role as market makers during episodes of high and low market stress. Within
this work, I distinguish between two sources of volatility: unexpected volatility that
is due to increasing risk aversion and expected volatility that follows from important
macroeconomic news announcements.
The ﬁrst part of the analysis looks at HFT trading behavior during a week of unexpected high volatility and a week of low volatility in a rather general setup. The results
show that liquidity-taking (active) HFTs overall tend to follow momentum strategies.
In times of high market stress they dominate over liquidity-providing (passive) HFTs
who trade in the opposite direction of the market. But similar to active HFTs, the trading participation by passive HFTs is higher than usual when volatility rises unexpectedly. Against this evidence, slower traders overall withdraw from markets in phases of
increased volatility since they deem the market too risky.
The core part of this paper addresses the trading behavior of HFTs around the release
of major macroeconomic news such as the NFPs and ECB rate decisions. Since these news
releases are known in advance, they constitute a second source of market stress which is
anticipated by market participants to a certain extent (“expected volatility”). My results
show that active HFTs are more dominant than any other trading group during the release
of important macroeconomic news. They beneﬁt from their speed advantage by trading
according to the news surprise in the fraction of a second when the news is published.
As soon as other slower traders buy or sell on the news, they close their positions and
realize their trading proﬁts. Limit orders of slower traders are usually picked oﬀduring
these events.
Analyzing HFT trading activity on a tick-by-tick basis, I ﬁnd evidence
that active HFTs substantially contribute to price discovery around macroeconomic news
events. More speciﬁcally, in the milliseconds following the news release HFT trades contain more information than NHFT trades. Decomposing the variance into a permanent
and a transitory component indicates a much larger contribution by active HFTs to transitory than to permanent volatility. Hence, the beneﬁt of higher market eﬃciency through
HFT trading comes at the cost of short-term excessive volatility, which is the result of
34

the fast information processing and aggressive trading in response to news events. The
above ﬁndings suggest that overall HFTs consume liquidity in times of higher volatility,
either expected as a result of macroeconomic news announcements or unexpected due to
higher risk aversion of investors. However, the strategies pursued by active HFTs seem to
depend on the market environment. While in times of rising unexpected volatility active
HFTs overall follow momentum strategies, around the release of macroeconomic news
they apply news trading strategies and react independent of previous price movements.
Finally, I address the question whether passive HFTs increasingly disappear from
markets when uncertainty rises or whether they continue supplying liquidity. I ﬁnd that
in response to an unexpected rise in market volatility, passive HFTs cancel more orders
than they submit. The opposite holds true for passive NHFTs, who are probably not
as fast or well enough informed to quickly withdraw from markets during those stress
episodes. Nevertheless, given that passive HFTs contribute strongly to the traded volume
when volatility rises suddenly, a large number of them still seem to provide liquidity when
it is needed. Around macroeconomic news events, passive HFTs increasingly cancel limit
orders already several minutes before the data are released and scale back their order
submission activity at the same time due to the known risk of being adversely selected.
The results of this study provide useful implications for academics, market participants
and regulators. The ﬁnding that HFTs overreact to news and thereby contribute more
strongly to noise than to information implies a higher risk of excessive volatility around
important news events which can even cause ﬂash events. Therefore, regulators should
think of potential measures to incentivize HFTs to generate more informational trades.
The results that passive HFTs provide less liquidity during macroeconomic news events
ampliﬁes the risk of market disruptions through the fast and strong reaction by active
HFTs. In the future, slower market participants might be less willing to provide liquidity
during those times given their inability to quickly withdraw from markets and the risk of
being adversely selected, which could be additionally harmful for market stability. Hence,
ﬁnding ways to guarantee liquidity provision even during stress episodes is of particular
importance.
35

A
Appendix
A.1
Classiﬁcation methodology of technical transactions by latencysensitive market participants
Deutsche B¨orse Group applies a methodology in order to classify technical transactions by
latency-sensitive market participants for internal purposes. Based on the assumption that
for transactions arriving randomly the non-correlated intervals between single transactions
constitute an exponential distribution, one can represent their ratios relative to each other
as a linear function when using the log of the number of observations per time interval.
The observation of a signiﬁcant accumulation of transactions within very short time
intervals (< 500 µs) of all transactions by a speciﬁc business unit relative to all transactions
by all other market participants provides an indication that these transactions have been
initiated by a latency-sensitive participant. The results based on the application of this
methodology are used exclusively for internal purposes in order to classify and analyze
latency-sensitive activities. Neither the methodology nor the classiﬁcation are publicly
available.
This methodology is not entirely consistent with common classiﬁcation approaches
such as, for example, those applied for regulatory purposes in order to identify highfrequency trading strategies. The aim of this methodology is the practicability and stability that guarantee the independence of third parties and transparency for the trading
participants themselves.
36

A.2
Price impact of active NHFTs and NHFTs for 20 ticks
Table 7: Price impact of active HFT and NHFT - tick-based analysis 20 ticks
Panel A: Single IRFs
Active HFTs
Active NHFTs
Active HFT - NHFT
SR
0.053*
0.084***
-0.031
(0.032)
(0.032)
(0.045)
LR
0.717***
0.185**
0.532***
(0.080)
(0.086)
(0.117)
LR −SR
0.664***
0.101
0.563***
(0.086)
(0.092)
(0.126)
Panel B: Contribution to permanent and transitory variance
Active HFTs
Active NHFTs
Public information
Permanent variance
0.129***
0.000
0.862***
(0.021)
(0.022)
(0.032)
Transitory variance
0.453***
0.040
0.506***
(0.109)
(0.091)
(0.118)
Information-to-noise ratio
0.285***
0.010
1.703***
(0.082)
(0.533)
(0.403)
Panel A of this table shows the results of the impulse responses from active HFT and
NHFT order ﬂow on returns using 20 ticks, based on the VAR analysis including the
macroeconomic news dummy as exogenous variable. SR denotes the short-run eﬀect, LR
is the cumulative eﬀect after 20 ticks and (LR−SR) the diﬀerence between the two. Panel
B includes the result of the variance decomposition for the permanent and transitory price
components. It shows the shares of the variance of active HFTs and NHFTs, relative to
the eﬃcient and transitory variance, as well as the information-to-noise ratio after 20
ticks.
Standard errors are given in parentheses and * denotes signiﬁcant at 10%, **
denotes signiﬁcant at 5%, *** denotes signiﬁcant at 1%.
37

References
Ait-Sahalia, Y. and M. Saglam (2014). High-frequency traders: taking advantage of speed.
Working paper.
Altavilla, C., D. Giannone, and M. Modugno (2014). Low frequency eﬀects of macroeconomic news on government bond yields. Working paper.
ASIC (2012). Report 331: Dark liquidity and high-frequency trading. Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) Report.
Benos, E. and S. Sagade (2013). High-frequency trading behaviour and its impact on
market quality: evidence from the UK equity market. Working paper.
Beveridge, S. and C. Nelson (1981). A new approach to the decomposition of economic
time series into permanent and transitory components with particular attention to the
measurement of the “business cycle”. Journal of Monetary Economics 7, 151–174.
Biais, B. and T. Foucault (2014). High-frequency traders and market quality. Bankers,
Markets and Investors 128, 5–19.
Bank for International Settlement (2014). Market-making and proprietary trading: industry trends, drivers and policy implications. Study by the Committee on the Global
Financial System.
Bank for International Settlement (2016). Electronic trading in ﬁxed income markets.
Study by the Markets Committee.
Bank for International Settlement (2016). Fixed income market liquidity. Study by the
Committee on the Global Financial System.
Boehmer, E., K. Fong, and J. Wu (2012). International evidence on algorithmic trading.
Working paper.
Breckenfelder, H.-J. (2013). Competition between high-frequency traders, and market
quality. Working paper.
Brogaard, J. (2011). High-frequency trading and volatility. Working paper.
Brogaard, J., T. Hendershott, and R. Riordan (2013). High-frequency trading and price
discovery. Working paper.
Chaboud, A., B. Chiquoine, E. Hjalmarsson, and C. Vega (2012). Rise of the machines:
Algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange market. Working paper.
38

ESMA (2011).
Report on trends, risks and vulnerabilities.
European Securities and
Markets Authority (ESMA) position paper.
ESMA (2014). Securities and markets stakeholder group. European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) Annual Report.
Foucault, T., J. Hombert, and I. Rosu (2015). News trading and speed. Working paper.
Gao, C. and B. Mizrach (2013). Market quality breakdowns in equities. Working paper.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991a). Measuring the information content of stock trades. Journal of
Finance 46, 179–207.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991b). The summary informativeness of stock trades: An econometric
analysis. Review of Financial Studies 4, 571–595.
Hasbrouck, J. (1993). Assessing the quality of a security market: a new approach to
transaction-cost measurement. Review of Financial Studies 6, 191–212.
Hasbrouck, J. and G. Saar (2009). Technology and liquidity provision: The blurring of
traditional deﬁnitions. Journal of Financial Markets 12, 143–172.
Hendershott, T., C. M. Jones, and A. J. Menkveld (2011).
Does algorithmic trading
improve liquidity? Journal of Finance 66, 1–33.
Hendershott, T. and R. Riordan (2011). Algorithmic trading and information. Working
paper.
Hirschey, N. (2013). Do high-frequency traders anticipate buying and selling pressure?
Working paper.
Jiang, G. J., I. Lo, and G. Valente (2013). High-frequency trading around macroeconomic
news announcements: Evidence from the US treasury market. Working paper.
Jones, C. M., O. Lamont, and R. L. Lumsdaine (1998). Macroeconomic news and bond
market volatility. Journal of Financial Economics 47, 315–337.
Liu, X., I. Lo, M. Nguyen, and G. Valente (2014). High-frequency trading and treasury
bond returns. Working paper.
Menkveld, A. J. (2013). High-frequency trading and the new market makers. Journal of
Financial Markets 16, 712–740.
39

U.S. Department of Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, U.S. Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (2015). The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014.
Joint StaﬀReport.
Schopen, J. and M. Missong (2011).
The reaction of stock-bond correlations to risk
aversion and real time macroeconomic announcements. Working paper.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2014).
Equity market structure literature
review part II: High-frequency trading. Working paper.
Shorter, G. and R. S. Miller (2014).
High-frequency trading: Background, concerns,
and regulatory developments.
CRS Report 43608. Congressional Research Service,
Washington DC.
TABB Group (2012). U.S. Equities Market 2012: Mid-year review. Study.
Zhang, F. (2010). High-frequency trading, stock volatility, and price discovery. Working
paper.
Zhang, L., P. Mykland, and Y. Ait-Sahalia (2005). A tale of two time scales: determining
integrated volatility with noisy high-frequency data. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 100, 1394–1411.
Zhang, S. (2013). Need for speed: An empirical analysis of hard and soft information in
a high-frequency world. Working paper.
Zhang, S. and R. Riordan (2011).
Technology and market quality: the case of highfrequency trading. Working paper.
40
