How Trading Barriers in Underlying Asset Markets Impact 
ETF Trading and Characteristics
Jinhwan Kima, Hoon Choa, Sangik Seokb,*
aCollege of Business Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 85, Hoegi-ro, 
Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 02455, Republic of Korea 
bCollege of Business Administration University of Ulsan, 93, Daehak-ro, Nam-gu, Ulsan 
44610, Republic of Korea
*Corresponding Author. E-mail: siseok@ulsan.ac.kr
Abstract
We examine the impact of the underlying market’s minimum trading unit (MTU) on the 
corresponding exchange-traded fund (ETF) market using unique hand-collected data. MTUs 
act as trading barriers, affecting market accessibility. Our findings show that institutional 
investors are less active in ETFs when the underlying market is less accessible. Improved 
accessibility in the underlying market correlates with increased arbitrage activity, better 
tracking ability, and a higher probability of informed trading in ETFs. After a reduction in the 
underlying market’s MTU, institutional trading in ETFs gradually increases, accompanied by 
significant changes in arbitrage activity, tracking ability, and informed trading probability.
Keywords: Exchange-traded funds; Minimum trading unit; Institutional trading activity; 
Market linkage; Informed trading
JEL classification: G11, G14, G15
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

1
How Trading Barriers in Underlying Asset Markets Impact ETF 
Trading and Characteristics
Abstract
We examine the impact of the underlying market’s minimum trading unit (MTU) on the 
corresponding exchange-traded fund (ETF) market using unique hand-collected data. MTUs act 
as trading barriers, affecting market accessibility. Our findings show that institutional investors 
are less active in ETFs when the underlying market is less accessible. Improved accessibility in 
the underlying market correlates with increased arbitrage activity, better tracking ability, and a 
higher probability of informed trading in ETFs. After a reduction in the underlying market’s MTU, 
institutional trading in ETFs gradually increases, accompanied by significant changes in arbitrage 
activity, tracking ability, and informed trading probability.
Keywords: Exchange-traded funds; Minimum trading unit; Institutional trading activity; Market 
linkage; Informed trading
JEL classification: G11, G14, G15
1. Introduction
Since the introduction of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) in the US in 1993, they have evolved from 
novel financial instruments into highly attractive investment vehicles, surpassing traditional funds 
in both popularity and growth. The report from Statista Research Department reveals a significant 
increase in the assets under management (AUM) of global ETFs, surging from USD 204 billion in 
2003 to USD 9.6 trillion in 2022. With the largest proportion in the global ETF market, the US 
operates ETFs that are valued at approximately USD 4.5 trillion. ETFs are preferred for providing 
access to diversified indices, akin to mutual index funds, but at a lower cost and with higher 
liquidity. Due to their affordability and accessibility, they are popular among both individual and 
institutional investors. This study specifically examines US-listed country ETFs, which track the 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

2
indices of specific countries. These country ETFs have emerged as viable options for individual 
investors who want easy access to overseas markets. Investing directly in foreign markets has been 
difficult due to challenges such as time zone differences, information barriers, and exchange rate 
risks. Country ETFs streamline this process by enabling investors to participate in overseas 
markets with the same level of ease as domestic stock trading. By analyzing data from US-listed 
country ETFs and information concerning worldwide stock exchanges, we investigate the impact 
of underlying market accessibility on the ETFs market.
The significant growth of global ETF markets has made the interactions between ETFs and 
various financial markets crucial subjects for both investors and researchers (Ben-David et al., 
2018; Dannhauser, 2017; Glosten et al., 2021; Kang et al., 2021; Klein and Song, 2021; Mensi et 
al., 2022; Rhodes and Mason, 2023). The growing number of ETFs that track similar indices in 
comparison to previous years underscores the substantial impact of regulatory policies in the 
underlying asset markets on ETF markets in various countries. Due to the high trading volume and 
the varied objectives of institutional investors in the ETF market, even minor impacts on the 
underlying market result in substantial gains or losses for numerous stakeholders. Therefore, 
conducting highly sophisticated analyses is essential. Despite the significance of this topic, 
research on the impact of underlying market restrictions on the ETF market is lacking. This is 
mainly because it is difficult to design an experimental environment to examine the relationship 
between underlying market restrictions and ETFs. Karmazien and Sokolovski (2022) is the sole 
study pertinent to this subject matter. They contend that if regulations on the underlying market 
become stricter, ETFs will be employed as an alternative. Their argument is supported by 
highlighting that investors utilized ETFs resorted to bypass short-selling restrictions during the 
2008 ban on short-selling in the underlying market. However, this study is limited in its scope 
because it lacks a comprehensive experimental setting, as the short-selling constraint was not 
imposed on all stocks, and the analysis only encompasses a brief duration of the financial crisis.
This study aims to comprehensively analyze the impact of underlying asset market’s 
accessibility on ETFs’ investment patterns and characteristics. We adopt the minimum trading unit 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

3
(MTU) as a proxy for market accessibility. MTUs represent the minimum number of shares or the 
minimum monetary value necessary for a transaction. They play a vital role in the efficient 
management and regulation of financial markets. Various stock exchanges worldwide adopt 
different MTUs to optimize their management and supervision. These regulations are regularly 
revised. High MTUs pose barriers to market entry, especially for retail investors who typically 
invest smaller amounts. For example, the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges have an MTU of 100 
shares. To invest in Kweichow Moutai, whose shares were valued at $233 as of January 2, 2024, 
an investor must commit at least $23,300. This amount may be exceedingly high for an average 
individual investor. Therefore, high MTUs create significant obstacles for investors and hinder 
efficient trading in stock markets. With the global adoption and constant updates of different 
MTUs, MTUs offer an ideal experimental environment to investigate the relationship between the 
accessibility of the underlying market and trading in ETFs. Table 1 shows the diversity of MTU 
rules and their evolution across global stock exchanges. It provides an overview of the MTU rules 
and the historical changes in MTU based on hand-collected information from various stock 
exchanges worldwide.1
[Table 1 here]
This study investigates the following research question: Does market accessibility 
influence ETFs’ trade patterns and characteristics? Some literature suggests that market trading 
barriers can harm market efficiency, result in various costs, and cause liquidity issues (Ahn et al., 
2014; Gozluklu et al., 2015; Hauser and Lauterbach, 2003). These potential risks or costs are 
essential factors for institutional investors who primarily invest in ETFs. We anticipate that trading 
barriers in the underlying market affect the trading activity of institutional investors, informed 
trading, arbitrage activity, and tracking errors of ETFs. We construct appropriate frameworks to 
1In this paper, the term MTUs refers to the MTUs in the underlying asset market, not the MTUs of the ETF. Because 
we utilize country ETFs that are listed in the US ETF market, the MTU for our ETF sample is the same, while the 
MTU of the underlying markets tracked by these ETFs differs.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

4
test our hypotheses using country ETFs and hand-collected information about worldwide stock 
exchanges. We employ a panel regression model to examine the impact of underlying market 
accessibility on ETFs using US-listed 40 country ETFs. Additionally, to alleviate concerns 
regarding the ETF-specific characteristics and potential side effects of unobservable factors, we 
conduct additional tests by constructing a natural experiment involving underlying stock markets 
that have modified their MTU during the sample period.
This study provides three noteworthy contributions. To the best of our knowledge, this 
study is the first to establish the relationship between the accessibility of the underlying asset 
market and the ETF market using market-wide regulation. Our findings, which utilized a unique 
hand-collected dataset, offer new insights into the investment patterns of ETF investors, thereby 
enhancing the academic discourse. We provide valuable insights for fund managers and financial 
institutions concerning the demand dynamics of ETF investors. These findings have practical 
implications for the management and launch of new ETFs, offering a novel perspective for issuers. 
Finally, this study provides insight into the potential impact of policies concerning trading barriers, 
such as fractional share investing, MTU changes, short-selling bans, and qualified investor 
regulations. Moreover, we provide valuable reference data to market regulators and policymakers. 
Specifically, the practice of investing in fractional shares has been limited by various constraints, 
such as cost; however, its adoption significantly influences the ETF market. Our analysis provides 
predictions and implications for this evolving landscape.
This study’s major findings are as follows. An analysis of various country ETFs listed on 
the US market indicates that institutional trading is less vigorous in ETFs that have large MTUs in 
their underlying asset markets. This finding offers empirical evidence that institutional investors, 
who are especially sensitive to potential costs, actively utilize ETFs that track accessible markets. 
In addition, compared to ETFs tracking markets that have lower barriers, those that have high entry 
barriers exhibit a lower institutional arbitrage activity, a greater spread between the ETF price and 
the net asset value (NAV), greater tracking errors, and a lower probability of informed trading 
(PIN). We construct a natural experiment based on exogenous events, specifically MTU changes 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

5
in the Japanese, Singapore, and Vietnam stock markets. As a result, we demonstrate that the 
proportion of institutional trading in each country ETFs decreases, the institutional arbitrage 
activity increases, tracking errors decrease, and PIN increases after the relaxation of underlying 
markets trading barriers. This trend becomes increasingly evident after the MTU change, and the 
disparity remains over a long period.
The rest of this paper is organized in the following manner. Section 2 reviews the relevant 
literature. Section 3 describes the data and variables utilized. Section 4 provides a detailed 
explanation of our empirical findings. Finally, Section 5 summarizes this study’s key insights and 
contributions and concludes the paper. 
2. Literature review
This study encompasses three distinct areas. The first area is related to the impact of MTUs on 
investor bases and financial markets, specifically within the ETF market. Although this study does 
not directly demonstrate the impact of underlying MTUs on the underlying asset market, several 
prior studies highlight the effect of MTUs on the underlying asset market’s investor base and 
market characteristics. Regarding the relationship between MTU and investor base, Amihud et al. 
(1999) analyze the differences before and after the MTU change in the Japanese stock market. 
They discover that a decrease in MTU leads to a reduction in trading barriers, which in turn attracts 
a greater number of investors, especially individual investors. Isaka (2014) also demonstrates a 
notable surge in individual investors subsequent to the MTU change in the Japanese stock market. 
These findings strongly corroborate the notion that MTUs function as stringent market trading 
barriers, and investors are highly sensitive to them.
In addition, the influence of MTU on market characteristics has been extensively 
researched, with various studies examining this aspect across various stock exchanges (Banerjee 
and Banerjee, 2020; Heriyanto and Chang, 2021; Ibrahim et al., 2019; Junarsin et al., 2019). 
Individual and institutional investors play distinct roles in financial markets. Individual investors 
are often classified as noise investors. Consequently, changes in the ratio of investor types result 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

6
in changes in market characteristics. Building on the research conducted by Amihud et al. (1999), 
Hauser and Lauterbach (2003) discover that a decrease in MTU increases trading in individual 
stocks and the noise surrounding their prices. They note that a decrease in MTU leads to increased 
prices for actively traded stocks. This is because the positive influence of trading activity on stock 
value outweighs the negative effect of this noise. However, a decrease in MTU results in lower 
prices for less active stocks. This is because the negative influence of price noise on stock value 
outweighs the positive effect of trading activity. Contrary to the common expectation that informed 
trading diminishes as the number of individual investors increases after an MTU reduction, Ahn 
et al. (2014) demonstrate that despite the increase in individual investors, the efficiency of price 
information enhances as the MTU decreases. This efficiency is attributable to informed investors’ 
active participation in the market. Moreover, Gozluklu et al. (2015) demonstrate that there is an 
increase in retail trading on the Italian Stock Exchange following a reduction in MTU. They 
conclude that MTU reduction enhances market liquidity and reduces adverse selection costs. A 
vast body of literature emphasizes that the mitigation of MTU prompts several investors to enter 
the stock market, resulting in changes in market efficiency, PIN, liquidity, and potential costs. 
These findings imply that ETF investors tend to be sensitive to regulatory policies in the underlying 
asset market, which serves as the foundation for our hypotheses.
The second area concerns the relationship between ETF investor base and its characteristics. 
Dennis (2003) analyzes the liquidity effects in ETFs, specifically focusing on the stock split of the 
Nasdaq-100 tracking stock ETF (QQQ). The author’s analysis reveals that ETF splits increase the 
number of retail traders and widen the bid/ask spread of QQQ. This result implies that ETF retail 
traders are sensitive to price per share, and changes in the proportion of retail trading alter ETF 
characteristics. Yu and Webb (2009) investigate the changes in ETF characteristics before and 
after stock splits using various ETFs as case studies. Following these splits, they find a significant 
increase in the bid/ask spread and transactions under $20,000. Da Dalt et al. (2019) analyze the 
OMXH25 ETF and demonstrate that retail investors exhibit contrarian characteristics in ETF 
investments, albeit to a lesser extent compared to the stock market. These findings imply that 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

7
alterations in the composition ratio of individual and institutional investors in an ETF significantly 
influence its characteristics.
The third area concerns the relationship between ETFs and their underlying asset markets. 
Calamia et al. (2013) analyze European ETFs and reveal a positive relationship between the 
liquidity of underlying assets and that of ETFs. Dannhauser (2017) demonstrates that ETFs 
positively impact market value by decreasing the number of participants engaged in liquidity 
trading in the underlying asset market and attracting more informed investors. Additionally, Xu 
and Yin (2017) demonstrate that ETFs enhance the price efficiency of underlying assets by 
establishing a positive correlation between changes in the quantity of outstanding ETF shares and 
the price efficiency of the underlying asset. Agarwal et al. (2018) analyze how ETF ownership 
increases commonality in underlying assets liquidity through market-makers’ arbitrage activity. 
They highlight that the impact of ETF ownership differs from that of ownership of index mutual 
funds, active mutual funds, and other institutional investors. Ben-David et al. (2018) investigate 
the influence of ETFs on the underlying asset market in arbitrage trading channels. They discover 
that the ease of trading ETFs appeals to high-frequency investors, thereby affecting the volatility 
of the underlying assets via continuous arbitrage activity. Bhattacharya and O’Hara (2018) 
theoretically prove that ETFs can result in price distortions. ETFs’ intensified herding activity 
leads to an imbalance between the value of the underlying assets and their fundamentals. This 
effect is particularly prominent in ETFs that have underlying assets that are difficult to access. Da 
and Shive (2018) examine the effect of ETFs’ arbitrage trading on the return synchronization of 
underlying assets. They discover that the ETF turnover rate influences the degree of 
synchronization in the underlying asset portfolio. Through this linkage between ETFs and the 
underlying asset market, our findings indicate market regulatory changes can directly impact the 
underlying asset market, as well as indirectly impact it via ETFs. This implies that the effects of 
regulation policies on underlying asset markets can deviate significantly from what regulators or 
financial institutions predict. Furthermore, these distortions are likely to intensify as the market 
share of ETFs continues to grow.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

8
We further explore these discussions by examining how underlying market MTUs 
influence ETF investment patterns and characteristics. Several studies indicate that MTUs act as a 
hindrance to trading and are frequently perceived by investors as an additional cost. Therefore, we 
anticipate underlying market MTUs to have a significant impact not only on the underlying market, 
but also on the investor base and characteristics of ETFs that track these markets. Although there 
is active research on the correlation between trading barriers and stock markets, a notable gap 
exists regarding how trading barriers in underlying asset markets affect ETFs. Consequently, our 
study seeks to bridge this gap. Considering ETF market’s rapid growth, understanding the 
influence of underlying markets’ trading barriers on the ETF traders’ composition and ETF 
characteristics is crucial. Moreover, the interconnections between ETFs and underlying asset 
markets, such as through arbitrage trading, indicate that changes in ETFs result in corresponding 
changes in the underlying asset market. This emphasizes the significance of our findings.
3. Data and variables
3.1 Country ETFs
We use the following procedure to construct our country ETF sample. First, we compile a set of 
countries from the webpage of the US-listed country ETFs database.2 Our initial set of countries 
comprises 43 countries: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Ireland, 
Israel, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Philippines, 
Poland, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, and Vietnam. Second, we 
construct a representative group of ETFs for each country. We choose the top three ETFs per 
2See https://etfdb.com/etfs/country/.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

9
country based on the size of AUM.3 Typically, a single ETF is used to track each country. For 
countries tracked by multiple country ETFs, the top three ETFs account for most of the total AUM 
in the country ETF market. Finally, we filter country ETFs that provide trading information that is 
accessible via the NYSE/AMEX Trade and Quote (TAQ) database. The final dataset comprises 40 
country ETFs.4
3.2 Dependent variables
Our sample period extends from January 1, 2014, to August 31, 2022, covering several significant 
events such as the Chinese recession, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the 2022 Russia-Ukraine war.5 
To examine our hypotheses, we define four sets of dependent variables. Institutional trading 
activity is the first set of dependent variables. Following the methodologies of Barber et al. (2008), 
Abad et al. (2021), and Bryzgalova et al. (2023), we employ the proportion of large-scale 
transactions, with $20,000 (20K) or $50,000 (50K) cutoffs, as a proxy for institutional investment 
activity. An alternative approach to measuring institutional trading activity is to use the method 
proposed by Boehmer et al. (2021), which classifies retail trading activity in the stock market. By 
subtracting retail trading activity from total trading, institutional trading activity can be indirectly 
inferred. However, when applying this method to our ETF sample, we observe a time-series 
average institutional trading volume of 92.8% (with a standard deviation of 9.2%), compared to a 
time-series average institutional holding of 62.5% (with a standard deviation of 25.4%) reported 
by Bloomberg. This inconsistency suggests potential limitations in the institutional classification 
3We select the top three after excluding ETFs from the list if they are currency ETFs, currency-hedged ETFs, or 
leveraged ETFs.
4In Table A.1 of Appendix A, we describe detailed information about the country ETFs sample.
5The lack of data for odd-lot trading (transactions below round lot) is crucial for our analysis because it is a trading 
method that is actively utilized by retail investors and algorithmic traders. Given that the NYSE/AMEX TAQ database 
exclusively provides information on odd-lot trading post-December 9, 2013 (see, O’Hara et al., 2014), we establish 
the commencement of our sample period as 2014.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

10
method when used for ETFs. By contrast, when applying a 20K cutoff to proxy institutional 
investment activity based on trading volume, the distribution closely resembles that of institutional 
holding. Moreover, according to the Jane Street Global ETF Trading Survey Report in 2017, 
institutions predominantly engage in block trading for ETFs. Based on these considerations, we 
determine that a trade size cutoff is the most appropriate method for classifying traders in our ETF 
sample. We collect daily data on the total number of trades, total trade volumes, as well as trade 
numbers and volumes for institutional trades exceeding 20K or 50K, using the TAQ Millisecond 
Tools database. The proportions of 20K or 50K institutional trades represent transactions 
exceeding $20,000 or$50,000, respectively. We compute four categories of variables associated 
with institutional trading activity: the proportions of 20K and 50K trades based on trade numbers 
(20K INST # and 50K INST #) and trade volumes (20K INST VOL and 50K INST VOL).
Institutional arbitrage activity is the second set of dependent variables. Marshall et al. 
(2013) argue that ETF arbitrage opportunities significantly increase order imbalances. Based on 
these findings, we measure arbitrage activity by analyzing ETF order imbalance. The following 
equation defines two metrics for institutional arbitrage activity:
O𝐼𝑖,𝑡,𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒=
|𝐵𝑢𝑦𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖,𝑡,𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒― 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖,𝑡,𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒|
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖,𝑡
,
(1)
where 𝐵𝑢𝑦𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖,𝑡,𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒 and 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖,𝑡,𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒 represent the buy and sell volumes for ETF i at 
date t, respectively. The term type indicates either 20K or 50K institutional trades. We employ 
these two forms of order imbalance (OI 20K and OI 50K) as proxies for institutional arbitrage 
activity. We collect data on the daily buying and selling volumes of 20K or 50K institutional 
trading from the TAQ Millisecond Tools database.
Tracking ability is the third set of dependent variables. We define three variables that 
represent the ETFs’ tracking ability. First, the absolute ETF premium (|Premium|) indicates the 
spread between the ETF price and NAV. It is calculated by dividing the difference between the 
ETF price and NAV by the ETF price. Second, the tracking error that is based on the NAV and 
ETF returns (TE(P-N)) denotes the absolute difference between the returns of the ETF and the 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

11
NAV. Third, the tracking error that is based on the ETF and the underlying index return (TE(P-I)) 
represents the absolute difference between the returns of the ETF and the underlying index. We 
collect daily ETF price, NAV, and information regarding underlying indices from the TAQ 
Millisecond Tools, ETF Global, and Bloomberg databases, respectively.
PIN is the final set of dependent variables. Easley et al. (1996) first introduce the structural 
model of estimating PIN. The fundamental concept behind estimating PIN is that both informed 
and uninformed traders coexist in the market, and the daily number of buying and selling provides 
insights into their transaction patterns. Therefore, the calculation of the PIN involves estimating 
parameters that maximize the likelihood function, using the likelihood function and information 
about buying and selling. Several studies extensively adopt this concept of PIN. However, 
subsequent researchers highlight that conventional PIN estimation methods have several issues, 
such as estimation bias or boundary solutions. To address these problems, they provide various 
algorithms aimed at enhancing the accuracy of PIN estimation. To ensure the robustness of 
estimation results, we employ the PIN estimation algorithms developed by Yan and Zhang (2012) 
(PIN YZ), Gan et al. (2015) (PIN GWJ), Ersan and Alici (2016) (PIN EA), and Griffin et al. (2021) 
(PIN BAYES).6 To ensure consistency in the weekly information, we configure the daily PIN by 
sequentially defining the week from Monday to Sunday, estimating the weekly PIN, and 
subsequently allocating the estimated PIN to each day within the respective week. To estimate PIN, 
we collect the daily number of buying and selling from the TAQ Millisecond Tools database.
3.3 Control variables and information on MTUs
Because several factors influence ETFs’ investment patterns and characteristics, we incorporate a 
6We utilize the R estimation package, PINstimation, to calculate the four PIN types. We calculate PIN YZ, PIN GWJ, 
PIN EA, and PIN BAYES using the function “pin_yz,” “pin_gwj,” “pin_ea,” and “pin_bayes” in PINstimation, 
respectively. See https://www.pinstimation.com/ for a detailed description of the package and functions.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

12
comprehensive set of control variables in our analysis. Based on a survey by Visual Capitalist in 
2022, key factors that institutions consider in ETF investment are ETF size, liquidity, historical 
returns, ETF brand, and fees.7 Previous studies support the influence of these factors on ETF (Bae 
and Kim, 2020; Box et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2011; Clifford et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2023). To 
control the effects of liquidity and ETF size, we employ the logarithmic value of ETF effective 
spread percentage average (LNESPA) and the logarithmic AUM (LNAUM). In particular, the 
liquidity of an ETF is intricately linked to the liquidity of its underlying asset market, which makes 
it a crucial variable to consider (Calamia et al., 2013). Moreover, we use the logarithmic value of 
ETF intraday volatility (LNIVOL; Rompotis, 2018) and ETF fund flow (FF; Xu et al., 2022) to 
control intraday volatility and non-fundamental demand shock. The growth of shares outstanding 
calculates ETF fund flow.
Regarding the ETFs’ historical performance, we utilize the logarithmic returns over the 
past one trading day (NAVPR1), five trading days (NAVPR5), and 22 trading days (NAVPR22) of 
NAV. In addition, we construct a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the ETF brand is 
iShares by BlackRock, the world’s most popular ETF brand, and zero if otherwise. To account for 
the impact of ETF brands and costs, we adopt brand dummy variables (BRAND) and fund expense 
ratio (FER) as control variables. Furthermore, we incorporate underlying-specific and countryspecific factors into our set of control variables. We employ the correlation between the underlying 
index and the S&P 500 index (CORSPX) and Ahir et al.’s (2022) uncertainty index of each country 
(WUI) as control variables. We gather data on the uncertainty index for each country on a monthly 
basis and assign the corresponding value to each day within that month.8 We set our main dummy 
variable (LOTSIZE) to zero if the underlying market MTU is one; otherwise, it is one.9
7See, https://www.visualcapitalist.com/sp/how-do-institutional-investors-choose-etfs/. This survey is sponsored by 
iShares.
8For New Zealand and Norway, because of the absence of monthly data, we utilize quarterly data instead.
9According to MTU change in Korea Stock Exchange, for EWY (which tracks the Korean stock market), the LOTSIZE 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

13
The data sources used to configure the set of control variables are summarized as follows. 
We collect the daily effective spread percentage average and intraday volatility from the TAQ 
Millisecond Tools database. We collect the daily shares outstanding, fund expense ratio, and daily 
S&P 500 index from the ETF Global, Bloomberg, and Center for Research in Security Prices, 
respectively. We collect countries’ uncertainty index from the World Uncertainty Index 
webpage.10 We collect MTU information from the literature, reports, and stock exchange’s 
webpages. Table 2 presents summary statistics for the panel data. Due to missing values in the 
price of the underlying index, the observation count for TE(P-I) differs from that of the other 
variables. We exclude weeks with three or fewer trading days when estimating the weekly PIN. 
For PIN YZ, the algorithm does not estimate PIN for four weeks; consequently, this leads to a slight 
difference in the number of observations compared to other variables.
[Table 2 here]
4. Empirical results
4.1 Panel regression model
In this section, we investigate the influence of underlying market restrictions, specifically MTU 
constraints, on the ETFs’ trading activity and characteristics. We analyze the panel regression 
model presented below:
𝑌𝑖,𝑡= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐿𝑂𝑇𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽2𝑋𝑖,𝑡+ 𝜇𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡,
(2)
where 𝑌𝑖,𝑡 represents the set of dependent variables (20K INST #, 50K INST #, 20K INST VOL, 
50K INST VOL, OI 20K, OI 50K, |Premium|, TE(P-N), TE(P-I), PIN EA, PIN GWJ, PIN BAYES, 
is set to one until June 2, 2014, and subsequently adjusted to zero thereafter.
10The detailed in https://worlduncertaintyindex.com/.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

14
and PIN YZ) on date t for each ETF i. 𝐿𝑂𝑇𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝑖,𝑡 denotes a dummy variable, which is set to zero 
if the MTU is one and one if otherwise. 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 is a set of control variables, including LNESPA, 
LNIVOL, FF, NAVPR1, NAVPR5, NAVPR22, LNAUM, BRAND, FER, WUI, and CORSPX. In 
addition, the model includes a time-fixed effect (𝜇𝑡).11
Table 3 presents the estimated coefficients derived from equation (2) when the dependent 
variables consist of the trading activity of institutional investors. Columns (1), (2), (3), and (4) 
report the estimation results for 20K INST #, 50K INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST VOL, 
respectively. Column (1) indicates that the R-squared for 20K institutional trading is 0.385, which 
effectively explains the variation in the institutional trading proportion. The main variable, 
LOTSIZE, exhibits a significantly negative coefficient at the 1% significance level. The coefficient 
of -0.651 implies that the proportion of transactions above $20,000 in the total transaction 
decreases by 0.651pp if the underlying market MTU exceeds 1. The average of 20K INST # is 
5.744%, indicating a non-negligible difference of approximately 11.33% between high and low 
MTU. Additionally, regarding trading volume, the difference between high and low MTU is 7.52%. 
Moreover, the LOTSIZE exhibits a significantly negative coefficient for institutional trading above 
$50,000. The notable aspect of these findings is that institutional investors, despite benefitting 
from various cost advantages when investing indirectly through ETFs instead of directly in 
underlying markets with high trading barriers, seem to prioritize market efficiency and potential 
costs associated with these barriers. Consequently, this results in increasingly cautious institutional 
investment activity in ETFs that track markets with high trading barriers.
[Table 3 here]
11 To enhance the robustness of our results, we calculate t-statistics using robust standard errors with clustering. Due 
to the small number of ETFs and the large time dimension in our panel structure, clustering at the ETF level is 
inappropriate. Instead, we apply clustering at the daily level. This approach yields consistent results, with minimal 
changes observed in the t-statistics.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

15
In addition, the signs of the coefficients for the other variables offer valuable insights. 
LNESPA, which indicates the bid-ask spread of ETFs, exhibits a significantly positive coefficient. 
There are two plausible justifications for this result. First, due to the linkage between an ETF’s 
bid-ask spread and the underlying market’s bid-ask spread, ETFs with higher bid-ask spreads tend 
to correspond with higher bid-ask spreads in the underlying market. This phenomenon indicates a 
greater liquidity enhancement effect from ETFs when the bid-ask spread of an ETF is high, 
resulting in increased institutional trading activity. Second, large trade sizes can exert one-sided 
price pressure when institutional activity is high, thus widening the bid-ask spread. From this 
perspective, a positive relationship exists between institutional trading activity and the bid-ask 
spread. 
A remarkable observation emerges concerning the returns on NAV for the past one trading 
day or five trading days, which do not significantly impact any of the dependent variables. 
However, the returns on NAV over the past 22 trading days have a notable effect. They 
significantly increase the proportion of trading activity exceeding $20,000 or $50,000. This pattern 
indicates that institutional investors exhibit a greater inclination toward ETFs that have 
demonstrated robust performance over the long term. Additionally, institutional investors tend to 
engage in active trading of large-size ETFs that track indices that are highly correlated with the 
S&P 500 index. Furthermore, they demonstrate a preference for ETFs with the iShares brand. 
Conversely, institutional investors tend to avoid trading ETFs that are associated with high 
uncertainty in the target country and those with high expense ratios. There is no significant 
correlation between net fund flows and institutional trading activity. These intuitive results indicate 
the effectiveness of our model.
Next, we investigate how the underlying market MTUs impact the arbitrage activity and 
tracking ability of country ETFs. Table 4 lists the coefficients estimated using equation (2) for the 
dependent variables associated with institutional arbitrage activity (OI 20K and OI 50K) and the 
tracking ability of ETFs (|Premium|, TE(P-N), and TE(P-I)). Columns (1) and (2) show that the 
coefficients of LOTSIZE are significantly negative. This observation indicates that a larger trading 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

16
barrier in the underlying market reduces institutional arbitrage activity in ETFs. This suggests that 
a larger MTU decreases the proportion of institutional trading in ETFs, which in turn results in 
diminished arbitrage activity. Additionally, the presence of trading barriers in the underlying 
market hinders arbitrage activity using ETFs, as these barriers result in additional costs.12 
Columns (3), (4), and (5) show that the coefficients of LOTSIZE are significantly positive, and this 
aligns with the results related to arbitrage activity. This finding indicates that ETFs exhibit larger 
tracking errors when significant trading barriers exist in the underlying market. Primarily, this is 
due to decreased institutional arbitrage activity. Moreover, a larger MTU restricts high-frequency 
algorithmic trading in ETFs. High-frequency algorithmic trading aids in narrowing the gap 
between ETF prices and NAVs (Jain et al., 2021). Therefore, a larger MTU expands the spread 
between ETF prices and NAVs.
[Table 4 here]
Finally, we examine the impact of trading barriers in the underlying market on informed 
trading in ETFs. Table 5 displays the coefficients estimated using equation (2) for dependent 
variables related to PIN (PIN EA, PIN GWJ, PIN BAYES, and PIN YZ). For all proxies of PIN, the 
coefficients of LOTSIZE are significantly negative, implying that the PIN of ETFs is lower when 
the underlying market is less accessible. In column (3), the average PIN BAYES is 18.22%; hence, 
the difference in PIN between high and low MTU is approximately 2.85%. Ahn et al. (2014) 
contend that increased market accessibility results in more active noise trader activity, thereby 
decreasing the PIN in the stock market. Consistent with their findings, our results suggest that 
ETFs that track accessible stock markets have a higher PIN than ETFs that track less accessible 
markets. This is due to the more active informed trader activity, such as institutional investors. 
From Table 3 and Table 5, we interpret that institutional trading activity is subdued in the case of 
ETFs, when the underlying market is less accessible. This implies less trading activity by informed 
12Moreover, we test the overall order imbalance, instead of the institutional order imbalance and obtain similar results.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

17
traders, resulting in a decrease in PIN. Among other variables, the bid-ask spread, net fund flow, 
long-term historical performance, and correlation with the S&P 500 index positively correlate with 
PIN. In contrast, intraday volatility, AUM, fund expense ratio, and the uncertainty of the target 
country negatively correlate with PIN. The results of other variables align with intuition.
[Table 5 here]
We demonstrate that the underlying market MTU influences the trading patterns of 
institutional investors and ETF characteristics. To determine whether the influence of variables is 
long-term, we investigate the impact of the underlying market MTU on trading activity and ETF 
characteristics on a monthly basis. We transform the daily frequency variables into their monthly 
frequency counterparts to facilitate their use in a monthly panel regression model. Unlike the daily 
panel regression, which segments past NAV returns into one-day, five-day, and 22-day periods, 
the monthly panel regression considers only the previous month’s daily average of NAV returns. 
We adopt equation (2) as a monthly panel regression model and modify the frequency of the 
variables by using daily average values. Table 6 summarizes the results. Panels A and C report the 
trading activity and PIN results, respectively. Panel B reports arbitrage activity and tracking ability. 
[Table 6 here]
The R-squared values for dependent variables indicate that the model’s explanatory power 
increases when conducting monthly analysis. Specifically, its explanatory power for institutional 
arbitrage activity and tracking errors is significantly greater than that of the daily panel regression 
model. Although the t-statistics for the coefficients of LOTSIZE are lower than those in the daily 
analysis, they remain significant except for PIN EA and PIN YZ in Panel C. In addition, the sign 
of the coefficients appears consistent. Although excluded from the table, the estimation results for 
other variables are also comparable to those from the daily panel regression analysis.
4.2 Change in the underlying market MTU
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

18
A limitation of the panel regression models is their failure to account for the specific characteristics 
of individual ETFs (ETF-fixed effects). To address this issue, we conduct a pre-post difference 
test on stock markets that experienced MTU changes during the sample period. Amihud et al. 
(1999) and Ahn et al. (2014) highlight that these alterations in MTU offer a valuable natural 
experimental environment. We utilize three ETFs, namely iShares MSCI Japan ETF (EWJ), 
iShares MSCI Singapore ETF (EWS), and VanEck Vietnam ETF (VNM), that have at least one 
year of pre-event data available within our sample period. On October 1, 2018, the Japanese Stock 
Exchange adjusted the MTU to 100 for stocks with an MTU of 1,000. On January 19, 2015, the 
Singapore Stock Exchange adjusted the MTU to 100 for stocks with an MTU of 1,000. On January 
4, 2021, the Hochiminh Stock Exchange adjusted the MTU to 100 for stocks with an MTU of 10. 
These adjustments offer a robust foundation for testing the effect of the MTU on ETFs as a natural 
experiment. We hypothesize that the proportion of institutional trading in ETFs is expected to rise 
after the reduction in MTU.
To examine the long-term changes in ETF trading patterns due to MTU changes, we use 
the longest available pre- and post-event periods within our data sample. The pre-event period is 
defined as [-390 calendar days, -31 calendar days] (12 months), while the post-event period is 
defined as [31 calendar days, 570 calendar days] (18 months) from the MTU change date.13 To 
mitigate the impact of noise around the MTU change, we exclude the periods from one month 
before and after the event. After including the control variable, we examine whether there is a 
significant difference in trading activity between the pre- and post-event periods. For this analysis, 
we apply the following panel regression model.
13In our block-by-block comparison, we divide each block into 3-month intervals (90 calendar days). Therefore, to 
conduct a pre-post difference test for the longest available periods, we allocate such periods in multiples of 3 months 
within our data sample, assigning 12 months (360 calendar days) for the pre-event period and 18 months (540 calendar 
days) for the post-event period due to the underling market’s MTU change date of EWS and VNM. Comparable results 
are obtained when the pre- and post-event periods are equally configured as 360 calendar days.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

19
𝑌𝑖,𝑡= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑀𝑇𝑈𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽2𝑋𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛼𝑖+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡,
(3)
where 𝑀𝑇𝑈𝑖,𝑡 is a dummy variable that is set to zero for the pre-event period and one for the postevent period. Unlike EWJ and EWS, VNM exhibits an increase in MTU. Therefore, to ensure 
consistency, we set the dummy for VNM to one for the pre-event period and zero for the postevent period. Because we control for ETF-fixed effects through 𝛼𝑖, we exclude ETF-specific 
variables, BRAND, FER, and CORSPX, from the control variables. 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 includes LNESPA, 
LNIVOL, FF, NAVPR1, NAVPR5, NAVPR22, LNAUM, and WUI.
Table 7 presents the estimated coefficients derived from equation (3) when the dependent 
variables are the trading activity of institutional investors. The coefficients of MTU indicate that 
because of the MTU reduction, the proportion of institutional trading within the ETF increases at 
the 1% significance level. The results align with our hypothesis that institutions exhibit increased 
engagement in stock market investments via ETFs after the MTU reduction. The coefficient of 
4.864 in column (3) suggests that there is a 4.864pp increase in institutional trading activity during 
the post-event period compared to the pre-event period. The average 20K INST VOL in the preperiod is 42.4%. Therefore, the approximately 11.5% rise in institutional trading activity after the 
reduction in MTU is economically significant. 
[Table 7 here]
The overall estimation results in Table 7 support the findings in subsection 4.1, which 
affirm the consistent impact of the underlying market MTU on institutional ETF trading even when 
controlling for individual ETF characteristics. Additionally, we conduct the analysis incorporating 
the iShares MSCI South Korea ETF (EWY) and WisdomTree Japan Hedged Equity Fund (DXJ), 
which were previously excluded due to issues related to the short pre-event period (approximately 
three months) and currency hedged fund. We confirm the further increase of the coefficients of 
LOTSIZE and its t-statistic. Table A.2 of Appendix A reports the results of these additional tests.
Table 8 presents the estimated coefficients obtained from equation (3) when the dependent 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

20
variables are either institutional arbitrage activity or tracking ability.14 Based on the results shown 
in Table 8, the coefficients of MTU are positive for the two variables of institutional arbitrage 
activity and negative for the two variables of tracking error. Although the coefficient signs are 
consistent with the panel regression analysis results in subsection 4.1, the coefficients are only 
significant for column (2).
[Table 8 here]
Table 9 presents the estimated coefficients obtained from equation (3) when the dependent 
variables are PIN. The coefficients of MTU are significantly positive, except for column (1). This 
result indicates that the PIN rises following the relaxation of the underlying market’s trading 
barriers due to the heightened trading activity by institutional investors who are regarded as 
informed traders.
[Table 9 here]
Compared to the results in subsection 4.1, the pre-post difference test indicates a slightly 
reduced significance for arbitrage activity, tracking error, and PIN. The diminished significance 
may arise due to the following reasons. Institutional trading activity gradually increases after the 
MTU reduction. Meanwhile, arbitrage activity, tracking error, and PIN increase only after 
institutional trading activity has sufficiently intensified. Therefore, we propose that arbitrage 
activity, tracking error, and PIN will exhibit a gradual change over an extended period compared 
to the trading activity of institutional investors.
To further examine the tendency of changes in ETF trading patterns and characteristics 
over the long term, we divide the original one-year pre-event period into four sub-periods of three 
months each. We then use them to estimate the coefficient of the MTU dummy variable in equation 
14We exclude TE(P-I) from the pre-post difference test because we cannot gather information on underlying index of 
EWS. However, the analysis of the two most commonly used variables to measure ETF tracking ability—the spread 
between NAV and ETF price and the return difference between NAV and ETF price—should be sufficient.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

21
(3). In other words, the four pre-event sub-periods are defined as [-120 calendar days, -31 calendar 
days], [-210 calendar days, -121 calendar days], [-300 calendar days, -211 calendar days], and [-
390 calendar days, -301 calendar days]. Table 10 presents the estimation results of the block-byblock comparison test. In each panel, the first, second, third, and fourth rows represent the MTU 
dummy variable’s estimated coefficients for the following dependent variables: institutional 
trading activity (INVTYPE: 20K INST #, 50K INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST VOL), 
institutional arbitrage activity (ARBACT: OI 20K and OI 50K), tracking ability (TRACAB: 
|Premium| and TE(P-N)), and PIN (PIN: PIN EA, PIN GWJ, PIN BAYES, and PIN YZ), 
respectively. If the coefficients are significant at the 10% significance level, we highlight them in 
bold. We provide estimates for different periods to investigate how the estimation results change 
in detail according to the period between blocks. Specifically, we report estimations for the postevent period defined as [31 calendar days, 570 calendar days] (Post-Period 1), as well as for 
periods defined as [121 calendar days, 570 calendar days] (Post-Period 2), [211 calendar days, 
570 calendar days] (Post-Period 3), and [301 calendar days, 570 calendar days] (Post-Period 4).
[Table 10 here]
In Table 10, the first row of each panel shows an increasing trend in the estimated 
coefficients from Panel A to Panel C and from Post-Period 1 to Post-Period 4. This indicates that, 
notwithstanding some noise around the MTU change date, the greater the temporal distance 
between the pre-event and post-event periods, the more pronounced the disparity in institutional 
trading activity becomes. Although the coefficients in the TRACAB and PIN rows are consistent 
with our hypothesis, they do not demonstrate aa trend as straightforward as that of institutional 
trading activity. However, both the significance and magnitude of the estimated coefficients tend 
to increase from Post-Period 1 to Post-Period 4. The ARBACT rows show comparatively lower 
levels of significance in the estimated coefficients compared to other variables. Although the 
coefficients tend to shift toward positive values from Panel A to Panel D, they are insignificant 
except for Post-Period 1 and Post-Period 2 in Panel D.
We summarize the results in Table 10 as follows. When the accessibility to the underlying 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

22
market of an ETF is eased, institutional trading activity undergoes a gradual and prolonged change. 
As institutional trading activity increases, institutional arbitrage activity, tracking ability, and PIN 
also change gradually. However, the duration of these changes is significantly longer than changes 
in institutional trading activity.
We visualize the estimated coefficient to examine the series of changes based on the 
temporal distance between the pre-event and post-event periods. Fig. 1 displays the coefficients of 
the MTU dummy variable as estimated from the pre-post difference test for institutional trading 
activity. The pre-event period in this figure is [-390 calendar days, -31 calendar days], while the 
x-axis represents the commencement date of the post-event period ([+x calendar days, 570 
calendar days]). The dashed line indicates the 90% confidence interval of the estimated 
coefficients. Fig. 1 distinctly shows a gradual increase in institutional trading activity relative to 
the pre-event period as the start date of the post-event period advances. Upon setting the pre-event 
period to [-390 calendar days, -121 calendar days], the estimated coefficients become larger and 
mirror the trend observed in Fig. 1. Additionally, to alleviate concerns regarding the difference in 
durations between the pre-event and post-event periods, we set the post-event period to a rolling 
window of 360 calendar days ([+x calendar days, +(x+360) calendar days]) and conduct a similar 
analysis. This also exhibits a gradual increasing trend. Fig. A.1 and Fig. A.2 in Appendix A report 
these results.
[Fig. 1 here]
Fig. 2 presents the results for institutional arbitrage activity and tracking ability, whereas 
Fig. 3 presents the results for PIN. Fig. 2 shows a gradual enhancement in ETF tracking ability 
following the MTU reduction and a slightly increasing trend in institutional arbitrage activity; 
however, this trend is not as pronounced for OI 20K. Fig. 3 shows that the estimated coefficients 
for PIN remain significantly positive; however, they do not exhibit a distinct increasing trend. 
Therefore, the results depicted in Fig. 1, Fig. 2, and Fig. 3 support our interpretation of the impact 
of accessibility of underlying markets on the institutional trading activity of ETFs and the 
consequent changes in institutional arbitrage activity, tracking ability, and PIN.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

23
[Fig. 2 here]
[Fig. 3 here]
5. Conclusion
This study examines the impact of the accessibility of the underlying market on ETF markets. We 
utilize a unique hand-collected dataset and conduct daily and monthly panel regression analyses. 
The results indicate that a larger underlying market MTU is associated with a lower proportion of 
institutional trading in the ETF market. In addition, we discover that a larger underlying market 
MTU is linked to reduced institutional arbitrage activity, tracking ability, and PIN of ETFs. To 
account for ETF-specific characteristics and potential side effects of unobservable factors, this 
study employs the event of MTU reduction as a natural experiment. Following a decrease in MTU, 
we observe an increase in institutional trading, institutional arbitrage activity, tracking ability, and 
PIN. In particular, institutional trading activity exhibits a gradual increase over an extended period 
post-MTU reduction. Our findings underscore the significant impact of changes in the underlying 
asset market on the ETFs that track these markets. As global exchanges modify their regulations 
and policies, monitoring and adapting to structural modifications in markets is crucial. Our 
findings are valuable for portfolio managers, offering insights into market changes resulting from 
future regulatory policies. As the ETF market continues to expand, we emphasize the importance 
of managers and APs considering investor preferences regarding the accessibility of the underlying 
markets when designing ETFs. This consideration is crucial because the composition of ETF 
investors not only affects the characteristics of ETFs but also directly impacts the profitability of 
arbitrage traders.
In recent years, the range of assets tracked by ETFs has become more diversified. For 
example, ETFs that track the cryptocurrency market have recently been launched. In light of this 
market trend, it is imperative to persist in examining the impact of regulations or trading barriers 
in different asset markets, not only on the markets themselves but also on the ETFs that track them. 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

24
We hope that future research will delve into a broader array of asset classes and regulatory policies 
to gain deeper insights into the investment patterns in the ETF market.
References
Abad, P., Díaz, A., Escribano, A., Robles, M.-D., 2021. Crossing boundaries beyond the 
investment grade: Induced trading by rating-contingent investment constraints. J. Corp. 
Financ. 67, 101903. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2021.101903
Agarwal, V., Hanouna, P.E., Moussawi, R., Stahel, C.W., 2018. Do ETFs increase the 
commonality in liquidity of underlying stocks? CFR Working Paper. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3001524
Ahir, H., Bloom, N., Furceri, D., 2022. The world uncertainty index. NBER Working Paper, 
Cambridge, MA. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4039482
Ahn, H.J., Cai, J., Hamao, Y., Melvin, M., 2014. Little guys, liquidity, and the informational 
efficiency of price: Evidence from the Tokyo Stock Exchange on the effects of small 
investor participation. Pacific Basin Financ. J. 29, 163–181. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pacfin.2014.04.001
Amihud, Y., Mendelson, H., Uno, J., 1999. Number of shareholders and stock prices: Evidence 
from Japan. J. Finance 54, 1169–1184. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022-1082.00141
Bae, K., Kim, D., 2020. Liquidity risk and exchange-traded fund returns, variances, and tracking 
errors. J. Financ. Econ. 138, 222–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.02.012
Banerjee, Anirban, Banerjee, Ashok, 2020. Does trade size restriction affect trading behavior? 
Evidence from Indian single stock futures market. J. Futur. Mark. 40, 355–373. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/fut.22073
Barber, B.M., Odean, T., Zhu, N., 2009. Do retail trades move markets? Rev. Financ. Stud. 22, 
151–186. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhn035
Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F., Moussawi, R., 2018. Do ETFs increase volatility? J. Finance 73, 
2471–2535. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12727
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

25
Bhattacharya, A., O’Hara, M., 2018. Can ETFs increase market fragility? Effect of information 
linkages in ETF markets. Working Paper, Cornell University. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2740699
Boehmer, E., Jones, C.M., Zhang, Xiaoyan, Zhang, Xinran, 2021. Tracking retail investor 
activity. J. Finance 76, 2249–2305. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13033
Box, T., Davis, R., Fuller, K., 2020. The dynamics of ETF fees. Financ. Anal. J. 76, 11–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0015198X.2019.1694356
Bryzgalova, S., Pavlova, A., Sikorskaya, T., 2023. Retail trading in options and the rise of the 
big three wholesalers. J. Finance 78, 3465–3514. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13285
Calamia, A., Deville, L., Riva, F., 2013. Liquidity in European equity ETFs: What really 
matters? Bankers Mark. Investors 124, 60–73.
Chen, H.-C., Ho, J.-K., Lai, C.W., Morales-Camargo, E., 2012. Institutional trading behavior in 
the ETF market. Working Paper, University of New Mexico. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1934056
Clifford, C.P., Fulkerson, J.A., Jordan, B.D., 2014. What drives ETF flows? Financ. Rev. 49, 
619–642. https://doi.org/10.1111/fire.12049
Da, Z., Shive, S., 2018. Exchange traded funds and asset return correlations. Eur. Financ. Manag. 
24, 136–168. https://doi.org/10.1111/eufm.12137
Da Dalt, C., Feldman, D., Garvey, G., Westerholm, P.J., 2019. Contrarians or momentum 
chasers? Individual investors’ behavior when trading exchange-traded funds. J. Futur. Mark. 
39, 553–578. https://doi.org/10.1002/fut.21979
Dannhauser, C.D., 2017. The impact of innovation: Evidence from corporate bond exchangetraded funds (ETFs). J. Financ. Econ. 125, 537–560. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2017.06.002
Dennis, P., 2003. Stock splits and liquidity: The case of the Nasdaq-100 index tracking stock. 
Financ. Rev. 38, 415–433. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-6288.00053
Easley, D., Kiefer, N.M., O’Hara, M., Paperman, J.B., 1996. Liquidity, information, and 
infrequently traded stocks. J. Finance 51, 1405–1436. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.15406261.1996.tb04074.x
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

26
Ersan, O., Alıcı, A., 2016. An unbiased computation methodology for estimating the probability 
of informed trading (PIN). J. Int. Financ. Mark. Institutions Money 43, 74–94. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intfin.2016.04.001
Gan, Q., Wei, W.C., Johnstone, D., 2015. A faster estimation method for the probability of 
informed trading using hierarchical agglomerative clustering. Quant. Financ. 15, 1805–
1821. https://doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2015.1023336
Glosten, L., Nallareddy, S., Zou, Y., 2021. ETF activity and informational efficiency of 
underlying securities. Manage. Sci. 67, 22–47. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3427
Gozluklu, A.E., Perotti, P., Rindi, B., Fredella, R., 2015. Lot size constraints and market quality: 
Evidence from the Borsa Italiana. Financ. Manag. 44, 905–945. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/fima.12105
Griffin, J., Oberoi, J., Oduro, S.D., 2021. Estimating the probability of informed trading: A 
Bayesian approach. J. Bank. Financ. 125, 106045. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2021.106045
Hauser, S., Lauterbach, B., 2003. The impact of minimum trading units on stock value and price 
volatility. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 38, 575. https://doi.org/10.2307/4126732
Heriyanto, R., Chang, T.P., 2021. Effect of minimum trading unit on trading activity: Evidence 
from Indonesia stock market. Rev. Accounting, Financ. Gov. 1, 29–37.
Ibrahim, N.E.H., Mohd, K.N.T., Khaw, K.L.-H., 2019. Effect of standardization of trading board 
lot on abnormal liquidity in Malaysian stock market. Cap. Mark. Rev. 27, 89–102.
Isaka, N., 2014. Long-run effects of minimum trading unit reductions on stock prices. Int. Rev. 
Financ. 14, 75–103. https://doi.org/10.1111/irfi.12026
Jain, A., Jain, C., Jiang, C.X., 2021. Active trading in ETFs: The role of high-frequency 
algorithmic trading. Financ. Anal. J. 77, 66–82. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0015198X.2020.1865694
Junarsin, E., Libert, E., Kristanto, J., 2019. The impacts of minimum trading units and tick size 
changes on bid-ask spread, depth, and trading volume: Evidence from the Indonesia Stock 
Exchange. J. Glob. Bus. Trade 77, 66–82.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

27
Kang, S., Hernandez, J.A., Sadorsky, P., McIver, R., 2021. Frequency spillovers, connectedness, 
and the hedging effectiveness of oil and gold for US sector ETFs. Energy Econ. 99, 105278. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2021.105278
Karmaziene, E., Sokolovski, V., 2022. Short-selling equity exchange traded funds and its effect 
on stock market liquidity. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 57, 923–956. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022109021000181
Kim, J., Cho, H., Seok, S., 2023. Liquidity risk, return performance, and tracking error: Synthetic 
vs. Physical ETFs. J. Int. Financ. Mark. Institutions Money 89, 101885. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intfin.2023.101885
Klein, O., Song, S., 2021. Commonality in intraday liquidity and multilateral trading facilities: 
Evidence from Chi-X Europe. J. Int. Financ. Mark. Institutions Money 73, 101349. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intfin.2021.101349
Lee, C.M.C., Ready, M.J., 1991. Inferring Trade Direction from Intraday Data. J. Finance 46, 
733–746. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1991.tb02683.x
Marshall, B.R., Nguyen, N.H., Visaltanachoti, N., 2013. ETF arbitrage: Intraday evidence. J. 
Bank. Financ. 37, 3486–3498. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2013.05.014
Mensi, W., Yousaf, I., Vo, X.V., Kang, S.H., 2022. Asymmetric spillover and network 
connectedness between gold, BRENT oil and EU subsector markets. J. Int. Financ. Mark. 
Institutions Money 76, 101487. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intfin.2021.101487
O’Hara, M., Yao, C., Ye, M., 2014. What’s not there: Odd lots and market data. J. Finance 69, 
2199–2236. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12185
Rhodes, M.E., Mason, J.R., 2023. ETF ownership and firm-specific information in corporate 
bond returns. J. Financ. Mark. 63, 100772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.finmar.2022.100772
Rompotis, G.G., 2018. Herding behavior among exchange-traded funds. J. Behav. Financ. 19, 
483–497. https://doi.org/10.1080/15427560.2018.1431886
Xu, L., Yin, X., 2017. Does ETF trading affect the efficiency of the underlying index? Int. Rev. 
Financ. Anal. 51, 82–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2017.02.009
Xu, L., Yin, X., Zhao, J., 2022. Are the flows of exchange-traded funds informative? Financ. 
Manag. 51, 1165–1200. https://doi.org/10.1111/fima.12396
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

28
Yan, Y., Zhang, S., 2012. An improved estimation method and empirical properties of the 
probability of informed trading. J. Bank. Financ. 36, 454–467. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2011.08.003
Yu, S., Webb, G., 2009. The effects of ETF splits on returns, liquidity, and individual investors. 
Manag. Financ. 35, 754–771. https://doi.org/10.1108/03074350910973685
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

29
Fig. 1. Visualized estimated coefficients of MTU dummy variable for institutional trading activity.
This figure displays the estimated coefficients of the MTU dummy variable obtained from equation 
(3). The dependent variables are 20K INST #, 50K INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST VOL. 
The pre-event period is [-390 calendar days, -31 calendar days], and the x-axis represents the 
commencement date of the post-event period ([+x calendar days, 570 calendar days]). The solid 
line indicates the estimated coefficients, while the dashed line indicates the 90% confidence 
interval of the estimated coefficients.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

30
Fig. 2. Visualized estimated coefficients of MTU dummy variable for institutional arbitrage 
activity and tracking ability.
This figure displays the estimated coefficients of the MTU dummy variable obtained from equation 
(3). The dependent variables are OI 20K, OI 50K, |Premium|, and PE(P-N). The pre-event period 
is [-390 calendar days, -31 calendar days], and the x-axis represents the commencement date of 
the post-event period ([+x calendar days, 570 calendar days]). The solid line indicates the 
estimated coefficients, while the dashed line indicates the 90% confidence interval of the estimated 
coefficients.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

31
Fig. 3. Visualized estimated coefficients of MTU dummy variable for PIN.
This figure displays the estimated coefficients of the MTU dummy variable obtained from equation 
(3). The dependent variables include PIN EA, PIN GWJ, PIN BAYES, and PIN YZ. The pre-event 
period is [-390 calendar days, -31 calendar days], and the x-axis represents the commencement 
date of the post-event period ([+x calendar days, 570 calendar days]). The solid line indicates the 
estimated coefficients, while the dashed line indicates the 90% confidence interval of the estimated 
coefficients.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

32
Table 1. Summary and history of MTU
This table summarizes our hand-collected information on worldwide stock exchanges.
Country
Name of Exchange
MTU
MTU change
Changed Date
Australia
Australia Securities Exchange
1
　
　
Hong Kong
Hong Kong Stock Exchange by firm (100, 500, 
1,000, 2,000, etc.)
　
　
Indonesia
Indonesia Stock Exchange
100
500 → 100
2014-01-14
10 → 1 (Above 100,000 
KRW)
2004-12-20
10 → 1 (between 50,000 
KRW and 100,000 KRW)
2006-06-05
South Korea
Korea Exchange
1
10 → 1 (below 50,000 KRW)
2014-06-02
New Zealand
New Zealand Stock Exchange
1
　
　
Osaka Stock Exchange
8 lot sizes → 1000, 100
2014-04-01
Japan
Tokyo Stock Exchange
100
1000, 100 → 100
2018-10-01
1000, 200 → 100
2003-04-07 (289 firms)
1000, 200 → 100
2003-04-28 (106 firms)
Malaysia
Bursa Malaysia Securities 
Berhad
100
1000, 200 → 100
2003-05-26 (474 firms)
Singapore
Singapore Exchange
100
1000 → 100
2015-01-19
Hanoi Stock Exchange
100
　
　
100 → 10
2003-05-20
Vietnam
Hochiminh Stock Exchange
100
10 → 100
2021-01-04
Taiwan
Taiwan Stock Exchange
1000
　
　
Shanghai Stock Exchange
100
　
　
China
Shenzhen Stock Exchange
100
　
　
Thailand
Stock Exchange of Thailand by price band (100 
or 50)
　
　
India
National Stock Exchange of 
India
by price band
　
　
Netherlands
　
　
Belgium
　
　
Portugal
　
　
France
Euronext 
1
　
　
Decrease 33%
1998-09-01
Israel
Tel Aviv Stock Exchange 
1
Decrease 62%~81%
1999-12-01
Denmark
　
　
Finland
　
　
Sweden
Nasdaq OMX Nordic
1
　
　
South Africa
Johannesburg Stock Exchange
100
　
　
United Kingdom
London Stock Exchange
1
50 → 1
2010-09-20
Italy
Borsa Italiana
1
by firm → 1
2002-01-14
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

33
Russia
Moscow Exchange
by firm
　
　
Norway
Oslo Börs
1
　
　
Switzerland
SIX Swiss Exchange
1
　
　
Turkey
Borsa Istanbul
1
　
　
Austria
Wiener Borse (Vienna)
1
　
　
Poland
Giełda Papierów 
Wartościowych w Warszawie
1
　
　
Germany
Frankfurt Stock Exchange
1
　
　
Brazil
Brazillian Stock Exchange
by firm (100 is 
common)
　
　
Canadian Securities Exchange
　
　
Canada
Toronto Stock Exchange & 
Venture Exchange
by price band 
(100, 500, and 
1,000)
　
　
Ireland
Irish Stock Exchange
1
Mexico
Bolsa Mexicana de Valores by price band (5 or 
100)
Saudi Arabia
Saudi Stock Exchange
1
Chile
Bolsa de Santiago
1
Greece
Athens Stock Exchange
1
Argentina
Bolsas y Mercados 
Argentinos
1
Philippines
Philippine Stock Exchange
by price band
Peru
Bolsa de Valores de Lima
minimum value is 
PEN 1.00
Qatar
Qatar Stock Exchange
1
Colombia
Bolsa de Valores de Colombia
1
United Arab 
Emirates
Dubai Financial Market
1
　
　
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

34
Table 2. Summary statistics
This table displays the summary statistics for the daily frequency variables. Panels A, B, and C summarize the 
variables for institutional trading activity, institutional arbitrage activity and tracking ability, and PIN, 
respectively. Panel D summarizes the independent variables. The table displays the proportions of 20K and 50K 
institutional trading in terms of trade numbers (20K INST # and 50K INST #) and in terms of trade volumes (20K 
INST VOL and 50K INST VOL), two types of order imbalance (OI 20K and OI 50K), absolute ETF premium 
(|Premium|), tracking error based on NAV and ETF return (TE(P-N)), tracking error based on ETF and underlying 
index return (TE(P-I)), four PIN variables (PIN EA, PIN GWJ, PIN BAYES, and PIN YZ), a dummy variable that 
equals zero if the MTU is one and one if otherwise (LOTSIZE), logarithmic value of ETF effective spread 
percentage average (LNESPA), logarithmic value of intraday volatility (LNIVOL), ETF fund flow (FF), 
logarithmic returns over the past one trading day (NAVPR1), logarithmic returns over the past five trading days 
(NAVPR5), logarithmic returns over the past 22 trading days (NAVPR22), logarithmic AUM (LNAUM), ETF 
brand dummy variable (BRAND), fund expense ratio (FER), uncertainty index (WUI), and the correlation between 
underlying index and the S&P 500 index (CORSPX). This table presents the observations, mean, standard 
deviation, minimum, 25% quantile, median, 75% quantile, and maximum values.
　
N
mean
std
min
25%
50%
75%
max
Panel A. Trading activity of institutional investors
20K INST #
86,027
5.744%
4.806%
0.000%
2.133%
4.412%
8.097%
43.628%
50K INST #
86,027
1.530%
1.695%
0.000%
0.369%
0.977%
2.083%
26.316%
20K INST VOL
86,027
37.011%
19.221%
0.000%
23.156%
35.967%
50.349%
99.861%
50K INST VOL
86,027
21.693%
17.446%
0.000%
8.684%
18.593%
31.546%
99.792%
　
　
　
　
　
　
　
　
　
Panel B. Institutional arbitrage activity and tracking ability
OI 20K
86,027
12.076%
14.750%
0.000%
2.675%
7.022%
15.335%
99.722%
OI 50K
86,027
9.387%
13.835%
0.000%
1.196%
4.463%
11.216%
99.792%
|Premium|
86,027
0.619%
0.949%
0.000%
0.157%
0.373%
0.780%
98.599%
TE(P-N)
86,027
0.749%
1.010%
0.000%
0.184%
0.440%
0.947%
71.994%
TE(P-I)
81,553
0.661%
0.787%
0.000%
0.194%
0.441%
0.870%
35.657%
　
　
　
　
　
　
　
　
　
Panel C. Probability of informed trading
PIN EA
85,984
17.351%
9.947%
0.000%
10.066%
15.038%
22.318%
86.620%
PIN GWJ
85,984
17.139%
9.777%
0.000%
10.030%
14.885%
21.965%
86.620%
PIN BAYES
85,984
18.215%
10.039%
1.848%
11.014%
15.796%
23.012%
84.215%
PIN YZ
85,964
17.800%
10.031%
0.000%
10.380%
15.572%
22.948%
86.620%
Panel D. Independent variables
LOTSIZE
86,027 
0.451 
0.498 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
1.000 
LNESPA
86,027 
-7.473 
0.953 
-9.629 
-8.192 
-7.700 
-6.762 
-3.194 
LNIVOL
86,027 
-16.137 
2.175 
-21.864 
-17.866 
-16.521 
-14.476 
-7.348 
FF
86,027 
0.000 
0.014 
-0.476 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.683 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

35
NAVPR1
86,027 
0.000 
0.015 
-0.818 
-0.006 
0.000 
0.007 
0.204 
NAVPR5
86,027 
0.000 
0.033 
-0.970 
-0.015 
0.002 
0.018 
0.346 
NAVPR22
86,027 
0.002 
0.069 
-0.976 
-0.034 
0.005 
0.039 
0.559 
LNAUM
86,027 
20.044 
1.533 
14.255 
18.918 
19.884 
21.284 
23.857 
BRAND
86,027 
0.852 
0.355 
0.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
FER
86,027
0.549 
0.101 
0.080 
0.500 
0.570 
0.590 
0.830 
WUI
86,027
0.276 
0.260 
0.000 
0.092 
0.212 
0.378 
1.922 
CORSPX
86,027
0.402 
0.160 
0.112 
0.238 
0.427 
0.530 
0.786 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

36
Table 3. Estimated coefficients of daily panel regression model for institutional trading activity
This table reports coefficients estimated using equation (2) and the daily frequency variables. The LOTSIZE 
is a dummy variable that equals zero if the MTU is one and one if otherwise. LNESPA, LNIVOL, FF, NAVPR1, 
NAVPR5, NAVPR22, LNAUM, BRAND, FER, WUI, and CORSPX represent the logarithmic value of ETF 
effective spread percentage average, logarithmic value of intraday volatility, ETF fund flow, logarithmic 
returns over the past one trading day, logarithmic returns over the past five trading days, and logarithmic 
returns over the past 22 trading days, logarithmic AUM, ETF brand dummy variable, fund expense ratio, 
uncertainty index, and the correlation between underlying index and the S&P 500 index, respectively. 
Columns (1), (2), (3), and (4) present the results corresponding to the dependent variables 20K INST #, 50K 
INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST VOL, respectively. We incorporate time-fixed effects into the model. 
t-statistics are presented in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate that coefficients are significant at 10%, 5%, and 
1% significance levels, respectively.
Trading activity of institutional investors
20K INST #
50K INST #
20K INST VOL
50K INST VOL
　
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.651*** 
-0.146*** 
-2.785*** 
-1.860*** 
LOTSIZE
(-20.88)
(-12.69)
(-20.01)
(-14.10)
0.969*** 
0.489*** 
5.023*** 
4.383*** 
LNESPA
(20.62)
(28.27)
(23.97)
(22.06)
0.023 
0.018** 
0.549*** 
0.404*** 
LNIVOL
(1.04)
(2.17)
(5.55)
(4.31)
-1.961** 
-0.718** 
-0.613 
2.341 
FF
(-2.16)
(-2.15)
(-0.15)
(0.61)
-0.325 
-0.130 
-6.290 
-6.213 
NAVPR1
(-0.27)
(-0.29)
(-1.15)
(-1.20)
0.244 
0.092 
-2.718 
-5.084* 
NAVPR5
(0.36)
(0.37)
(-0.89)
(-1.76)
2.396*** 
0.530*** 
9.700*** 
7.264*** 
NAVPR22
(7.52)
(4.52)
(6.83)
(5.39)
2.419*** 
0.883*** 
8.896*** 
6.886*** 
LNAUM
(143.45)
(142.42)
(118.35)
(96.63)
0.878*** 
0.222*** 
1.954*** 
2.059*** 
BRAND
(20.52)
(14.13)
(10.24)
(11.39)
0.656*** 
-0.234*** 
-2.186*** 
-3.326*** 
FER
(4.76)
(-4.62)
(-3.56)
(-5.71)
-0.394*** 
-0.158*** 
-2.377*** 
-1.428*** 
WUI
(-7.39)
(-8.05)
(-10.00)
(-6.34)
3.617*** 
1.061*** 
13.367*** 
6.218*** 
CORSPX
(37.14)
(29.62)
(30.78)
(15.10)
Time Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.385 
0.334 
0.231 
0.161 
Obs
86,027
86,027
86,027
86,027
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

37
Table 4. Estimated coefficients of daily panel regression model for institutional arbitrage activity and tracking 
ability
This table reports the coefficients estimated using equation (2) and the daily frequency variables. The 
LOTSIZE is a dummy variable that equals zero if the MTU is one and one if otherwise. LNESPA, LNIVOL, 
FF, NAVPR1, NAVPR5, NAVPR22, LNAUM, BRAND, FER, WUI, and CORSPX represent the logarithmic 
value of ETF effective spread percentage average, logarithmic value of intraday volatility, ETF fund flow, 
logarithmic returns over the past one trading day, logarithmic returns over the past five trading days, and 
logarithmic returns over the past 22 trading days, logarithmic AUM, ETF brand dummy variable, fund expense 
ratio, uncertainty index, and the correlation between underlying index and the S&P 500 index, respectively. 
Columns (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) present the results corresponding to the dependent variables OI 20K, OI 
50K, |Premium|, TE(P-N), and TE(P-I), respectively. We incorporate time-fixed effects into the model. tstatistics are presented in parentheses. ** and *** indicate that coefficients are significant at 5% and 1% 
significance levels, respectively.
Institutional arbitrage activity
　
Tracking ability
OI 20K
OI 50K
|Premium|
TE(P-N)
TE(P-I)
　
(1)
(2)
　
(3)
(4)
(5)
-1.952*** 
-1.865*** 
0.146*** 
0.144*** 
0.078*** 
LOTSIZE
(-16.84)
(-16.61)
(21.85)
(21.07)
(13.94)
2.070*** 
1.165*** 
0.044*** 
-0.003 
-0.006
LNESPA
(11.86)
(6.89)
(4.38)
(-0.29)
(-0.75)
1.248*** 
0.887*** 
0.001 
0.005 
0.008** 
LNIVOL
(15.14)
(11.11)
(0.31)
(1.07)
(2.16)
-2.070 
0.711 
0.232 
0.177 
0.315** 
FF
(-0.61)
(0.22)
(1.19)
(0.89)
(2.02)
-3.030 
-3.804 
-9.597*** 
-3.298*** 
-3.107*** 
NAVPR1
(-0.67)
(-0.86)
(-36.64)
(-12.30)
(-14.81)
1.146 
-2.276 
-3.299*** 
-2.762*** 
-1.424*** 
NAVPR5
(0.45)
(-0.93)
(-22.58)
(-18.48)
(-12.17)
6.926*** 
6.617*** 
-0.384*** 
-0.389*** 
-0.242*** 
NAVPR22
(5.85)
(5.77)
(-5.63)
(-5.57)
(-4.44)
0.216*** 
0.475*** 
-0.016*** 
-0.018*** 
0.010*** 
LNAUM
(3.45)
(7.84)
(-4.39)
(-4.89)
(3.45)
1.003*** 
1.158*** 
0.129*** 
0.236*** 
-0.011 
BRAND
(6.31)
(7.53)
(14.06)
(25.22)
(-1.57)
-4.186*** 
-3.993*** 
-0.040 
-0.186*** 
-0.135*** 
FER
(-8.17)
(-8.05)
(-1.36)
(-6.15)
(-5.78)
-2.427*** 
-1.943*** 
0.123*** 
0.208*** 
0.137*** 
WUI
(-12.25)
(-10.13)
(10.74)
(17.79)
(14.42)
3.803*** 
2.007*** 
-0.592*** 
-0.546*** 
-0.744*** 
CORSPX
(10.51)
(5.73)
(-28.38)
(-25.59)
(-41.54)
Time Fixed
O
O
　
O
O
O
R-squared
0.105 
0.042 
0.072 
0.048 
0.056 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

38
Obs
86,027
86,027
　
86,027
86,027
81,553
Table 5. Estimated coefficients of daily panel regression model for PIN
This table reports the coefficients estimated using equation (2) and the daily frequency variables. The 
LOTSIZE is a dummy variable that equals zero if the MTU is one and one if otherwise. LNESPA, LNIVOL, 
FF, NAVPR1, NAVPR5, NAVPR22, LNAUM, BRAND, FER, WUI, and CORSPX represent the logarithmic 
value of ETF effective spread percentage average, logarithmic value of intraday volatility, ETF fund flow, 
logarithmic returns over the past one trading day, logarithmic returns over the past five trading days, and 
logarithmic returns over the past 22 trading days, logarithmic AUM, ETF brand dummy variable, fund expense 
ratio, uncertainty index, and the correlation between underlying index and the S&P 500 index, respectively. 
Columns (1), (2), (3), and (4) present the results corresponding to the dependent variables PIN EA, PIN GWJ, 
PIN BAYES, and PIN YZ, respectively. We incorporate time-fixed effects into the model. t-statistics are 
presented in parentheses. ** and *** indicate that coefficients are significant at 5% and 1% significance levels, 
respectively.
Probability of informed trading
PIN EA
PIN GWJ
PIN BAYES
PIN YZ
　
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.238*** 
-0.320*** 
-0.519*** 
-0.245*** 
LOTSIZE
(-3.60)
(-4.97)
(-8.15)
(-3.66)
4.710*** 
4.629*** 
4.782*** 
4.607*** 
LNESPA
(47.37)
(47.79)
(49.83)
(45.73)
-0.431*** 
-0.410*** 
-0.284*** 
-0.418*** 
LNIVOL
(-9.19)
(-8.95)
(-6.26)
(-8.77)
6.390*** 
6.883*** 
4.456** 
5.856*** 
FF
(3.33)
(3.68)
(2.40)
(3.01)
-2.020 
-0.972 
0.024 
-2.028 
NAVPR1
(-0.76)
(-0.38)
(0.01)
(-0.76)
-0.524 
-2.297 
-1.556 
-0.691 
NAVPR5
(-0.36)
(-1.63)
(-1.11)
(-0.47)
2.703*** 
3.161*** 
3.265*** 
3.402*** 
NAVPR22
(4.01)
(4.81)
(5.02)
(4.98)
-1.586*** 
-1.605*** 
-1.645*** 
-1.640*** 
LNAUM
(-44.47)
(-46.17)
(-47.76)
(-45.38)
0.014 
0.046 
0.041 
0.055 
BRAND
(0.15)
(0.52)
(0.47)
(0.60)
-0.687** 
-0.832*** 
-1.298*** 
-0.896*** 
FER
(-2.35)
(-2.93)
(-4.61)
(-3.03)
-1.041*** 
-1.086*** 
-1.559*** 
-1.065*** 
WUI
(-9.23)
(-9.88)
(-14.32)
(-9.31)
1.632*** 
1.603*** 
2.260*** 
1.484*** 
CORSPX
(7.92)
(7.98)
(11.36)
(7.11)
Time Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.350 
0.362 
0.407 
0.344 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

39
Obs
85,984
85,984
85,984
85,964
Table 6. Estimated coefficients of monthly panel regression model
This table reports the coefficients estimated using equation (2) and the monthly frequency variables. Panels 
A, B, and C show the results for institutional trading activity, institutional arbitrage activity and tracking ability, 
and PIN, respectively. We use daily average values to change the variables’ frequency. Unlike daily panel 
regression, the monthly panel regression considers only the previous month's daily average of NAV returns. 
The other control variables remain consistent with the daily panel regression. The LOTSIZE is a dummy 
variable that equals zero if the MTU is one and one if otherwise. We incorporate time-fixed effects into the 
model. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. ** and *** indicate that coefficients are significant at 5% and 
1% significance levels, respectively.
　
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. Trading activity of institutional investors
20K INST #
50K INST #
20K INST VOL
50K INST VOL
-0.648*** 
-0.146*** 
-2.773*** 
-1.844*** 
LOTSIZE
(-5.76)
(-3.68)
(-7.56)
(-6.36)
Control 
Variables
O
O
O
O
Time Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.508 
0.476 
0.479 
0.459 
Obs
4,068
4,068
4,068
4,068
　
Panel B. Institutional arbitrage activity and tracking ability of ETFs
OI 20K
OI 50K
|Premium|
TE(P-N)
TE(P-I)
-1.910*** 
-1.826*** 
0.212*** 
0.178*** 
0.094*** 
LOTSIZE
(-11.26)
(-11.39)
(4.56)
(6.37)
(5.84)
Control 
Variables
O
O
O
O
O
Time Fixed
O
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.542 
0.330 
0.170 
0.173 
0.211 
Obs
4,068
4,068
4,068
4,068
3,865
Panel C. Probability of informed trading
PIN EA
PIN GWJ
PIN BAYES
PIN YZ
-0.258 
-0.343** 
-0.544*** 
-0.269 
LOTSIZE
(-1.55)
(-2.11)
(-3.21)
(-1.61)
Control 
Variables
O
O
O
O
Time Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.645 
0.655 
0.677 
0.643 
Obs
4,068
4,068
4,068
4,068
　
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

40
Table 7. Impact of MTU reduction in the underlying market on institutional trading activity in ETFs
This table reports the coefficients estimated using equation (3). MTU is a dummy variable that equals zero for 
the pre-event period and one for the post-event period. LNESPA, LNIVOL, FF, NAVPR1, NAVPR5, NAVPR22, 
LNAUM, and WUI represent the logarithmic value of ETF effective spread percentage average, logarithmic 
value of intraday volatility, ETF fund flow, logarithmic returns over the past one trading day, logarithmic 
returns over the past five trading days, and logarithmic returns over the past 22 trading days, logarithmic 
AUM, and uncertainty index, respectively. Columns (1), (2), (3), and (4) present the results corresponding to 
the dependent variables 20K INST #, 50K INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST VOL, respectively. We 
incorporate ETF-fixed effects into the model. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate 
that coefficients are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels, respectively.
Trading activity of institutional investors
20K INST #
50K INST #
20K INST VOL
50K INST VOL
　
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
2.371*** 
0.930*** 
4.864*** 
5.204*** 
MTU
(10.92)
(10.34)
(6.21)
(6.45)
-1.611*** 
-0.693*** 
-3.523*** 
-3.278*** 
LNESPA
(-5.24)
(-5.44)
(-3.17)
(-2.86)
-0.091 
-0.034 
0.001 
-0.020 
LNIVOL
(-0.84)
(-0.75)
(0.00)
(-0.05)
-13.890 
-0.697 
2.468 
3.976 
FF
(-1.10)
(-0.13)
(0.05)
(0.08)
-2.298 
-1.574 
-6.020 
-11.270 
NAVPR1
(-0.36)
(-0.60)
(-0.26)
(-0.48)
-7.424** 
-2.119* 
-9.422 
-2.886 
NAVPR5
(-2.52)
(-1.74)
(-0.89)
(-0.26)
7.729*** 
3.110*** 
21.378*** 
17.162*** 
NAVPR22
(6.10)
(5.92)
(4.68)
(3.64)
1.026** 
0.528*** 
2.733 
7.768*** 
LNAUM
(2.20)
(2.74)
(1.63)
(4.49)
-0.547 
0.108 
1.672 
2.726 
WUI
(-0.90)
(0.43)
(0.76)
(1.20)
ETF Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.121 
0.113 
0.051 
0.045 
Obs
1,838
1,838
1,838
1,838
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

41
Table 8. Impact of MTU reduction in the underlying market on institutional arbitrage activity and tracking 
ability in ETFs
This table reports the coefficients estimated using equation (3). MTU is a dummy variable that equals zero for 
the pre-event period and one for the post-event period. LNESPA, LNIVOL, FF, NAVPR1, NAVPR5, NAVPR22, 
LNAUM, and WUI represent the logarithmic value of ETF effective spread percentage average, logarithmic 
value of intraday volatility, ETF fund flow, logarithmic returns over the past one trading day, logarithmic 
returns over the past five trading days, and logarithmic returns over the past 22 trading days, logarithmic 
AUM, and uncertainty index, respectively. Columns (1), (2), (3), and (4) present the results corresponding to 
the dependent variables OI 20K, OI 50K, |Premium|, and TE(P-N), respectively. We include ETF-fixed effects 
in the model. t-statistics are indicated in parentheses. *, **, and *** show that coefficients are significant at 10%, 
5%, and 1% significance levels, respectively.
Institutional arbitrage activity
　
Tracking ability
OI 20K
OI 50K
|Premium|
TE(P-N)
　
(1)
(2)
　
(3)
(4)
0.598 
1.197* 
-0.084 
-0.067 
MTU
(0.83)
(1.77)
(-1.53)
(-1.19)
-1.119 
-0.933 
0.557*** 
0.215*** 
LNESPA
(-1.09)
(-0.97)
(7.12)
(2.70)
0.106 
0.236 
0.146*** 
0.174*** 
LNIVOL
(0.29)
(0.70)
(5.30)
(6.20)
-3.559 
2.248 
-5.272 
5.875* 
FF
(-0.08)
(0.06)
(-1.64)
(1.79)
-3.341 
-1.135 
0.700 
-3.237** 
NAVPR1
(-0.16)
(-0.06)
(0.44)
(-1.98)
-13.023 
-8.045 
-2.576*** 
-1.371* 
NAVPR5
(-1.33)
(-0.87)
(-3.44)
(-1.80)
9.555** 
8.170** 
-2.498*** 
-2.943*** 
NAVPR22
(2.26)
(2.06)
(-7.75)
(-8.96)
0.586 
3.315** 
-0.487*** 
-0.513*** 
LNAUM
(0.38)
(2.28)
(-4.11)
(-4.25)
-1.464 
-1.252 
-0.278* 
0.034 
WUI
(-0.72)
(-0.66)
(-1.79)
(0.22)
ETF Fixed
O
O
　
O
O
R-squared
0.005 
0.008 
0.249 
0.204 
Obs
1,838
1,838
　
1,838
1,838
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

42
Table 9. Impact of MTU reduction in the underlying market on PIN
This table reports the coefficients estimated using equation (3). MTU represents a dummy variable that equals 
zero for the pre-event period and one for the post-event period. LNESPA, LNIVOL, FF, NAVPR1, NAVPR5, 
NAVPR22, LNAUM, and WUI represent the logarithmic value of ETF effective spread percentage average, 
logarithmic value of intraday volatility, ETF fund flow, logarithmic returns over the past one trading day, 
logarithmic returns over the past five trading days, and logarithmic returns over the past 22 trading days, 
logarithmic AUM, and uncertainty index, respectively. Columns (1), (2), (3), and (4) display the results 
corresponding to the dependent variables PIN EA, PIN GWJ, PIN BAYES, and PIN YZ, respectively. We 
incorporate ETF-fixed effects into the model. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote that 
coefficients are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels, respectively.
Probability of informed trading
PIN EA
PIN GWJ
PIN BAYES
PIN YZ
　
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.753 
0.916** 
1.286*** 
1.086** 
MTU
(1.58)
(1.99)
(3.12)
(2.23)
0.873 
1.605** 
0.054 
1.010 
LNESPA
(1.29)
(2.46)
(0.09)
(1.46)
-0.076 
-0.129 
-0.044 
-0.032 
LNIVOL
(-0.32)
(-0.56)
(-0.22)
(-0.13)
-28.951 
-20.646 
-4.310 
-13.211 
FF
(-1.05)
(-0.77)
(-0.18)
(-0.47)
-4.127 
7.616 
-8.051 
-5.064 
NAVPR1
(-0.30)
(0.57)
(-0.67)
(-0.36)
-10.493 
-13.950** 
-11.060** 
1.555 
NAVPR5
(-1.62)
(-2.23)
(-1.98)
(0.24)
2.894 
-1.612 
0.258 
-0.672 
NAVPR22
(1.04)
(-0.60)
(0.11)
(-0.24)
1.227 
2.123** 
2.297*** 
1.849* 
LNAUM
(1.20)
(2.15)
(2.60)
(1.77)
-2.991** 
-2.316* 
-2.771** 
-1.923 
WUI
(-2.23)
(-1.79)
(-2.38)
(-1.40)
ETF Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.009 
0.014 
0.012 
0.007 
Obs
1,838
1,838
1,838
1,838
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

43
Table 10. Impact of MTU reduction on order imbalance and probability of informed trading in ETFs
This table reports the coefficients of the MTU dummy variable estimated using equation (3). This table reports the estimation results for the four post-event 
periods: [31 calendar days, 570 calendar days], [121 calendar days, 570 calendar days], [211 calendar days, 570 calendar days], and [301 calendar days, 570 
calendar days]. Panel A, B, C, and D report the estimation results when pre-event periods are [-120 calendar days, -31 calendar days], [-210 calendar days, -121 
calendar days], [-300 calendar days, -211 calendar days], and [-390 calendar days, -301 calendar days], respectively. Rows “INVTYPE,” “ARBACT,” 
“TRACAB,” and “PIN” indicate that dependent variables are institutional trading activity (20K INST #, 50K INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST VOL), 
institutional arbitrage activity (OI 20K and OI 50K), tracking ability (|Premium| and TE(P-N)), and PIN (PIN EA, PIN GWJ, PIN BAYES, and PIN YZ), respectively. 
We highlight the coefficients in bold if they are significant at the 10% significance level.
Post-Period 1 [+31, +570]
　Post-Period 2 [+121, +570]
　Post-Period 3 [+211, +570]
　Post-Period 4 [+301, +570]
Panel A. Pre-Period 1 [-120, -31]
INVTYPE
3.08 
1.36 
2.94 
4.48 
4.10 
1.88 
5.41 
7.18 
6.40 
2.66 
7.95 
7.99 
7.37 
3.04 
9.54 
8.80 
ARBACT
-0.01 
0.36 
—
—
0.26 
0.79 
—
—
-1.40 
-0.69 
—
—
-1.13 
-0.27 
—
—
TRACAB
-0.06 
-0.04 
—
—
-0.10 
-0.07 
—
—
-0.17 
-0.06 
—
—
-0.37 
-0.20 
—
—
PIN
0.10 
-0.14 
1.43 
0.55 
0.70 
-0.01 
1.85 
0.83 
-0.23 
-0.43 
1.78 
0.54 
-0.01 
-0.11 
2.00 
1.16 
Panel B. Pre-Period 2 [-210, -121]
INVTYPE
3.90 
1.61 
6.95 
6.64 
5.07 
2.21 
9.86 
9.78 
7.70 
3.06 
12.68 
10.53 
8.85 
3.53 
14.91 11.90 
ARBACT
-0.54 
-0.15 
—
—
-0.15 
0.46 
—
—
-1.68 
-0.92 
—
—
-1.02 
-0.13 
—
—
TRACAB
-0.08 
-0.14 
—
—
-0.12 
-0.17 
—
—
-0.21 
-0.17 
—
—
-0.45 
-0.37 
—
—
PIN
1.70 
1.55 
1.70 
2.09 
2.67 
1.92 
2.30 
2.54 
1.91 
1.76 
2.38 
2.26 
2.48 
2.46 
2.90 
3.12 
Panel C. Pre-Period 3 [-300, -211]
INVTYPE
4.71 
1.72 
11.29 
9.58 
6.18 
2.41 
14.58 
12.90 
9.19 
3.37 
18.09 
14.25 
10.76 
3.96 
21.19 16.55 
ARBACT
1.01 
1.28 
—
—
1.16 
1.67 
—
—
-0.30 
0.42 
—
—
0.27 
1.16 
—
—
TRACAB
-0.02 
-0.22 
—
—
-0.05 
-0.28 
—
—
-0.03 
-0.26 
—
—
-0.22 
-0.52 
—
—
PIN
-0.15 
0.48 
0.12 
0.36 
1.00 
0.95 
0.92 
1.00 
0.31 
0.75 
1.04 
0.99 
0.77 
1.44 
1.53 
1.85 
Panel D. Pre-Period 4 [-390, -301]
INVTYPE
1.83 
0.65 
5.14 
5.34 
2.48 
1.02 
6.96 
7.51 
3.52 
1.36 
7.62 
7.24 
3.96 
1.53 
8.33 
7.61 
ARBACT
0.98 
1.78 
—
—
1.26 
2.29 
—
—
0.09 
1.36 
—
—
0.29 
1.65 
—
—
TRACAB
-0.09 
-0.09 
—
—
-0.11 
-0.11 
—
—
-0.13 
-0.07 
—
—
-0.22 
-0.14 
—
—
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

44
PIN
0.63 
1.54 
1.24 
0.77 
　1.25 
1.69 
1.55 
1.12 
　1.10 
1.51 
1.64 
1.17 
　1.14 
1.59 
1.73 
1.48 
Control Variables
O
ETF Fixed
O
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

45
Appendix A
Fig. A.1. Visualized estimated coefficients of MTU dummy variable for different pre-event 
periods.
This figure displays the estimated coefficients of the MTU dummy variable obtained from 
equation (3). Dependent variables are 20K INST #, 50K INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST 
VOL. The pre-event period is [-390 calendar days, -121 calendar days], and the x-axis 
represents the start date of the post-event period ([+x calendar days, 570 calendar days]). The 
solid line indicates the estimated coefficients, while the dashed line indicates the 90% 
confidence interval of the estimated coefficients.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

46
Fig. A.2. Visualized estimated coefficients of MTU dummy variable for different post-event 
periods.
This figure displays the estimated coefficients of the MTU dummy variable from equation (3). 
Dependent variables are 20K INST #, 50K INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST VOL. The 
pre-event period is [-390 calendar days, -31 calendar days], and the x-axis represents the postevent period ([+x calendar days, +(x+360) calendar days]). The solid line indicates the 
estimated coefficients, while the dashed line indicates the 90% confidence interval of the 
estimated coefficients.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

47
Table A.1. List of ETFs
This table provides detailed information on the final sample. The table reports the track country, 
ETF’s name, and ETF symbol.
Track Country
ETF Name
ETF Symbol
Japan
iShares MSCI Japan ETF
EWJ
iShares MSCI China ETF
MCHI
China
iShares China Large-Cap ETF
FXI
India
WisdomTree India Earnings Fund
EPI
Canada
iShares MSCI Canada ETF
EWC
iShares MSCI Brazil ETF
EWZ
Brazil
iShares MSCI Brazil Small-Cap ETF
EWZS
South Korea
iShares MSCI South Korea ETF
EWY
Taiwan
iShares MSCI Taiwan ETF
EWT
Mexico
iShares MSCI Mexico ETF
EWW
Switzerland
iShares MSCI Switzerland ETF
EWL
Germany
iShares MSCI Germany ETF
EWG
France
iShares MSCI France ETF
EWQ
Chile
iShares MSCI Chile ETF
ECH
Vietnam
VanEck Vietnam ETF
VNM
iShares MSCI Indonesia ETF
EIDO
Indonesia
VanEck Indonesia Index ETF
IDX
Hong Kong
iShares MSCI Hong Kong ETF
EWH
Italy
iShares MSCI Italy ETF
EWI
Israel
iShares MSCI Israel ETF
EIS
Poland
iShares MSCI Poland ETF
EPOL
Netherlands
iShares MSCI Netherlands ETF
EWN
Sweden
iShares MSCI Sweden ETF
EWD
South Africa
iShares MSCI South Africa ETF
EZA
Malaysia
iShares MSCI Malaysia ETF
EWM
Thailand
iShares MSCI Thailand ETF
THD
Turkey
iShares MSCI Turkey ETF
TUR
Argentina
Global X MSCI Argentina ETF
ARGT
Philippines
iShares MSCI Philippines ETF
EPHE
Ireland
iShares MSCI Ireland ETF
EIRL
Peru
iShares MSCI Peru and Global Exposure ETF
EPU
New Zealand
iShares MSCI New Zealand ETF
ENZL
Norway
Global X MSCI Norway ETF
NORW
Austria
iShares MSCI Austria ETF
EWO
Colombia
Global X MSCI Colombia ETF
GXG
Belgium
iShares MSCI Belgium ETF
EWK
Russia
iShares MSCI Russia ETF
ERUS
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed

48
Table A.2. Impact of MTU reduction in the underlying market on institutional trading activity 
in ETFs when EWY or DXJ are included
This table reports the coefficients estimated using equation (3). MTU is a dummy variable that 
equals zero for the pre-event period and one for the post-event period. Panels A, B, and C show 
results for each case involving only EWY, only DXJ, and both EWY and DXJ. Columns (1), 
(2), (3), and (4) present the results corresponding to the dependent variables 20K INST #, 50K 
INST #, 20K INST VOL, and 50K INST VOL, respectively. We incorporate ETF-fixed effects 
into the model. t-statistics are presented in parentheses. *** indicates that coefficients are 
significant at 1% significance levels.
　
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. Including EWY
20K INST #
50K INST #
20K INST VOL
50K INST VOL
3.1657***
1.1298***
8.6650***
7.2772***
MTU
(17.60)
(15.64)
(13.11)
(10.89)
Control 
Variables
O
O
O
O
ETF Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.164 
0.140 
0.103 
0.075 
Obs
2,273
2,273
2,273
2,273
Panel B. Including DXJ
20K INST #
50K INST #
20K INST VOL
50K INST VOL
2.6143***
0.9950***
6.4421***
5.5695***
MTU
(14.14)
(13.91)
(9.70)
(8.22)
Control 
Variables
O
O
O
O
ETF Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.128 
0.119 
0.074 
0.069 
Obs
2,458
2,458
2,458
2,458
Panel C. Including EWY and DXJ
20K INST #
50K INST #
20K INST VOL
50K INST VOL
3.1581***
1.1220***
9.1464***
7.1514***
MTU
(19.65)
(18.41)
(15.62)
(12.13)
Control 
Variables
O
O
O
O
ETF Fixed
O
O
O
O
R-squared
0.162 
0.144 
0.113 
0.089 
Obs
2,893
2,893
2,893
2,893
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5018606
Preprint not peer reviewed
