Information, Trading and Product Market Interactions:
Cross-Sectional Implications of Informed Trading
HEATHER E. TOOKES ∗
ABSTRACT
I present a simple model of informed trading in which asset values are derived from imperfectly
competitive product markets and private information events occur at individual ﬁrms. The model
predicts that informed traders may have incentives to make information-based trades in the stocks
of competitors, especially when events occur at ﬁrms with large market shares. In the context
of 759 earnings announcements, I use intraday transactions data to test the hypothesis that net
order ﬂow and returns in the stocks of non-announcing competitors have information content for
announcing ﬁrms.
∗Yale School of Management, 135 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8200.
Phone: 203-436-0785; E-mail:
heather.tookes@yale.edu.
This paper is based on part of my dissertation at Cornell University.
I am grateful to
Maureen O’Hara (Chair), David Easley, Robert Masson and Roni Michaely for many helpful discussions.
I would also
like to thank Warren Bailey, Carliss Baldwin, Scott Bauguess, Sudipto Bhattacharya, Joshua Coval, Judith Chevalier,
John Griﬃn, Michael Hertzel, Kenneth Kavajecz, Norris Larrymore, Jonathan Macey, Adam Reed, Laura Starks, David
Scharfstein, Matthew Spiegel, Robert Stambaugh (the editor), Bhaskaran Swaminathan, Eric Theissen, Nancy Wallace,
James Weston, an anonymous referee, seminar participants at Cornell University, the 2003 European Finance Association
Meetings, Arizona State, Yale SOM, U.C. Berkeley, Stanford, Harvard, UNC-Chapel Hill, the 2004 American Finance
Association Meetings, the 2004 Batten Finance Conference, Yale Law School and MIT-Sloan for their useful suggestions.
Any errors are my own.

How does an informed trader’s propensity to trade on inside information in a given company’s stock
vary with industry and ﬁrm characteristics? Using a simple model of informed trading in which asset
values are derived from imperfectly competitive product markets and where private information events
occur at ﬁrms, I examine the question of where informed traders choose to transact.1
This paper
adds to existing research by explicitly linking informed trading in stock markets to the structure
of competition in product markets.
It also provides new evidence on the process of information
diﬀusion across stocks as we vary the location at which private information is observed.
Given
privately observed information at a particular location (ﬁrm), informed traders may choose to trade
in the stocks of related ﬁrms (in the same industry, for example).
In addition to cross-stock trading
incentives, this paper examines cross-sectional diﬀerences in where informed trading is likely to occur.
I present a very simple model of informed trading in the context of both ﬁrm-speciﬁc and industrywide information events. I assume that asset values are derived from a Cournot duopoly with asymmetric constant marginal costs.
Small, wealth-constrained informed traders decide whether to trade
on privately observed information regarding a given ﬁrm’s future production costs in that ﬁrm’s stock
or the stock of a competitor.
I solve for the conditions under which competitor trading will occur.2
The model provides structure to the intuition of how information impacts more than one ﬁrm in an
industry.
We often start with returns as the basic element of ﬁnancial models.
What distinguishes
the approach in this paper and in the literature on ﬁnancial and product market interactions (e.g.,
Brander and Lewis (1986); Maksimovic and Titman (1991); Chevalier and Scharfstein (1996); Allen
and Phillips (2000); Hou and Robinson (2006)) is that it takes one step back and explicitly accounts
for the characteristics of ﬁrms and industries that generate returns. I begin with economic fundamentals to provide economic intuition as to what generates diﬀerences in stocks’ sensitivities to common
information and how these sensitivities interact with insiders’ trading strategies.
Beyond the implication that some insiders may choose to trade in the stocks of competing ﬁrms,
1

there are additional cross-sectional predictions.
First, the amount of information-based trading in
a company’s stock is predicted to decrease in ﬁrm market share.
In the Cournot example used in
this paper, large market shares stem from competitive advantage.
Stocks of ﬁrms with large market
shares are less attractive locations for information-based trades because these ﬁrms are strong (i.e.,
low-cost, more competitive). The stock prices of small ﬁrms exhibit higher sensitivity to shocks as a
result of product market weakness, which creates opportunities for informed traders to extract higher
excess returns from trades.
In addition to competitor trading incentives, the well-known product
market structure provides a link between ﬁrm size (within industries) and volatility that has not been
emphasized.
Second, as would be expected, the type of private information ("competitive" versus
"industry-wide") is important. Competitor trading incentives are much larger when the information
is regarding an industry-wide shock since these shocks have ﬁrst-order eﬀects on the proﬁtability of
all ﬁrms. Finally, as is common in the microstructure literature, liquidity matters. Informed traders
are more likely to trade in liquid stocks because of their ability to "hide" their trades in these stocks.
A natural way to test these conjectures is to identify those traders who are informed and to
collect data on their trading portfolios.
Because these data are unavailable, I take an alternative
approach.
I use aggregate transaction data and estimate cross-stock price impacts of net order
ﬂow to infer information content of trades and information transmission.
The intuition is that if
market makers learn from the trading process, they will update prices based on information from order
ﬂow and returns in all relevant securities.
In the context of 759 quarterly earnings announcements
(times in which information asymmetry is likely to be high) in 128 industries, I examine information
transmission across stocks.
Consider announcing Firm A and competing Firm B.
If it is optimal
for informed traders to trade in the stock of B, then order ﬂow in B should have information content
for A, even when the information event is known to have occurred at A (and not at B). The main
empirical ﬁndings support the hypothesis that non-announcing competing ﬁrms’ stocks are locations
2

for information-based trades.
I ﬁnd that order ﬂows and returns in the stocks of non-announcing
competitors have information content for announcing-ﬁrm returns, even after controlling for lagged
own-ﬁrm returns and both contemporaneous and lagged own-ﬁrm order ﬂow. In addition, analysis of
cross-sectional variation in the cross-stock price impact of trades and returns provides some evidence
that the information content varies systematically with variables identiﬁed in the main model.
Transactions of informed traders are of interest because a central implication of asymmetric information models in the market microstructure literature is that these trades convey price-relevant information to markets (e.g., Kyle (1985), Glosten and Milgrom (1985)).
Order ﬂow (net buyer-initiated
volume) is particularly useful in this paper since the price impact of trades reﬂects aggregation of
traders’ information.
This is distinct from price changes due to public information, which can occur
without trading (see e.g., Evans and Lyons (2002b)).
Most empirical studies of price discovery in
stock markets have focused on the extent to which trading leads to price revisions in the context of
individual securities (e.g., Hasbrouck (1991); Madhavan, Richardson and Roomans (1997); Dufour
and Engle (2000) for stocks) or across securities that are diﬀerent claims to the same underlying asset
(e.g., Biais and Hillion (1994); Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas (1998); Chan, Chung and Fong (2002);
Chakravarty, Gulen and Mayhew (2004); Cao, Chen and Griﬃn (2005) for options and underlying
stocks; Harris (1989) and Chan (1992) for futures and stocks). Only in recent years has empirical focus shifted towards price discovery in multiple stock settings (e.g., Chordia, Roll and Subrahmanyam
(2000); Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001); Harford and Kaul (2005)).
These papers have documented
common components of order ﬂows and liquidity across stocks.3,4
The current paper sheds further
light on where (within industries) we should expect price discovery to occur.
This study also contributes to literature on insider trading and regulation.
Registered insiders
face regulatory constraints in own-ﬁrm trades that they do not face when they trade in the stocks of
their competitors. They are also likely to be informed in settings in which information events occur at
3

individual ﬁrms, making incentives for competitor trading particularly strong. Most empirical studies
of trading by oﬃcers and directors of U.S. ﬁrms investigate abnormal returns to own-ﬁrm trades
(e.g., Jaﬀe (1974); Finnerty (1976); Seyhun (1986); Lakonishok and Lee (2001); Jeng, Metrick and
Zeckhauser (2003)).
Understanding variation in informed traders’ incentives should help distinguish
insiders who are likely to make information-based trades in own-ﬁrm stock from those who are more
likely to trade for non-speculative reasons.
This paper is not the ﬁrst to link informed trading to
product markets.
The questions that have been addressed relate to how one ﬁrm can distort proﬁts
from entry by trading in the securities of other ﬁrms whose values are dependent on its actions (see
e.g., Hansen and Lott (1995); Fishman and Hagerty (1992)) or the impact of own-ﬁrm trading by an
insider who is also a manager choosing output levels (Jain and Mirman (2000)).
The current paper
focuses on informed trading in competitive stock markets with multiple securities and is the ﬁrst to
empirically examine the potential role of product market competition in cross-stock price discovery.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section I, I present a very simple model of informed trading
in the context of both ﬁrm-speciﬁc and industry-wide information events. This section concludes with
a discussion that maps the implications of the model to the empirical tests.
Section II contains the
empirical analysis of cross-stock net order ﬂow and returns relationships during both "normal" and
earnings announcement periods. Section III concludes.
I
Hypothesis Development
The following provides a simple framework formalizing the hypotheses and main intuition. Firms
compete in a Cournot product market and private information is revealed to insiders at a given ﬁrm.
The term "insiders" is very broad and applies to all traders who are informed when an information
event occurs.
This would include corporate insiders and employees, as well as analysts following
the ﬁrm who have access to information before it is released to the market.5
What is important is
4

the location at which the information is observed.
Insiders trade either in the stock of the ﬁrm at
which the event occurred or in a competitor’s stock.
The main results are that competitor trading
incentives exist and that these incentives vary systematically with ﬁrm market share within industries
and with the type of information ("ﬁrm-speciﬁc" versus "industry-wide").
As will be clear in the
discussion, "ﬁrm-speciﬁc" information carries that name only because it relates to ﬁrm-speciﬁc costs.
The information itself is relevant to the values of all ﬁrms due to the oligopolistic market structure.
A
Model
I modify the sequential trade model in Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas (1998) to consider informed
trading in stocks that derive their values from a single, imperfectly competitive industry. Uncertainty
stems from the ﬁrms’ random production costs, which can take two possible values: ci −∆c or ci +∆c.
With probability θ, an information event will occur at Firm i, in which true costs are privately
revealed to Firm i’s insiders.
Two assets ("Firms") trade in an equity market prior to competition
in the product market.
Ownership of a given ﬁrm represents rights to all cashﬂows from the asset’s
production of the good.6
Timing
The exact timing is as follows:
In period 0, nature decides whether an information event will
occur.
If an information event occurs, a perfect signal regarding Firm 1’s future costs is revealed to
Firm 1’s insiders (i.e., let i=1).
With probability δ the signal will reveal a low state (high future
costs) for Firm 1; with probability (1 −δ) the signal will reveal a "high" state.
In period 1, a day
of stock market trading occurs.
In period 2, a public signal regarding c1 is revealed to all market
participants.
This ensures eﬃcient production decisions.
Because the informed are assumed to
behave competitively, as long as period 1 contains suﬃciently many rounds of trading, revelation of
cost will actually occur before period 2.
Beginning in period 3, the product market meets and all
5

proﬁts are realized and returned to shareholders. Figure 1 provides a timeline.
[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Market Participants
There are four types of equity market participants:
Firm 1’s insiders (those with access to Firm
1’s private information); Firm 1’s uninformed liquidity traders; Firm 2’s uninformed liquidity traders;
and a market maker.7
Insiders are risk-neutral and competitive.
Although it may be the case that the number of
registered insiders at individual ﬁrms is small, the potential group of indirect insiders (e.g., other
employees, temporary insiders, analysts and family members) and the possibility of unintentional
leakage makes the number of potentially informed individuals large.
This increases the likelihood
that informed traders will behave competitively.
Insiders are wealth-constrained investors who seek
to maximize return on their $1 investment. This return maximization assumption reﬂects borrowing
restrictions found in real markets.
If an information event occurs at Firm 1, Firm 1’s insiders are
always informed.
Uninformed traders trade for exogenous liquidity reasons and are equally likely to
buy or sell. The fractions of each type of trader in the market are as follows:
µ are informed if there is an information event regarding Firm 1’s costs.
(1 −µ) are uninformed liquidity traders. Of these, fractions: f sell Stock 1; f buy Stock 1; g sell
Stock 2; and g buy Stock 2. Let 2f + 2g = 1.
All traders arrive and submit orders sequentially to a competitive market maker. Following each
trade, the market maker revises his quotes using Bayes’ rule. "Own-ﬁrm trades" are deﬁned as trades
in the stock of Firm 1 by Firm 1’s insiders (Firm 1 is the information source).
"Competitor trades"
are trades in the stock of Firm 2 by Firm 1’s insiders. Figure 2 provides the probabilistic structure.
6

[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]
Trading Strategies
The imperfectly competitive product market setup means that a change in costs for Firm 1 changes
equilibrium proﬁtability and produces potential insider trading proﬁts at both ﬁrms.
I assume that
traders cannot execute trades in both securities simultaneously; therefore, insiders face a trading
location decision: trade in own-ﬁrm stock or that of a competitor. When Firm 1’s insiders observe a
signal, there are four possible equilibria: (1) all insiders trade in own-ﬁrm stock; (2) all insiders trade
in the stock of the competing ﬁrm; (3) they mix between Stocks 1 and 2; (4) they refrain from trading.
In the case of a low signal, the fraction of insiders trading in Stock 1 is αL  [0,1], and (1−αL) trade in
Stock 2. Equilibrium requires that market makers set bid and ask prices that result in zero expected
proﬁts given optimal behavior of informed traders.
B
The Product Market
Consider a standard Cournot duopoly with a single homogenous good and asymmetric constant
marginal costs. Starting from this well-known structure allows us to formulate the intuition behind the
hypothesized link between insiders’ trading strategies and ﬁrm and industry characteristics within the
context of a well-understood market.8
What has not been emphasized previously is the link between
product market weakness (which produces a small market share and ﬁrm size) and implicit leverage
of ﬁrms. These stem directly from competitive disadvantage and create insider trading incentives.
Given costs Ci(qi) = ciqi and a linear inverse demand function p(Q) = a −bQ, ﬁrms simultaneously choose quantities qi (where Q =
X
qi). Equilibrium proﬁts from production are returned to
shareholders as dividends. The well-known ﬁrst order conditions for Cournot-Nash Equilibrium give
quantities and proﬁts:
7

q∗
i =
a −ci −bq∗
j
2b
;
π∗
i =
"
a + P2
k=1 ck
3
−ci
#2 1
b
(1)
It is clear from (1) that a ﬁrm with a high cost will produce a low quantity (i.e., high ci ﬁrms are
small due to competitive disadvantage) and realize a lower proﬁt.
Consider changes in proﬁtability
with respect to changes in a given ﬁrm’s costs:
Own proﬁtability:
∂π∗
i
∂ci
= −4
3b
"
a + P2
k=1 ck
3
−ci
#
(2)
Competitor proﬁtability:
∂π∗
i
∂cj
= 2
3b
"
a + P2
k=1 ck
3
−ci
#
(3)
Clearly, an increase in the competitive costs of Firm i decreases the value of that ﬁrm and increases
the value of the competitor.
Before turning to the stock market, in which the possibility of trade
by insiders will aﬀect prices, it is useful to consider cross-sectional diﬀerences in return volatility
(sensitivity of proﬁts to the information).
The percent changes in proﬁtability with respect to a ∆c
increase in Firm 1’s cost are:
Firm 1:
∂π∗
1
∂c1 ∆c
π∗
1
=
−4∆c
[a + c2 −2c1]
and
Firm 2:
∂π∗
2
∂c1 ∆c
π∗
2
=
2∆c
[a + c1 −2c2]
(4)
Because earnings streams in high-cost (small) ﬁrms are more volatile, insiders are more likely
to choose to trade in the stocks of small competitors.
If Firm 2’s costs are suﬃciently high (i.e.,
5c2 −4c1 > a) then Firm 2’s proﬁtability will be more sensitive to Firm 1’s ﬁrm-speciﬁc costs than
8

Firm 1’s proﬁtability.
C
The Stock Market
Firm 1’s insiders observe changes in future costs.
In order to establish a product market link,
denote the value of Firm i given changes in costs for Firm 1 as:
V Ψ
i
≈π∗
i + ∂π∗
i
∂c1
∆c1
(5)
where the signal Ψ {H,L} denotes state of the world at Firm 1.
The objective is to characterize the conditions under which insiders choose to trade in competitors’
stocks.
Consider the equilibrium strategy of an insider making the ﬁrst trade of the day.
E[Vit/Ψ]
is the expected value of Stock i given observed (perfect) signal Ψ, bit is the market maker’s bid for
Stock i at time t, ait is the ask for Stock i at time t.
The trading rule is: Sell if E[Vi/Ψ] < b1t; Buy
if E[Vi/Ψ] > a2t; No trade in Stock i otherwise. Based on the optimal strategy within a given stock,
the insiders compare returns across stocks and choose their optimal trading location.
This decision
suggests where we might expect price discovery to occur.
C.1
Market Maker’s Opening Quotes
To illustrate the impact of private information regarding product market parameters on equilibrium
spreads, consider the market maker’s opening quotes and the equilibrium strategy of an insider making
the ﬁrst trade of the day.
Let Firm 1’s insiders receive a low signal (high own-ﬁrm costs).
The
unconditional expected value of Stock i at time t is:
V ∗
it = E[Vit] = δtV L
i + (1 −δt)V H
i
(6)
Given a trade in either Stock 1 or Stock 2, the market maker will update his belief regarding δt
9

using Bayes’ rule and, by Equation (6), revises his belief regarding the expected values of both stocks.
For example, the bid for Stock 1 at time t is b1t=E[V1t/Sell Stock 1].
Since my focus is on the ﬁrst
trade of the day, I drop the t subscript.
The bid and ask prices for Stock 1:
b1 = V ∗
1 −(1 −δ)[V H
1 −V L
1 ]θδµαL
f(1 −µθ) + θδµαL
;
a1 = V ∗
1 + (1 −δ)[V H
1 −V L
1 ]θδµαH
f(1 −µθ) + θ(1 −δ)µαH
(7)
The bid and ask prices for Stock 2:
b2 = V ∗
2 −(1 −δ)[V L
2 −V H
2 ]θδµ(1 −αH)
g(1 −µθ) + θ(1 −δ)µ(1 −αH);
a2 = V ∗
2 + (1 −δ)[V L
2 −V H
2 ]θδµ(1 −αL)
g(1 −µθ) + θδµ(1 −αL)
(8)
Clearly, the deviation of bid and ask prices from the expected values of each asset is increasing
in the fraction of insiders who choose to trade in that security.
In this example, if none of Firm 1’s
insiders trade in Stock 2 (i.e., αL = αH = 1), then a2 = b2 = V ∗
2 and there would be no spread in the
competitor’s stock.
When Firm 1’s insiders observe a low signal, they trade in Stock 2 if
V L
2 −a2
a2
> b1 −V L
1
b1
(9)
The remainder of the analysis considers the case of a low signal, so the subscript on αL is dropped.
To provide intuition, I solve for the conditions under which insiders choose a pure strategy in competitor
trades. That is, when will α = 0?
C.2
Pure Strategy in Competitor Trades
Lemma 1:
After observing a low signal regarding ﬁrm-speciﬁc costs, a suﬃcient condition for
Firm 1’s insiders to trade in Stock 2 is:
10

(V L
2 −V ∗
2 )g(1 −θµ)
V ∗
2 g(1 −θµ) + θδµV L
2
>V ∗
1 −V L
1
V ∗
1
(10)
The argument is as follows:
Let α = 0.
If, given that all insiders trade in Stock 2, returns from
trade in that stock are greater than own-ﬁrm returns, then it must be the case that α = 0.
From
Equation (7), when α = 0 there is no informed trading in Stock 1 and b1 = V ∗
1 .
Returns from the
sale of Stock 1 are:
b1 −V L
1
b1
= V ∗
1 −V L
1
V ∗
1
(11)
If the insider buys Stock 2, returns are:
V L
2 −a2
a2
= (V L
2 −V ∗
2 )g(1 −θµ)
V ∗
2 g(1 −θµ) + θδµV L
2
(12)
¥
From (10), it is clear that increasing liquidity traders in Firm 2 (increasing g) increases the propensity of Firm 1’s insiders to trade in that stock.
A lower prior on the low signal (δ) also increases
returns to trading in Stock 2.
Importantly, in this set-up, V has a structure (it is product market proﬁtability). We can use this
fact to gain additional insight into the links between product market characteristics and trading location.
Lemma 2:
The range of microstructure parameters ( δ, θ, µ, f, g) for which there will be a pure
strategy in competitor trades is increasing in own-ﬁrm market share and decreasing in the market share
of the competing ﬁrm.
Lemma 2 formalizes the intuition that because small ﬁrms within industries tend to be weak (e.g.,
they are new and vulnerable to shocks or they have another competitive disadvantage), the sensitivity
11

of their values to information is high. This makes their stocks attractive venues for information-based
trading. To see why this holds, return to the product market, from which the traded assets derive
their values. Recall from Equation (5) that V Ψ
i
≈π∗
i + ∂πi
∂ck ∆ck.
Firm i’s market share is:
s∗
i =
q∗
i
P2
k=1 q∗
K
= a + cj −2ci
2a −c1 −c2
(13)
Equations (1), (2) and (3) gave equilibrium proﬁt and changes in proﬁtability with respect to changes
in costs. Substituting these and (13), and letting δ = 1/2 (for simpliﬁcation), Inequality (10) becomes:
s1g(1 −θµ) −2s2[g(1 −θµ) + θµ
2 ] >
2∆cθµ
2a −c1 −c2
(14)
Holding industry constant, the left-hand side of Inequality (14) is strictly increasing in Firm 1’s
market share and strictly decreasing in Firm 2’s market share.
Within an industry, small stocks are
more susceptible to informed competitor trades.
This within-industry market share result also has
between-industry implications. All else equal, the range of parameters over which there will be a pure
strategy in competitor trading is increasing in industry concentration (see the Appendix for details).
D
Industry-wide News
Section (C.2) focused on ﬁrm-speciﬁc (competitive) costs ci. In most industries, stock returns are
characterized by positive co-movement. This suggests that uncertainty is instead regarding industrywide variables.
It is straightforward to modify the model to examine the case in which private
information pertains to industry-wide costs and insiders instead observe a change in a cost cI, common
to both ﬁrms. The cost for Firm i in industry I is given by Ci(qi) = (ci + cI)qi. The percent change
12

in proﬁtability of Firm i with respect to a ∆cI increase in industry-wide costs is:
∆πi
π∗
i
=
−2∆cI
a + cj −2ci −cI
(15)
From (15) whenever cj > ci :
|∆πj|
π∗
j
> |∆πi|
π∗
i
(16)
There are several diﬀerences between the industry-wide and competitive cost cases (Inequalities
(15) and (4), respectively). The most important is that the sensitivity of proﬁtability to industry-wide
costs is larger for the weakest (highest idiosyncratic cost) ﬁrms.
Inequality (16) says that (all else
constant) insiders in large ﬁrms would always want to trade on information regarding industry-wide
shocks in the stocks of smaller, more volatile competitors.
This is not always true with competitive
information and provides a link between size and volatility stemming directly from the Cournot setup.
The intuition is analogous to models of informed trading in options (e.g., Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas
(1998)) in that leverage stemming from the product market makes weak competitors’ stocks attractive.9
This link between size and informed trading is also consistent with ﬁndings in Fishe and Robe (2004)
in which stockbrokers who obtained advance copies of Business Week tended to choose smaller ﬁrms
for their pre-announcement trades. Also note that from Inequality (15), the sensitivity of proﬁtability
of the ﬁrm at which the information event occurs is 1
2 of that in the idiosyncratic cost case, further
increasing competitor trading incentives.
Another diﬀerence is that returns are positively correlated
when information pertains to industry-wide costs. Therefore, the top two branches in Figure 2 would
be the choice between selling Firm 1 and selling Firm 2.
In the industry-wide case, the conditions for a pure strategy in competitor trades (analogous to
13

Inequality (14)) becomes:
s1g(1 −θµ) −s2[g(1 −θµ) + θµ
2 ] >
−θµ∆cI
2a −c1 −c2 −2cI
(17)
What distinguishes the industry-wide cost case is that the conditions in Inequality (17) are much
less restrictive on the range of microstructure parameters over which insiders will choose to engage in
competitor trading (i.e., Inequality (14)). As in the competitive information case, the range for which
there exists a pure strategy in competitor trades is strictly increasing in the market share of Firm 1
and decreasing in the market share of Firm 2.
E
Asymmetric Impact of Insider Trading Regulation
While this paper applies to settings in which insider trading is unregulated, the presence of regulation makes the analysis potentially more relevant. Let p represent the expected fraction of own-ﬁrm
trading proﬁts that an insider keeps.
If there are no regulations then p = 1.
Under current laws, p
can be negative (insiders must disgorge proﬁts, plus they face civil penalties of up to three times proﬁt
or avoided loss under 15 U.S.C. 78 u-1).
For negative p, it is clear that, whenever possible, insiders
will want to trade in competing ﬁrms’ stocks.
Consider the more realistic case in which monitoring
is imperfect and p ∈(0, 1). In this context, Equation (14) becomes:
s1g(1 −θµ) −2ps2[g(1 −θµ) + θµ
2 ] >
2p∆cθµ
2a −c1 −c2
(18)
Clearly, regulation shifts information risk to the stocks of competitors, especially when competitors
are weak/small.
This asymmetry may be important to policy makers.
In particular, traditional
insiders face constraints in trading the securities of their own ﬁrms that they do not face when they
choose to trade in the stocks of their competitors (i.e., Section 16 of the Securities and Exchange Act
of 1934 requires own-ﬁrm trade reporting and prohibits both own-ﬁrm short sales and short-swing
14

proﬁt taking).
Also, establishing a breach of a ﬁduciary duty to the source of privately observed
information has been the basis for courts to determine whether illegal insider trading has occurred
(see e.g., Bainbridge (2000)).
Breach of ﬁduciary duty to the ﬁrm (and its shareholders) is clear in
the case of own-ﬁrm trading on the basis of material private information and is less clear in the case
of competitor trading. Legal scholars hold that, under current laws, competitor trading may be legal
in many circumstances.10
In addition to government regulation, ﬁrm-level policies can restrict competitor trading.
In light
of the incentives highlighted in this paper, one might expect ﬁrms to self-regulate if they expected
such incentives to harm shareholders.
To explore whether in practice employment contracts restrict
executives and employees from trading the stocks of competitors, I reviewed the current code of conduct
policies in 60 ﬁrms: all of the Dow 30 stocks and 30 randomly selected from the Nasdaq 100.11 Most
ﬁrms are silent on the issue of competitor trading.12,13
Importantly, where these policies do exist,
they would work against empirical ﬁndings of cross-stock price impact. It also may not be reasonable
to expect strict adherence and enforcement.
For example, Bettis, Coles and Lemmon (2000) report
some evidence (albeit reduced) of own-ﬁrm insider trading during corporate blackout periods.
F
Implications and Motivation for Empirical Analysis
The two primary implications are: (1) competitor trading incentives may exist and (2) incentives
will vary systematically with ﬁrm and industry characteristics as well as type of information ("competitive" versus "industry-wide"). While it is clear that competitor trading incentives can exist when
ﬁrms operate in the same industry, what distinguishes the model is that the imperfectly competitive
industry structure provides both a mechanism through which linkages exist and predictions as to when
competitor trading incentives are likely to be strongest.
To test these, one would ideally identify all
of those traders who are at a given ﬁrm and analyze their entire trading portfolios. Given that these
15

data are unavailable, I infer information content based on the estimated price impact of cross-stock
net order ﬂow and returns to test for consistency with the competitor trading hypothesis.
Informed
trades are not directly identiﬁed; however, the price impact reveals the market maker’s expectation
that trades contain value-relevant information.
Four possible equilibria are discussed in the previous section:
pure strategy in own-ﬁrm trades;
pure strategy in competitor trades; mixed strategy in which insider trades in both own and competitor
stocks with positive probabilities; no trade.
A goal of the empirical analysis is to identify which of
these equilibria is most consistent with actual trading and returns relationships.
In the earnings
announcement setting, an empirical ﬁnding suggesting an informational role for trading and returns
of the announcing ﬁrm and no information contained in those of a competitor implies a pure strategy
equilibrium in own-ﬁrm (in this case, the announcing ﬁrm) trades.
The reverse ﬁnding implies a
pure strategy equilibrium in competitor trades.
Evidence of informative order ﬂow and returns in
both announcers and competitors is consistent with a mixed-strategy equilibrium, in which some
informed trade in the stock of the announcing ﬁrm and some trade in the stocks of competitors. No
information in announcing and competing ﬁrm order ﬂows and returns implies no informed trading.
These relationships are summarized in Table I.
[TABLE I ABOUT HERE]
II
Earnings Announcements and Cross-Stock Net Order Flow and
Returns Relationships
The model in Section I suggests that grouping stocks based on industry and then estimating
cross-stock price impacts of order ﬂow and returns (especially in event settings) might improve our
understanding of cross-stock price discovery.
In the empirical analysis, I infer information content
from cross-stock price impacts, measured over "normal" trading periods as well as the days preceding
16

and following 759 earnings events.
These windows allow me to vary the information environment
to examine whether there are changes in the structure of information diﬀusion when we vary the
location at which private information is observed.
A ﬁnding that the information content of trading
in competitors’ stocks decreases near earnings announcements would be inconsistent with competitor
trading.
Earnings release periods provide a useful basis for testing since information asymmetry during
these periods is likely to be high (in the notation of Section I, θ close to 1) and it is possible to identify
the location at which the event occurred. The assumption that these announcements allow informed
traders to value future cashﬂows is in line with evidence (e.g. Christophe, Ferri and Angel (2004)) of
informed trading in announcing ﬁrms during the days prior to earnings announcements. Many ﬁrms
engage in self-regulation and restrict own-ﬁrm trades by insiders prior to earnings announcements
(see Bettis, Coles and Lemmon (2000)).
Competitor trading might be most evident during these
pre-announcement "blackout" periods.
In addition, Demarzo, Fishman and Hagerty (1998) show
that the optimal insider trading regulation involves allowing small information-motivated trades and
imposing penalties for large trades. This is important since it suggests that some insider trading will
be allowed and that trading data should reﬂect at least some informationally motivated trades.
The main empirical model is in the spirit of Chan, Chung and Fong (2002) and Easley, O’Hara and
Srinivas (1998).
Both studies investigate the price discovery process across options and underlying
stocks, where the main regression equation of interest is one in which the dependent variable is the
ﬁve-minute change in the stock price.
A
Data and Sample Selection
Industry and Event Selection
The initial sample consists of all common stocks that appear on both CRSP and COMPUSTAT
17

at any time during the period 1993 to 2002. A valid announcement is an earnings announcement by
an NYSE/AMEX ﬁrm that occurs within 90 days of quarter end and which does not occur within two
trading days of an earnings announcement by another ﬁrm in the industry. Industries are deﬁned as
all ﬁrms with the same primary COMPUSTAT 4-digit SIC code.14
Consistent with the information
transfer literature (e.g., Freeman and Tse (1992)), I require announcers and competitors to have
December ﬁscal year ends in order to synchronize quarters. I also require that each industry have at
least eight quarters with valid announcements over the 1993 to 2002 period. Earnings announcement
dates are obtained from COMPUSTAT.15 While earnings release dates for all competitors (including
those listed on the NASDAQ) are used to identify valid announcements, only NYSE and AMEX stocks’
net order ﬂows and returns are analyzed in order to avoid confounding ﬁndings related to diﬀerent
trading mechanisms.
Intraday transactions data are from the Trades and Quotes (TAQ) database. Consistent with prior
studies (e.g., Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas (1998); Chan, Chung and Fong (2002)), I impose an active
trade ﬁlter of 50 trades per day in order to attenuate problems associated with non-synchronous
trading.
From the group of active competitors for a given announcement, one competing ﬁrm is
randomly selected for analysis.16
All announcements in which there is at least one active announcing
and one active competing ﬁrm are included in the ﬁnal sample of 128 industries (4-digit SIC codes)
and 759 valid earnings announcements.
Sample Description and Summary Statistics
There are 398 unique ﬁrms in the sample, occupying 128 diﬀerent industries.
The ﬁrms are
large, with average market capitalization in CRSP NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq Decile 9.
This is due
to selection criteria, in particular the active trade ﬁlter (which eliminates the smallest ﬁrms), but
should not cause important selection bias since within industry variation is important to the analysis,
not size.
Forty ﬁve percent of competing ﬁrms have market shares less than the announcing ﬁrm.
18

Table II provides a summary of price reactions and trading volumes over the ﬁve-day event window
(days −2 to +2).
Abnormal event-period price reactions are deﬁned as the absolute value of the
sum of abnormal returns over the event window dates −2 to +2.
The mean (median) abnormal
price changes during the event window are 6.5% (4.4%) for announcing ﬁrms and 4.9% (3.4%) for
competitors. Pre-event price changes are estimated over days −2 and −1 and exhibit similar variation.
The mean (median) abnormal price changes are 3.2% (1.9%) for announcing ﬁrms; 2.7% (1.9%) for
competitors.
The magnitudes of these price changes suggest that there is information contained in
the earnings announcements and that information begins to be incorporated into prices prior to the
actual announcement date. Consistent with the main model, announcement period price changes are
larger for the 343 announcements in which competitors have smaller market shares than the announcer
(5.9% versus 4.5%).
To provide a description of event-period trading volume, I deﬁne abnormal trading as volume
relative to average daily trading volume over the calendar year ending thirty days prior to each
announcement.
From Table II, volumes in both announcers and competitors appear to increase
during earnings announcement periods.
That these volumes accompany price changes motivates a
closer examination of the information content of trading volumes.
The average dollar volumes in Table II suggest that, on average, competitors’ stocks are more
liquid than those of announcing ﬁrms. Inequality (14) implies that information-based trading is more
likely to occur in the stocks of weak competitors; it also suggests that, all else equal, informed traders
prefer to trade in liquid stocks.
Therefore, careful analysis of cross-sectional variation in the price
impact of trading and returns in competing ﬁrms will need to control for diﬀerences in liquidity.
The data in Table II also indicate that the values of the ﬁrms are sensitive to common information, with the historical return and volume correlations among announcers and competitors are
positive and high, with average historical correlations of approximately .32 for returns and .19 for
19

trading volume.17
The empirical intra-industry information transfer literature (e.g., Foster (1981)
and Freeman and Tse (1992) for earnings announcements; Hertzel (1991) for repurchases; Lang and
Stulz (1992) for bankruptcies; Laux, Starks and Yoon (1998) for dividends; Bittlingmayer and Hazlett
(2000) for litigation) documents that information releases aﬀect the values of both announcers and
competitors. This literature does not consider trading activity in non-announcing competitors in the
periods surrounding announcements. The analysis in this section documents these relationships.
[TABLE II ABOUT HERE]
The next step involves closer (intraday) examination of order ﬂows and returns.
The primary
goal is to characterize cross-stock information transmission during both "normal" and announcement
periods.
The main tests are based on cross-stock net order ﬂow and returns relationships during
benchmark period as well as pre-, post-, and earnings announcement days.
Benchmark observations
are measured over ten trading days (the ﬁve days ending two weeks prior to the announcement and
ﬁve days beginning two weeks following the announcement), since information asymmetry related to
the announcers’ earnings should be lower at these times.18
Construction of Volume and Return Series for the Intraday Analysis
I divide each trading day into 78 successive ﬁve-minute intervals from 9:30 a.m. until 4:00 p.m.
ET. Stock return in interval t is deﬁned as the log ratio of quote midpoints at the end of intervals t
and t−1.
Returns are based on quote midpoints in order to reduce the eﬀects of bid ask bounce.19
I assume that quotes are set symmetrically about the expected value and that they reﬂect all public
information.
Following Chan, Chung and Fong (2002), I calculate net stock trading volume (buyer-initiated
volume minus seller-initiated volume) using the Lee and Ready (1991) trade classiﬁcation algorithm.
As in Chan, Chung and Fong (2002) and Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas (1998), all return and net
20

trade volume variables are standardized using the mean and standard deviation of the series for each
individual stock over each trading day.
Standardization allows for pooling across ﬁrms in order to
increase the power of the empirical tests.
B
Empirical Model
To shed light on the informational role of cross-stock net order ﬂow and returns, I take the basic
econometric approach adapted from Hasbrouck (1991) for the case of multiple securities in Chan,
Chung and Fong (2002).
The interactions between returns and order ﬂow are modeled as a vector
autoregressive system. The main focus is on the null that net order ﬂows in competitors’ stocks have
no information content for announcing ﬁrms’ returns (after controlling for announcing ﬁrms’ net order
ﬂows and lagged returns).20
I estimate the following system:
Rt = α +
k
X
i=0
βiVt−i +
k
X
i=1
γiRt−i +
k
X
i=0
W
X
w=1
βw
i Vt−iDw +
k
X
i=1
W
X
w=1
γw
i Rt−iDw + t
(19)
Vt = κ +
k
X
i=1
δiVt−i +
k
X
i=1
θiRt−i +
k
X
i=0
W
X
w=1
δw
i Vt−iDw +
k
X
i=1
W
X
w=1
θw
i Rt−iDw + υt
(20)
In the above system, Rt is a (2 x 1) return vector [Ra
t Rc
t]0 where superscripts a and c denote
announcers and competitors, respectively; Vt is a (2 x 1) signed net order ﬂow vector [V a
t V c
t ]0.
Rt
is the standardized return over ﬁve-minute return interval t and Vt is standardized net order ﬂow
(buyer-initiated volume minus seller-initiated volume).21
Coeﬃcient matrices (2 x 2) are: βi, γi; δi
and θi.
Superscript W indicates pre-event, event and post-event windows (days −2 to −1, day 0
and days +1 to +2, respectively). The dummy Dw is equal to 1 if the day is in the event window, 0
otherwise. Intercepts (α and κ) and disturbance terms (t and υt) are 2 x 1. Because net order ﬂow
and return series are standardized, errors are assumed to be homoskedastic.
21

Equations (19) and (20) are similar to the standard VAR except that contemporaneous net order
ﬂows appear on the right-hand side in the returns equations; however, only lagged explanatory variables
appear in the net order ﬂow equations. As in Hasbrouck (1991), this is based on the assumption that
net order ﬂow can contemporaneously cause quote revisions, while contemporaneous quote revisions
cannot cause net order ﬂow. Event window interactions are included to allow cross-stock order ﬂow and
returns relationships to vary when the information event is known to have occurred (i.e., near earnings
announcements).
If most price discovery takes place within own-ﬁrm stock, cross-stock coeﬃcients
during the event window (e.g., βc
i + βw
i Dw and γc
i + γw
i Dw in the announcing ﬁrm return equation)
will be zero.
Both pre- and post- event periods are of interest since information asymmetry (and
subsequent price discovery) can exist following public announcements (see e.g., Kim and Verrecchia
(1997)). Consistent with that intuition, in the context of foreign exchange, Evans and Lyons (2002b)
ﬁnd greater price impact of trades when public information is ﬂowing rapidly. These interactions will
be explored in greater depth in the cross-sectional tests (Section E).
C
Main Hypotheses
The two primary predictions from Section I are that competitor trading incentives (1) exist and
(2) will vary systematically with ﬁrm and industry characteristics. Estimation of Equations (19) and
(20) allows for an examination of the ﬁrst implication.
The announcing ﬁrm returns equation, Ra
t
(Equation (19)), is the primary focus of the analysis.
C.1
Announcing Firm Returns
The model in Section I suggests that if information is revealed in the stocks of non-announcing
competitors, βc
i, the coeﬃcients on non-announcing competing ﬁrm net order ﬂow, will be signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from zero.
Because announcing ﬁrm market makers may not directly observe cross-stock
net order ﬂow, they might infer net order ﬂow from observed competitor returns.
In that case, γc
i,
22

the coeﬃcients on non-announcing competing ﬁrm returns, would be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
I interpret empirical ﬁndings of an informational role for either competitor order ﬂow or returns as
evidence consistent with an informational role for trading in competitors’ stocks.
Equation (19) is
estimated to test the following hypotheses:
H0 1:
In the announcing ﬁrm returns equation ( Ra
t ), competing ﬁrm net order ﬂow has no information content. βc
i = 0 i=0,...k
H0 2: In the announcing ﬁrm returns equation ( Ra
t ), competing ﬁrm returns have no information
content. γc
i = 0 i=1,...k
The empirical speciﬁcation allows for variation in cross-stock information ﬂow across event windows. If all learning takes place within own-ﬁrm stock at the time of the announcement then the sum
of the estimated coeﬃcients on competitor order ﬂow and returns for the event windows will be zero.
From Equations (19) and (20):
H0 1w:
βc
i + βw
i Dw = 0 and H0 2w: γc
i + γw
i Dw = 0.
Recall from Equation (19) that subscripts i on coeﬃcients β and γ represent lagged ﬁve-minute
intervals. Because markets are not frictionless, past signed order ﬂows of non-announcing competitors
may also have information content.
There is no ex ante hypothesis regarding the nature of the information contained in the announcements; however, the positive historical return correlation between announcing ﬁrms in the sample
(mean of .32) suggests that industry-wide information content tends to dominate competitive information (γc
i, βc
i > 0).
C.2
Competing Firm Returns
If price discovery takes place across stocks rather than within the context of individual stocks, the
null hypotheses are identical to the announcing ﬁrm tests:
23

H0 3:
In the competing ﬁrm returns equation ( Rc
t), announcing ﬁrm net order ﬂow has no information content. βa
i = 0 i=0,...k
H0 4: In the competing ﬁrm returns equation ( Rc
t), announcing ﬁrm returns have no information
content. γa
i = 0 i=1,...k
For event windows: H0 1w:
βa
i + βaw
i Dw = 0 and H0 2w: γa
i + γaw
i Dw = 0.
C.3
Cross-sectional Considerations
In Section E, I explicitly investigate these predictions by allowing coeﬃcients of the main model
to vary with relative market shares, industry concentration and return correlations as well as both
liquidity and leverage controls.
C.4
Who Trades?
An Interpretation of Cross-stock Information Content
Before presenting the empirical results, I address an important issue regarding the types of traders
whose trades might generate cross-stock information linkages. The main model in Section I describes
insiders as those who privately observe an information event when it occurs at a particular ﬁrm
(these could be traditional insiders, employees, analysts following a ﬁrm, etc.). Traders either directly
observe the information event or they are uninformed.
In reality, it may be that some traders gain
informational advantages by observing trades by informed agents and that their subsequent trades
generate cross-stock linkages.
While these "sophisticated traders" have an informational advantage,
they are initially uninformed.
Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult to determine whether informative trades
are being made by insiders, as deﬁned in Section I, or by sophisticated traders. However, what matters
is the location (stock) in which these traders choose to transact, not how a particular trader becomes
informed. If sophisticated traders choose to make cross-stock trades, given their superior information,
they would facilitate information transmission in ways that are consistent with the main model.
24

Importantly, if sophisticated traders learn from the trades of traditional insiders, the insiders and
sophisticated traders will diﬀer only in the extent to which their trades in a particular ﬁrm are subject
to regulatory scrutiny. Asymmetric regulation (e.g., Section 16 constraints on own-ﬁrm trades) implies
that whenever it is optimal for a traditional insider to trade in the stock of the announcing ﬁrm, it
must also be optimal for a sophisticated trader to do so. The reverse does not necessarily hold. One
can then interpret an empirical ﬁnding that information ﬂows from the stock of a competing ﬁrm to
the announcing ﬁrm as evidence of competitor trading by either (i) insiders, as described in Section I,
or (ii) both insiders and sophisticated traders.
D
Competitor Trading Incentives? Results of the Cross-Stock Spillover Analysis
The results of estimation of Equations (19) and (20) are presented in Tables IIIa and IIIb.
The
discussion focuses on benchmark results and pre- and post-event period interactions.
Event-day
results are not emphasized due to variation in timing of the announcements (i.e., some announcements
occur between 9:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., so event day 0 will contain both pre- and post-announcement
trades).
D.1
Announcing-Firm Returns Equation
The estimated coeﬃcients on competing ﬁrm order ﬂow and returns in the announcing ﬁrm equation
(Ra
t , Equation (19)) are of greatest interest. Consistent with the maintained hypothesis, the results in
Table IIIa provide evidence that trading and returns in competing ﬁrms’ stocks have explanatory power
for the stocks of announcing ﬁrms, even after controlling for contemporaneous and lagged announcingﬁrm order ﬂow and lagged announcing-ﬁrm returns. This is important since it is often assumed that
price discovery takes place within a single security rather than through interaction across related
markets.22
Further, the coeﬃcients on the event-period interactions show that cross-stock learning
continues even during periods in which it is known that an information event has occurred at the
25

announcing ﬁrm.
In fact, the insigniﬁcant estimates of event-window interaction terms indicates
that the cross-stock learning remains largely unchanged in the aggregate sample. Another important
observation from the tables is that the magnitudes of the estimated coeﬃcients decline with lag length,
suggesting a rapid incorporation of information into prices.
[TABLE IIIa ABOUT HERE]
Note that the model is estimated using 6 lags; however, only 3 are reported in the tables (for
brevity). Six lags are chosen based on examination of autocorrelations and cross-autocorrelations and
for consistency with prior studies.23
One potential concern is the possibility that any observed price
impacts are reversed over longer lags, leading the truncation at six lags to produce spurious results.
The observed declining magnitudes of the estimated coeﬃcients in the table, at least in part, address
this concern.
D.2
Competitor Returns Equation
The results from the competitor returns equation are presented in Table IIIb and are qualitatively
similar to the results in the announcing ﬁrm equation.
Order ﬂow equations (20) are estimated but
not reported (for brevity) since returns equations are the central focus.
[TABLE IIIb ABOUT HERE]
D.3
Joint Tests, Direction of Information Flow and Benchmark Comparison
In addition to the individual cross-stock coeﬃcients, their joint signiﬁcance is of interest.
Table
IV presents the sums of the estimated coeﬃcients on competing ﬁrm returns and net order ﬂow from
the announcing ﬁrm returns Equation (19). I also present sums of the coeﬃcients on announcing-ﬁrm
returns and order ﬂow from the competing-ﬁrm returns equations.
I test the joint null hypothesis
that the sums of the cross-stock coeﬃcient estimates are not statistically diﬀerent from zero.
To
26

provide further insight into the direction of information transmission, I also test the cross-equation
restriction that the cross-stock price impacts of order ﬂow and returns are the same for announcers and
competitors: (1)
6
X
i=0
βc
i −
6
X
i=0
βa
i = 0 and (2)
6
X
i=0
γc
i −
6
X
i=0
γa
i = 0. If the diﬀerence in the magnitudes
of these estimated coeﬃcients is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero, then evidence is consistent with a
ﬂow of information from the stocks of one group of ﬁrms to another.
Consistent with competitor trading, Table IV indicates that information ﬂows via both returns
and order ﬂows in competitors’ stocks even when an information event is known to have occurred at
a particular ﬁrm.
Event-window interactions indicate that announcing-ﬁrm order ﬂow does have a
larger cross-stock price impact during the pre-event period, but (importantly) there is no corresponding
decrease in the cross-stock price impact of competitor order ﬂow.
During this pre-event period the
cross-stock price impact of announcing-ﬁrm returns decreases and order ﬂow increases, suggesting that
market makers expect more information from trades prior to the announcement.
Competitor order
ﬂow and returns remain informative for announcing-ﬁrm stock returns.
The results in Table IV indicate that competitor order ﬂow actually becomes more informative
during the post-event period.
This could be a result of information from trading in the sense of
superior processing of information contained in the announcement (e.g., in Kim and Verrecchia (1997))
as opposed to traditional “informed/insider trading” on non-public information.
[TABLE IV ABOUT HERE]
Table IV presents pooled results for all events and announcer-competitor pairs.
I also divide the
sample in half according to the relative market shares of the announcer and competitor.
Results
are in Table V. Panel A shows results of estimating the structure of information transmission when
competitors are relatively small and Panel B shows results for relatively large competitors.
It is
evident that the structure of price discovery changes during the event period and relative size plays an
important role. In the benchmark period, information tends to ﬂow via returns from relatively large
27

ﬁrms to relatively small ones, whereas information from order ﬂow is transmitted in both directions
regardless of relative size.
The returns ﬁndings are consistent with the ﬁndings in Hou (2003) that
returns on large ﬁrms lead returns on small ﬁrms within the same industry.
During the pre-event
period, there appears to be greater information transmission via order ﬂow and less transmission via
returns between announcers and smaller competitors. This is consistent with market makers expecting
to learn more from order ﬂow during periods in which information asymmetry is high.
While the
sign of the estimated coeﬃcient on the pre-event window interaction with small-competitor order ﬂow
is positive, as predicted (i.e., that there is informed trading in the stocks of smaller competitors),
it is not signiﬁcant at conventional levels.
For larger competitors, there are no signiﬁcant changes
during the pre-event period; however, during the post-event period, there is actually an increase in
the informativeness of competitor order ﬂow.
This is somewhat surprising, but may be related to
the liquidity of the stocks of larger competitors. The cross-sectional analysis in the next section will
control for liquidity.
[TABLE V ABOUT HERE]
To summarize, the main conclusion from the announcing-ﬁrm returns equation is that competingﬁrm order ﬂow and returns convey information for announcing-ﬁrm returns, even after controlling for
contemporaneous and lagged own-ﬁrm net order ﬂow and lagged own-ﬁrm returns.
This cross-stock
information transmission is evident even during periods in which an information event is known to
have occurred at the announcing ﬁrm.24
E
Cross-Sectional Relationships
The results in the previous section are important since they are consistent with the competitor
trading incentives described in Section I.
However, beyond an informational role for trading in
competitors’ stocks, the model presented in Section I also suggests that competitor trading will vary
28

with ﬁrm market shares and the type of information expected to be contained in the announcement
("competitive" versus "industry-wide"). For a deeper analysis of the process by which information is
incorporated into the prices of related securities, I re-estimate the announcing-ﬁrm returns equation
(Ra
t ), allowing the estimated coeﬃcients on competitor order ﬂow and returns to vary with relative
market shares, industry concentration, return correlations (measured ex ante).
I also control for
diﬀerences in liquidity and leverage.
The model is speciﬁed as follows:
Ra
t = δX +
6
X
i=0
βc
ixV c
t−iX +
6
X
i=0
3
X
w=1
βcw
ixwV c
t−iXDw +
6
X
i=1
γc
ixRc
t−iX +
6
X
i=1
3
X
w=1
γcw
i Rc
t−iDw+
6
X
i=0
βa
i V a
t−i +
6
X
i=0
3
X
w=1
βaw
i V a
t−iDw +
6
X
i=1
γa
i Ra
t−i +
6
X
i=1
3
X
w=1
γaw
i Ra
t−iDw + t
(21)
The speciﬁcation is the same as Equation (19), but a vector X of cross-sectional variables and the
associated coeﬃcients have been added.
The components of X are: 1, relative market share, HHI,
return correlation, relative liquidity and relative debt.
1. RHSARE is relative market share, deﬁned as the (log) ratio of year t−1 shares of sales in the
industry to competitor share.
2. HHI is industry concentration, deﬁned as the sum of squared market shares in industry i
during year t−1.
3. RETC is the stock return correlation of the announcers and competitors, calculated with
daily data for the year ending thirty days prior to the earnings announcement.
4. RLIQ is relative liquidity, deﬁned as the (log) ratio of daily turnover in the competitor
stock to announcer stock during the year ending thirty days prior to the announcement.
29

5. RDEBT is relative debt, deﬁned as the (log) ratio of announcing-ﬁrm leverage to the
leverage of the competing ﬁrm. Leverage ratios are deﬁned as total debt divided by book
value of equity in year t−1.
Based on the hypothesis that relatively weak ﬁrms are attractive venues for information-based
trades, I expect that relative market share will increase the information content of competing-ﬁrm
net order ﬂow and returns.
I also expect higher cross-stock information content when the returns
of the announcers and competitors tend to be highly correlated.
Here, historical return correlation
is a proxy for the relative amounts of industry-wide versus competitive information.
I also include
industry HHI since I expect cross-stock information content from competitors in more concentrated
industries.
I control for liquidity and leverage with the RLIQ and RDEBT interactions.
Informed
traders may prefer to trade in more liquid stocks, implying less competitor stock information content
when announcing-ﬁrm stock is relatively liquid; on the other hand, equilibrium price impacts of trade
in illiquid stocks will be greater if it is possible that information-based trades will occur in those
stocks.
Ex ante, this suggests that it is important to control for liquidity; however which of these
eﬀects dominates is an empirical question. The model presented in Section I assumes all-equity ﬁrms.
Because capital structure will impact stock price volatility, I include a relative leverage variable to
control for diﬀerences in volatility associated with leverage.
Table VI presents the results.
The standard errors on estimated coeﬃcients are noisier due to
the number of parameters being estimated; however, the results indicate that cross-sectional characteristics are important.
There are several important observations.
First, the results from the
pre-announcement period suggest that when the market share of the announcer is large relative to
the competitor, competitor order ﬂow becomes more informative.
This is consistent with the crosssectional predictions in Section I.
Interestingly, the reverse holds for returns.
That is, when announcers are relatively large, there is less cross-stock information ﬂow in competitor returns. It may
30

be that public information is quickly reﬂected in larger stocks’ returns (consistent with the ﬁndings
in the cross-stock return autocorrelation literature e.g., Lo and MacKinlay (1990); Badrinath, Kale
and Noe (1995); Sias and Starks (1997)), whereas information from trades can ﬂow in the opposite
direction.
Second, the expected type of information matters.
During the benchmark period, the estimated
coeﬃcients on the historical return correlation interaction are positive and signiﬁcant for both order
ﬂow and returns.
In fact, this proxy for relative amount of industry-wide versus competitive information is the most important determinant of cross-stock information transmission during “normal”
periods.
During the pre-event period, this sign actually switches and more competitive information
matters.
It might be that competitive information becomes relatively more important near earnings
announcements.
Finally, the most signiﬁcant cross-sectional diﬀerences are related to the changes of the pre-event
period.
During the post-event period, estimated coeﬃcients on the cross-sectional interactions are
insigniﬁcant, with the exception of market share.
After the information is released to the public,
there is less cross-stock information from the trades in relatively small competitors.
[TABLE V ABOUT HERE]
III
Conclusions
In this paper, I present a simple model of informed trading in which asset values are derived
from imperfectly competitive product markets and information events occur at individual ﬁrms.
Information-based trades can occur in the stocks of ﬁrms other than the ﬁrm at which an information event occurs.
The primary cross-sectional implication is that when information events occur
at dominant, large market share ﬁrms, insiders are more likely to make information-based trades in
the stocks of competitors.
The intuition for this result is that ﬁrms with large market shares are
31

less vulnerable to shocks, making them less attractive locations for information-based trades. A second prediction is that the informed trader’s trading location decision also depends on the content of
privately observed information ("competitive" versus "industry-wide").
The empirical investigation examines the hypothesis that informed trade may occur in stocks of
competitors. In particular, for a sample of 759 earnings announcements, I use aggregate trade data to
examine cross-stock net order ﬂow and returns relationships. The most important ﬁnding is that even
during announcement periods, trading and returns in competitors’ stocks have information content
beyond that contained in own-ﬁrm order ﬂow and returns. This is consistent with competitor trading.
While the strongest cross-sectional evidence is that information type ("competitive" versus "industrywide") determines the informativeness of cross-stock trading and returns, there also is some evidence
that relative market shares play a role in pre-announcement price discovery.
32

Notes
1The terms "informed traders" and "insiders" refer to all traders who are informed when an information event occurs at a given ﬁrm.
Broadly, this would include corporate insiders, employees,
their tippees and analysts following the ﬁrm who have access to information before it is released to
the market.
2In practice, while little is known regarding the extent to which competitor trading occurs, there
is anecdotal evidence.
Consider a Wall Street Journal article pointing to an information leak regarding the development of a medical device by Boston Scientiﬁc.
In the hours prior to the public
announcement, trading in Boston Scientiﬁc was halted, but Johnson & Johnson shares declined 2.5%
on high trading volume. In addition, "there was an even sharper drop in the same period of shares of
SurModics Inc., a smaller company that supplies an important component of J&Js." WSJ 9/18/2003
C3.
3There is a small theoretical literature on informed trading in multiple stock settings, where securities have correlated fundamentals (e.g., Subrahmanyam (1991); Gorton and Pennacchi (1993);
Caballe and Krishnan (1994); Bhattacharya, Reny and Spiegel (1995)).
This paper diﬀers in focus
from these in that I examine the role of product markets in generating the correlated fundamentals
and implications of varying the location (ﬁrm) at which private information is observed.
4Program trading has become increasingly important, with average weekly volume as a percentage
of NYSE volume up from 19 in 1999 to 57% in 2005 (source: NYSE.com). See Harris, Soﬁanos and
Shapiro (1994) for relationships between program trading and price movements.
5Following the adoption of Regulation Fair Disclosure in October 2000, analysts are less likely to
have access to ﬁrms’ material nonpublic information.
6Rights to future T-period cashﬂows might be a more realistic interpretation. Because the solution
to the T-period game is the same as the one-shot solution, a single production period is assumed.
7This can be extended to include insiders at Firm 2.
The resulting intuition regarding trading
incentives is the same. I present the basic case for purposes of exposition.
8Examples can be found in, e.g., Henderson and Quandt (1980).
9Back (1993) shows a distinct informational role for options in that they increase the types of
signals the market receives.
33

10 See e.g., Bainbridge (2000); Ayres and Bankman (2001); Ayres and Choi (2002).
Ayers and
Bankman (2001) note that the default rule when ﬁrms are silent on the issue of competitor trading by
employees is unclear. While not the focus of this study, competitor trading by ﬁrms is legal.
11Policies are as of May 2006 and are possibly tighter than restrictions during the 1993 to 2002
period (following Sarbanes Oxley in 2002).
12 Trading on material information in the stocks of rivals is explicitly restricted in 12 of 60 cases (6
each of Dow and Nasdaq-100 ﬁrms). This is substantially fewer than the 18 cases in which customers,
suppliers and partners are explicitly mentioned. The codes of an additional 18 ﬁrms do not speciﬁcally
mention competitors but might be interpreted to include rivals.
Vague statements or silence on the
issue might exist to provide ﬁrms with some discretion in blocking competitor trading.
I would like
to thank the referee for this point and for motivating this line of inquiry.
13In their conﬂict of interest statements, I ﬁnd explicit mention of ownership in competitors in 35
of 60 cases.
Firms care about levels of holdings, but silence and broad language governing trading
implies they care less about gains made from acquiring/disposing of competitors’ stock. The allowed
ownership ranges are large (usually between 1 and 5% of the competitors’ shares outstanding or 10 to
25% of wealth) and may not constrain employee trading gains. It is also signiﬁcant that seven ﬁrms
prohibit short positions in own-ﬁrm stock by employees.
Gains from shorting competitors would be
possible, as there are no examples of shorting restrictions in any other ﬁrm’s securities.
14Financial institutions and conglomerates (SIC codes 6000-6299, 6600-6999 and 9997) are excluded.
15Where COMPUSTAT dates are unavailable, I/B/E/S dates are used. Announcement dates (and
times) are conﬁrmed via a Factiva newswire search. Announcements in which news dates and COMPUSTAT/IBES dates diﬀer by more than one day are deleted. Otherwise, newswire dates are used.
The author gratefully acknowledges Thompson Financial for providing the earnings announcement
data as part of a broad academic program to encourage earning expectations research.
16The model in this paper includes only two alternatives for trading location. Most industries have
several competitors and informed traders may choose to transact in several stocks (or in options).
Analyzing only one competitor’s stock would bias results against a ﬁnding of signiﬁcant information
content of non-announcing ﬁrm order ﬂow and returns.
17Correlations measure average co-movement and potentially understate competitor trading opportunities since an informed trader would know the type of privately observed information and the
34

correct cross-stock trading directions.
18The pre-event benchmark is based on ﬁndings in Chae (2005), which reports abnormally low ownﬁrm turnover beginning on day -10 and continuing through day -3 relative to earnings news.
The
post-event benchmark assumes that announcement-related uncertainty is resolved within 10 days.
19If the bid and ask quotes are not updated simultaneously, the bid-ask bounce is not entirely
eliminated and quote midpoints will exhibit a portion of the bounce. However, two points should be
noted: (1) potential problems are reduced relative to transactions prices; and (2) this would primarily
impact estimated autocorrelations in own-ﬁrm returns rather than cross-stock relationships.
20While diﬀerent in focus and methods, the commonality in liquidity literature suggests the importance of order ﬂow beyond own-ﬁrm stock.
Using 15 broad industry classiﬁcations, Harford and
Kaul (2005) ﬁnd that both aggregate market index and industry order ﬂows explain returns and that
market index order ﬂows are more important on average.
Chordia et al. (2000) report larger coeﬃcients on industry variables than market variables for 3 of 5 measures of liquidity.
Note that there
are substantial diﬀerences between these studies and the empirical model in this paper.
In Harford
and Kaul (2005) the only explanatory variables are order ﬂows (i.e., all lagged returns are excluded).
In addition, industry and market index order ﬂows are calculated by summing the number of trades
across stocks. This measure is less relevant to the current paper since it under-weights small ﬁrms’
impact. Chordia et al. (2000) measure variation in liquidity, not returns.
21The model is also estimated using net trades, rather than net volume.
The R-square for the
returns regressions using trades is substantially higher (.17 versus .14), but results are not qualitatively
diﬀerent. Net volume results are presented, following the literature.
22The importance of own-security order ﬂow and lagged returns has been well-documented across
a range of security markets (see e.g., Evans and Lyons (2002) for foreign exchange markets).
23I estimated the model over longer intervals (up to 10 lags). The conclusions are unchanged.
24I re-estimated Equations (19) and (20) for several subsamples:
"high event-period price reaction" announcements; pre- and post- NYSE minimum tick reductions (eighths to sixteenths in 1997
and to one penny in 2001); and the 119 cases in which the announcements are the ﬁrst quarterly
announcements in the industry.
While there is some variation in the magnitude of the coeﬃcients
across subsamples, the evidence of cross-stock learning is robust.
35

References
Aboody, David and Baruch Lev, 2000, Information asymmetry, R&D and insider gains, Journal of
Finance 45, 2747-2766.
Allen, Jeﬀrey W. and Gordon M. Phillips, 2000, Corporate equity ownership, strategic alliances, and
product market relationships, Journal of Finance 55, 2791-2815.
Anthony, Joseph H., 1988, The interrelation of stock and option market trading volume data, Journal
of Finance 43, 949-961.
Ayres, Ian and Joseph Bankman, 2001, Substitutes for insider trading, Stanford Law Review 54,
235-294.
Ayres, Ian and Stephen Choi, 2002, Internalizing outsider trading, Michigan Law Review 101, 313-408.
Badrinath, S. G., Jayant R. Kale and Thomas H. Noe, 1995, Of shepherds, sheep, and the crossautocorrelations in equity returns, Review of Financial Studies 8, 401-30.
Back, Kerry, 1993, Asymmetric information and options, Review of Financial Studies 6, 435-472.
Bainbridge, Stephen M., 2000, "Insider Trading," in The Encyclopedia of Law & Economics 772-812
(Vol. III, Edward Elgar Publishing).
Bettis, Carr, Jeﬀrey Coles and Michael Lemmon, 2000, Corporate policies restricting trading by
insiders, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 191-220.
Bhattacharya Utpal, Philip J. Reny and Matthew Spiegel, 1995, Destructive interference in an imperfectly competitive multi-security market, Journal of Economic Theory 65, 136-70.
Biais, Bruno and Pierre Hillion, 1994, Informed trading in stock and options markets, Review of
Financial Studies 74, 743-780.
36

Bittlingmayer, George and Thomas W. Hazlett, 2000, DOS Kapital: Has antitrust action against
Microsoft created value in the computer industry? Journal of Financial Economics 55, 329-359.
Brander, James A. and Tracy R. Lewis, 1986, Oligopoly and ﬁnancial structure: The limited liability
eﬀect, American Economic Review 76, 956-970.
Caballe, Jordi and Murugappa Krishnan, 1994, Imperfect competition in a multi-security market with
risk-neutrality, Econometrica 62, 695-704.
Cao, Henry, Zhiwu Chen and John Griﬃn, 2005, The information content of option volumes prior to
takeover announcements, Journal of Business 78, 1073-1109.
Chae, Joon, 2005, Trading volume, information asymmetry, and timing information, Journal of Finance
60, 413-442.
Chakravarty, Sugato, Huseyin Gulen and Stewart Mayhew, 2004, Informed trading in stock and option
markets, Journal of Finance 59, 1235-1258.
Chan, Kalok, 1992, A further analysis of the lead-lag relationship between the cash market and stock
index futures market, Review of Financial Studies 5, 123-152.
Chan, Kalok, Peter Y. Chung and Wai-Ming Fong, 2002, The informational role of stock and option
volume, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1949-1975.
Chevalier, Judith A. and David S. Scharfstein, 1996, Capital-market imperfections and countercyclical
markups: Theory and evidence, American Economic Review 86, 703-25.
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity, Journal
of Financial Economics 56, 3-28.
37

Christophe, Stephen E., Michael G. Ferri and James J. Angel, 2004, Short-selling prior to earnings
announcements, Journal of Finance 59, 1845-1876.
DeMarzo, Peter M., Michael Fishman and Kathleen M. Hagerty, 1998, The optimal enforcement of
insider trading regulations, Journal of Political Economy 106, 602-32.
Dufour, Alfonso and Robert F. Engle, 2000, Time and price impact of a trade, Journal of Finance 55,
2467-98.
Easley, David and Maureen O’Hara, 1987, Price, trade size and information in securities markets,
Journal of Financial Economics 19, 69-90.
Easley, David, Maureen O’Hara and P.S. Srinivas, 1998, Option volume and stock prices: Evidence
on where informed traders trade, Journal of Finance 53, 431-465.
Evans, Martin and Richard Lyons, 2002a, Order ﬂow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Political
Economy 110, 170-80.
Evans, Martin and Richard Lyons, 2002b, Time-varying liquidity in foreign exchange, Journal of
Monetary Economics 49, 1025-1051.
Finnerty, Joseph E., 1976, Insiders and market eﬃciency, Journal of Finance 31, 1141-1148.
Fishe, Raymond P.H. and Michael A. Robe, 2004, The impact of illegal insider trading in dealer and
specialist markets: evidence from a natural experiment, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 461-88.
Fishman, Michael J. and Kathleen M. Hagerty, 1992, Insider trading and the eﬃciency of stock prices,
Rand Journal of Economics 23, 106-22.
Foster, George, 1981, Intra-industry information transfers associated with earnings releases, Journal
of Accounting and Economics 3, 201-32.
38

Freeman, Robert N. and Senyo Y. Tse, 1992, An earnings prediction approach to examining intercompany information transfers, Journal of Accounting and Economics 15, 509-23.
Glosten, Lawrence and Paul Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market
with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71-100.
Gorton, Gary and George G. Pennacchi, 1993, Security baskets and index-linked securities, Journal of
Business 66, 1-27.
Hansen, Robert G. and John R. Lott, Jr., 1995, Proﬁting from induced changes in competitors’ market
values: The case of entry and entry deterrence, Journal of Industrial Economics 43, 261-76.
Harford, Jarrad and Aditya Kaul, 2005, Correlated order ﬂow: Pervasiveness, sources, and pricing
eﬀects, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 29-55.
Harris, Lawrence, 1989, The October 1987 S&P 500 stock-futures basis, Journal of Finance 44, 77-99.
Harris, Lawrence, George Soﬁanos and James E. Shapiro, 1994, Program trading and intraday volatility, Review of Financial Studies 7, 653-685.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1991, Measuring the information content of stock trades, Journal of Finance 46,
179-207.
Hasbrouck, Joel and Duane J. Seppi, 2001, Common factors in prices, order ﬂows and liquidity, Journal
of Financial Economics 59, 383-411.
Heﬂin, Frank, K.R. Subramanyam and Yuan Zhang, 2003, Regulation FD and the ﬁnancial information
environment: Early evidence, Accounting Review 78, 1-37.
Henderson, James M., Richard M. Quandt, 1980, Microeconomic Theory : A Mathematical Approach,
3rd Edition (McGraw-Hill, New York).
39

Hertzel, Michael G., 1991, The eﬀects of stock repurchases on rival ﬁrms, Journal of Finance 46,
707-716.
Hou, Kewei, 2003, Information diﬀusion and the lead-lag eﬀect in stock returns, Working Paper, Ohio
State University.
Jaﬀe, Jeﬀrey F., 1974, Special information and insider trading, Journal of Business 47, 410-428.
Jain, Neelam and Leonard J. Mirman, 2000, Real and ﬁnancial eﬀects of insider trading with correlated
signals, Economic Theory 16, 333-353.
Jeng, Leslie A., Andrew Metrick and Richard Zeckhauser, 2003, Estimating the returns to insidertrading: A performance-evaluation perspective, Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 453-71.
Johannes, Laura and Ron Windslow, 2003, Johnson & Johnson Shares Fall After Leak of Study on
Rival , Wall Street Journal, September 18, C3.
Kim, Oliver and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1997, Pre-announcement and event-period information, Journal
of Accounting and Economics 24, 395-419.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-35.
Lakonishok, Josef and Inmoo Lee, 2001, Are insider trades informative? Review of Financial Studies
14, 79-111.
Lang, Larry H. and Rene M. Stulz, 1992, Contagion and competitive intra-industry eﬀects of bankruptcy announcements, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 45-60.
Laux, Paul, Laura T. Starks and Pyung Sig Yoon, 1998, The relative importance of competition
and contagion in intra-industry information transfers: An investigation of dividend announcements,
Financial Management 27, 5-16.
40

Lee, Charles and Mark Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data, Journal of Finance
46, 733-746.
Lo, Andrew W. and Craig A. MacKinlay, 1990, When are contrarian proﬁts due to stock market
overreaction? Review of Financial Studies 3, 175-205.
Madhavan, Ananth, Matthew Richardson and Mark Roomans, 1997, Why do security prices change?
A transaction-level analysis of NYSE stocks, Review of Financial Studies 10, 1035-1064.
Maksimovic, Vojislav and Sheridan Titman, 1991, Financial policy and reputation for product quality,
Review of Financial Studies 4, 175-200.
Masson, Robert T. and Ananth Madhavan, 1991, Insider trading and the value of the ﬁrm, Journal of
Industrial Economics 39, 333-353.
Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1986, Insiders’ proﬁts, costs of trading and market eﬃciency, Journal of Financial
Economics 16, 189-212.
Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1998, Investment Intelligence from Insider Trading (The MIT Press, Cambridge).
Sias, Richard W. and Laura T. Starks, 1997, Return autocorrelation and institutional investors, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 103-131.
Stephan, Jens A. and Robert E. Whaley, 1990, Intraday price change and trading volume relations in
the stock and options markets, Journal of Finance 45, 191-220.
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, 1991, A theory of trading in stock index futures, Review of Financial
Studies 4, 17-51.
41

IV
Appendix
This appendix provides additional discussion of the model presented in Section I.
A1.
Mixed Strategies α(0,1)
The analysis and intuition for the mixed-strategy case is almost identical to the α = 0 case. Recall
that if the conditions for a pure strategy in competitor trades do not hold, there are two possibilities:
(1) pure strategy in own-ﬁrm trades; or (2) a mixed-strategy equilibrium.
For the intuition behind
a mixed-strategy equilibrium, consider a case in which the expected sensitivity of ﬁrm value to the
private information is equal across the two securities.
If all of Firm 1’s insiders choose to trade in
own-ﬁrm stock, the market maker’s quotes will take into account full informed participation in Stock
1 and Stock 2’s quoted spreads would reﬂect no expected informed participation. This would give at
least some of Firm 1’s insiders incentive to trade in Stock 2.
After observing a low signal regarding ﬁrm-speciﬁc costs, Firm 1’s insiders will trade in Firm 2’s
stock with positive probability if:
(V H
2 −V L
2 )
V ∗
2
> (V H
1 −V L
1 )f(1 −θµ)
V ∗
1 f(1 −θµ) + δV L
1 θµ
(A1)
The argument is as follows: Let α = 1 (pure strategy in own-ﬁrm trades). If, given that all insiders
trade in Stock 1, returns from trade in Stock 2 are greater than own-ﬁrm returns, then it must be that
α < 1. When α = 1, returns to trade in Stock 1 (given a low signal) are:
b1 −V L
1
b1
=
(1 −δ)(V H −V L
1 )f(1 −θµ)
(δV L
1 + (1 −δ)V H
1 )f(1 −θµ) + δV L
1 θµ = (1 −δ)(V H
1 −V L
1 )f(1 −θµ)
V ∗
1 f(1 −θµ) + δV L1
1 θµ
(A2)
For Stock 2, returns are:
V L
2 −a2
a2
= (1 −δ)(V H
2 −V L
2 )
(δV L
2 + (1 −δ)V H
2 ) = (1 −δ)(V H
2 −V L
2 )
V ∗
2
(A3)
42

¥
Given that the conditions for a mixed strategy equilibrium are satisﬁed, the equilibrium α∗for the
ﬁrst trade of the day is:
α∗= f(V H
1 −V L
1 )[(1 −θµ)gV ∗
2 + θδµV L1
1 ] −g(V H
1 −V L
1 )f(1 −θµ)V ∗
1
θδµ[g(V H
2 −V L
2 )V L
1 + f(V H
1 −V L
1 )V L
2 ]
(A4)
Substituting product market parameters into (A1) provides conditions for a mixed-strategy equilibrium
that are analogous to Inequality (14):
s1[f(1 −θµ) + θµ1
2 )] −2s2f(1 −θµ) >
2∆cθµ
2a −c1 −c2
(A5)
Informed competitor trading is more likely when own ﬁrms have large market shares. Conditions for
a pure strategy in own-ﬁrm trades are analogous, but Inequality (A5) is reversed.
A2.
Industry HHI
The within-industry market share result in Inequality (14) also has between-industry implications.
Consider two industries identical in all respects except the marginal cost of the lowest-cost ﬁrm, Firm
L. Market share is decreasing in c, so the lowest-cost ﬁrm will have sI
L > 1
2. A standard measure of
industry competitiveness is the Hirschman-Herﬁndahl Index (HHI), the sum of squared market shares.
Higher HHI suggests a less competitive industry. In the Cournot example:
HHI = s2
L + (1 −sL)2 = F(sL(cL, cH))
(A6)
This is strictly increasing in sL for sL greater than 1
2.
If cL decreases, both HHI and competitor
trading incentives increase. Between industries, all else equal, the range of microstructure parameters
for which there will be a pure strategy in competitor trades is increasing in industry concentration
(HHI).
43

 
 
t = -1 
t = 1 
t = 2 
t = 3 
Nature 
chooses 
whether to 
reveal c1 to 
Firm 1’s 
insiders.  If 
information is 
revealed, Firm 
1’s insiders 
observe a 
perfect signal 
of c1.   
Product 
market 
entry 
game 
played.  
Firms 
raise 
outside 
equity for 
productive 
assets. 
Stock market 
trading day.  
There are M 
rounds of 
trading over 
the course of 
the day.   
Cost (c1) is 
publicly 
announced.   
T period 
production 
begins.  
Profits 
realized in the 
product 
market are 
returned to 
shareholders 
as dividends.   
t = 0 
Figure 1.  Timeline 
This figure shows the timeline of events. 

Information
Event θ
No
Information
Event (1-θ)
Low Signal 
δ
High Signal 
(1-δ)
Informed µ
  U
  f Sell Stock 1
 f Buy Stock 1
Uninformed (1-µ) 
 (1-µ)
µ
  U
  g Buy Stock 2
 g Sell Stock 2
 αH Buy Stock 1
(1-αL) Buy Stock 2
 αL Sell Stock 1
(1- αH) Sell Stock 2
  U
 
Figure 2.  Structure of Stock Trading: Firm-Specific (Competitive) Information Event 
This figure gives the structure of information revelation and stock market trading.  With probability θ, nature reveals a perfect signal of future 
own-firm costs to Firm 1's insiders.  The signal reveals a low state with probability δ and a high state with probability (1-δ).  Fractions µ and 
(1-µ) traders are informed and uninformed, respectively.  Of the (1-µ) uninformed, fractions f buy/sell Stock 1 and g buy/sell Stock 2.  
Uninformed nodes U are equal and 2f+2g = 1.  Fractions αL and αH are the informed traders who choose to trade in Stock 1 after observing a 
low signal and high signal, respectively. 

Cross-stock information content? 
Own-Firm Order 
Flow 
Competitors’ Order Flow 
Type of Equilibrium
Pure Strategy in Announcer Stock
Yes
No
Pure Strategy in Competitor Stock
No
Yes
Mixed Strategy 
Yes
Yes
No trade
No
No
Empirical Implications
This table presents the four possible equilibrium strategies for informed traders:  pure 
strategy in own-firm trades; pure strategy in competitor trades; mixed strategy, in which 
informed trader trades in both own and competitor stocks with positive probabilities; no 
trade.  "Yes" and "No" indicate whether returns and order flow of announcing and 
competing firms are predicted to have information content across stocks during periods in 
which information events occur at individual firms.  Note that the main model suggests an 
informational role for order flow across own- and competing firms; however, because order 
flow may not be directly observable across stocks, returns may also have cross-stock 
information content.
Table I

Mean
Median
Std. Dev
Mean
Median
Std. Dev
Volume and Returns
Avg. Daily Volume ($000) 
27,593
9,700
51,229
32,889
12,738
62,282
Avg. Daily Trades
446
208
790
501
232
775
Event Period Abnormal  Price Change (%)
0.14%
0.14%
0.09
0.29%
-0.06%
0.06
|Event Per. Abnormal Price Change| (%)
6.46%
4.43%
0.07
4.86%
3.43%
0.05
Pre-Event Abnormal  Price Change (%)
0.26%
-0.10%
0.07
0.13%
0.07%
0.04
|Pre-Event Abnormal Price Change| (%)
3.16%
1.92%
0.06
2.70%
1.92%
0.00
Event Period Abnormal Trades
1.37
1.19
0.94
1.14
1.02
0.58
Pre-Event Abnormal Trades
1.43
1.24
0.95
1.14
1.01
0.62
Event Period Abnormal Volume
1.56
1.29
1.81
1.19
1.01
0.63
Pre-Event Abnormal Volume
1.24
0.98
2.31
1.19
0.96
0.85
Industry and Firm Characteristics
Firm Market Share
0.18
0.13
0.18
0.21
0.15
0.19
Industry HHI
0.2594
0.2190
0.1671
0.2594
0.2190
0.1672
Trading Volume Correlation with Announcer
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.186
0.177
0.155
Return Correlation with Announcer
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.316
0.292
0.175
Equity Market Capitalization ($M)
6,427
2,090
10,701
9,010
3,111
23,948
Table II
This table summarizes the sample of announcers and competing firms.  There are 759 valid announcements in 128 industries (4-Digit SIC codes).  
For each valid announcement, I require at least one actively traded competitor on the NYSE or AMEX.   Trading volume and price changes 
(returns) are based on CRSP data.  Trade data are from TAQ .  Event period volumes, price changes and trades are calculated over days -2 to +2 
relative to the announcement day. "Pre-Event" volumes, trades and price changes are calculated over days -2 and -1.  Abnormal price changes are 
based on market models estimated over the benchmark 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the announcement.  Trading volume and return 
correlations are calculated over the same period. Event period abnormal trading volume is defined as [Ve/VB] where Ve is average daily event 
period volume and VB is benchmark daily volume.  Event period abnormal trades are defined as [Te/TB].  Market shares and industry HHI (sum of 
sqared market shares of all COMPUSTAT firms in the same 4-digit SIC code as the announcing firm) are based on year t-1 total sales.
Summary of Trading Volume, Returns and Firm Characteristics
Announcing Firms
Competitors

Explanatory 
Variables
Estimated 
Coefficient
t-value
Estimated 
Coefficient
t-value
Estimated 
Coefficient
t-value
Estimated 
Coefficient
t-value
Intercept
0.001
0.78
Rt-1
-0.052***
-37.43
0.021***
6.19
0.044***
8.89
0.019***
5.64
Rt-2
-0.028***
-20.08
0.008**
2.52
0.024***
4.81
0.010***
2.88
Rt-3
-0.016***
-11.38
0.005
1.55
-0.002
-0.34
0.009***
2.65
Vt
0.342***
288.29
0.010***
3.43
-0.045***
-11.47
-0.011***
-3.96
Vt-1
0.033***
25.71
-0.008***
-2.61
-0.011**
-2.47
-0.001
-0.25
Vt-2
0.003**
2.40
-0.003
-1.05
-0.004
-0.91
-0.003
-1.04
Vt-3
0.000
-0.36
0.000
-0.15
0.002
0.49
-0.006*
-1.79
RCt-1
0.021***
15.49
0.000
-0.10
-0.009*
-1.95
-0.003
-0.98
RCt-2
0.013***
9.77
0.000
-0.01
-0.008*
-1.68
0.000
-0.08
RCt-3
0.007***
5.29
-0.001
-0.16
0.000
-0.02
-0.002
-0.57
VCt
0.026***
22.04
-0.003
-1.03
-0.007*
-1.75
-0.003
-0.88
VCt-1
-0.004***
-2.85
-0.001
-0.26
0.009***
2.09
0.005*
1.71
VCt-2
-0.003**
-2.49
0.002
0.48
0.004
0.84
0.004
1.32
VCt-3
0.001
0.69
-0.002
-0.68
0.000
-0.08
-0.001
-0.47
Adjusted RSquare
0.1417
Event Window Interactions
All Periods (Including Benchmark)
Pre-Announcement Period
Table III(a)
This table presents regression results where the dependent variable is announcing firm return over 5-minute interval t.  Independent variables are lagged returns and both 
lagged and contemporaneous order flows in announcing and competing firms.  R t and RC t denote announcer and competitor returns, respectively.  They are defined as 
log(P t /P t-1 ), where P t is the quote midpoint at the end of 5-minute interval t.  Order flows are denoted V t and VC t and are defined as buyer- minus seller-initiated volume.  
All variables are standardized using mean and standard deviation of returns and order flows for each firm over each trading day.  The full set of equations (estimated 
separately by OLS) are:  
Signed Order Flow and Returns of Announcing and Competing Firms 
Dw is a dummy vector indicating event window (pre-event, event day and post-event).  Benchmark periods are 10 trading days:  5 days ending two weeks prior to the 
announcement and 5 days beginning two weeks following the announcement.  The pre-announcement period are days -2 and -1 relative to the announcement.  Postannouncement period are days +1 and +2.  * denotes .1 significance level,  ** denotes .05 significance level and  *** denotes .01 significance level.  There are 772,418 
observations.  The model is estimated using 6 lags; however, only results from lags 0 to 3 are included in the table (for brevity). 
Event Date
Post-Announcement Period
Dependent Variable=R t , Announcing firm
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
6
6
6
6
w
w
w
w
t
t
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i
t-i
6+i,w
t-i
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
7+i
t-i
7+i,w
t-i
t
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
R , RC = α + 
β R +
β
R D +
β
RC +
β
RC D +
V +
V D +
γ
VC +
γ
VC D +ε
γ
γ
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
6
6
6
6
w
w
w
w
t
t
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i
t-i
6+i,w
t-i
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i
t-i
6+i,w
t-i
t
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
V , VC = κ + 
δ R +
δ
R D +
δ
RC +
δ
RC D +
θ V +
β
θ D +
θ
VC +
θ
VC D +υ
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑

Explanatory 
Variables
Estimated 
Coefficient
t-value
Estimated 
Coefficient
t-value
Estimated 
Coefficient
t-value
Estimated 
Coefficient
t-value
Intercept
0.001
0.74
Rt-1
0.024***
17.51
-0.008**
-2.26
-0.002
-0.40
-0.005
-1.52
Rt-2
0.012***
8.79
0.002
0.58
-0.002
-0.37
0.002
0.68
Rt-3
0.009***
6.82
-0.007**
-1.96
-0.005
-0.97
0.001
0.23
Vt
0.024***
19.84
0.001
0.26
-0.003
-0.66
-0.006*
-1.94
Vt-1
-0.002
-1.54
0.002
0.71
0.000
0.08
-0.001
-0.23
Vt-2
-0.009**
-2.28
0.001
0.40
0.002
0.44
-0.003
-0.91
Vt-3
-0.001
-0.66
-0.001
-0.31
0.003
0.61
0.003
0.92
RCt-1
-0.054***
-38.56
0.005
1.43
0.015***
3.37
0.004
1.30
RCt-2
-0.027***
-19.69
-0.002
-0.52
0.006
1.30
0.004
1.24
RCt-3
-0.015***
-10.83
-0.003
-0.87
0.002
0.43
-0.001
-0.36
VCt
0.342***
286.07
-0.009***
-3.06
-0.005
-1.26
-0.001
-0.18
VCt-1
0.027***
20.83
0.004
1.41
-0.005
-1.16
0.002
0.77
VCt-2
0.004***
3.06
-0.002
-0.60
-0.007
-1.56
-0.003
-1.04
VCt-3
-0.002
-1.34
-0.002
-0.60
-0.001
-0.26
0.000
0.10
Adjusted RSquare
0.1410
This table presents regression results where the dependent variable is competing firm return over 5-minute interval t.  Independent variables are lagged returns and both lagged 
and contemporaneous order flows in announcing and competing firms.  R t and RC t denote announcer and competitor returns, respectively.  They are defined as log(P t /P t-1 ), 
where P t is the quote midpoint at the end of 5-minute interval t.  Order flows are denoted V t and VC t and are defined as buyer- minus seller-initiated volume.  All variables are 
standardized using mean and standard deviation of returns and order flows for each firm over each trading day.  The full set of equations (estimated separately by OLS) are:  
Dw is a dummy vector indicating event window (pre-event, event day and post-event).  Benchmark periods are 10 trading days:  5 days ending two weeks prior to the 
announcement and 5 days beginning two weeks following the announcement.  The pre-announcement period are days -2 and -1 relative to the announcement.  Post-announcement 
period are days +1 and +2.  * denotes .1 significance level,  ** denotes .05 significance level and  *** denotes .01 significance level.  There are 772,418 observations.  The model 
is estimated using 6 lags; however, only results from lags 0 to 3 are included in the table (for brevity). 
Signed Order Flow and Returns of Announcing and Competing Firms 
Table III(b)
Event Date
Post-Announcement Period
Dependent Variable=RC t , Competing firm
Event Window Interactions
All Periods (Including Benchmark)
Pre-Announcement Period
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
6
6
6
6
w
w
w
w
t
t
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i
t-i
6+i,w
t-i
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
7+i
t-i
7+i,w
t-i
t
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
R , RC = α + 
β R +
β
R D +
β
RC +
β
RC D +
V +
V D +
γ
VC +
γ
VC D +ε
γ
γ
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
6
6
6
6
w
w
w
w
t
t
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i
t-i
6+i,w
t-i
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i
t-i
6+i,w
t-i
t
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
V , VC = κ + 
δ R +
δ
R D +
δ
RC +
δ
RC D +
θ V +
β
θ D +
θ
VC +
θ
VC D +υ
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑

All Periods
Pre-Event Interaction
Event Day Interaction
Post-Event Interaction
Returns
To Announcer From Competitor 
0.056a
-0.001
-0.028b
-0.011
From Announcer To Competitor
0.061a
-0.020b
-0.006
-0.003
Difference
-0.005
0.019
-0.022
-0.008
Order Flow
To Announcer From Competitor 
0.020a
0.001
0.011
0.016b
From Announcer To Competitor
0.016a
0.014c
0.007
-0.005
Difference
0.004
-0.012
0.003
0.021a
The dependent variable is 5-minute return.  Independent variables are lagged returns and both lagged and contemporaneous order flows in announcing 
and competing firms.  R t and RC t denote announcer and competitor returns, respectively.  Announcer and competitor order flows are denoted V t and 
VC t and are defined as buyer- minus seller-initiated volume.  All variables are standardized using mean and standard deviation of returns and order 
flows for each firm over each trading day.
Superscript a corresponds to a rejection of the null hypothesis at the .01 significance level; b represents the .05 significance level; and c represents the 
.10 significance level. 
"All periods"  are all observations from both the benchmark and event periods.  The benchmark period is defined as the 5 trading days ending 2 weeks 
prior to the announcement and 5 trading days beginning two weeks following the announcement.  Pre-event days are days -2 to -1 relative to the 
announcement date; event day is day 0; post-event days are days +1 and +2.   "To Announcer from Competitor" indicates information flow from order 
flow/returns in the competing firm to the announcer (coefficients on competing firm order flow/returns in the announcing firm returns equations).  
"From Announcer to Competitor" indicates information flow from order flow/returns in the announcing firm to the competitor.
Table IV
Joint Significance of Event Window-Varying Coefficients
This table presents the sum of the estimated coefficients on cross-stock order flow and returns from the announcer and competitor returns equations.  
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
6
6
6
w
w
w
t
t
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i
t-i
6+i,w
t-i
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
i=6; w=3
6
w
7+i
t-i
7+i,w
t-i
t
i=0
i=0;w=1
R , RC = α + 
β R +
β
R D +
β
RC +
β
RC D +
V +
V D 
+
γ
VC +
γ
VC D +ε
γ
γ
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑

All Periods
Pre-Event Interaction
Event Day Interaction
Post-Event Interaction
PANEL A:  SMALL COMPETITORS
Returns
To Announcer From Competitor 
0.038a
-0.023c
-0.002
-0.010
From Announcer To Competitor
0.079a
-0.037a
0.002
0.001
Difference
-0.041a
0.014
-0.004
-0.011
Order Flow
To Announcer From Competitor 
0.017a
0.016
-0.008
0.003
From Announcer To Competitor
0.009c
0.024c
0.007
0.001
Difference
0.008
-0.008
-0.014
0.003
PANEL B: LARGE COMPETITORS
Returns
To Announcer From Competitor 
0.072a
0.017
-0.050a
-0.012
From Announcer To Competitor
0.046a
-0.006
-0.012
-0.006
Difference
0.026a
0.023
-0.038
-0.006
Order Flow
To Announcer From Competitor 
0.022a
-0.011
0.026c
0.026b
From Announcer To Competitor
0.021a
0.006
0.007
-0.010
Difference
0.001
-0.017
0.019
0.036b
"Small (Large) Competitors" are those firms with market shares that are smaller (larger) than announcing firms.  D is a vector of dummy variables indicating pre-event period, 
event and post-event windows (w = 1 , 2 and 3 respectively).  For announcing firm returns, the null hypotheses are ∑i β6+i = 0  and  ∑i γ7+i = 0.  Similarly, for competing firm 
returns, the null hypotheses are ∑ i βi  = 0  and  ∑i γi  = 0.  "All periods"  are all observations from both the benchmark and event periods.  The benchmark period is defined as the 
5 trading days ending 2 weeks prior to the announcement and 5 trading days beginning two weeks following the announcement.  Pre-event days are days -2 to -1 relative to the 
announcement date; event day is day 0; post-event days are days +1 and +2.   "To Announcer from Competitor" indicates information flow from order flow/returns in the 
competing firm to the announcer (coefficients on competing firm order flow/returns in the announcing firm returns equations).  "From Announcer to Competitor" indicates 
information flow from order flow/returns in the announcing firm to the competitor.
Superscript a corresponds to a rejection of the null hypothesis at the .01 significance level; b represents the .05 significance level; and c represents the .10 significance level. 
Table V
Joint Significance of Event Window-Varying Coefficients (by Relative Size)
The dependent variable is 5-minute return.  R t and RC t denote announcer and competitor returns, respectively.  Announcer and competitor order flows are denoted V t and VC t 
and are defined as buyer- minus seller-initiated volume.  All variables are standardized using mean and standard deviation for each firm over each trading day.
This table presents the sum of the estimated coefficients on cross-stock order flow and returns from the announcer and competitor returns equations:
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
6
6
6
6
w
w
w
w
t
t
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i
t-i
6+i,w
t-i
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
7+i
t-i
7+i,w
t-i
t
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
R , RC = α + 
β R +
β
R D +
β
RC +
β
RC D +
V +
V D +
γ
VC +
γ
VC D +ε
γ
γ
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑

All Periods (including 
Benchmark)
Pre-Event
Event Day
Post-Event
Returns 
∑βi,d
0.068
-0.182
0.033
-0.090
Interactions (Variable*∑β i,d ):
Relative Market Share (RSHARE )
-0.011
-0.083*
0.058
-0.029
Industry HHI (HHI )
0.013
-0.059
0.020
-0.020
Relative Liquidity (RLIQ )
-0.016
-0.015
0.019
-0.031
Relative Debt (RDEBT )
-0.021
-0.083
0.107
-0.033
Return Correlation (RETC )
0.133***
-0.007
0.031
0.019
Order Flow
∑γi,d
-0.013
0.150
-0.018
0.091
Interactions (Variable*∑γ i,d ):
Relative Market Share (RSHARE )
-0.001
0.022**
-0.017
-0.019*
Industry HHI (HHI )
0.003
-0.023
0.005
-0.008
Relative Liquidity (RLIQ )
-0.013
0.055**
0.024
0.004
Relative Debt (RDEBT )
-0.016
0.030
-0.045
-0.004
Return Correlation (RETC )
0.064***
-0.116**
-0.004
-0.002
Adjusted R-Square
0.142
Table VI
Information Content of Competitor Order Flow and Return:  Cross-Sectional Analysis
This table presents the sum of the estimated coefficients on competitor order flow and returns from the announcer returns equation, with interaction variables:
Event Window Interactions
R t and RC t denote announcer and competitor returns, respectively (based on 5-minute quote midpoints).  Order flows are denoted  V t and VC t and are defined 
as buyer- minus seller-initiated volume.  D is a vector of dummy variables indicating pre-event period, event and post-event windows (w = 1 , 2 and 3 
respectively).  Pre-event days are days -2 to -1 relative to the announcement date; event day is day 0; post-event days are days +1 and +2.
Relative market share (RSHARE ) is defined as the ratio of year t-1 announcing firm shares of sales in the industry to competitor share.  Relative liquidity (RLIQ ) 
is ratio of announcer to competitor turnover.  Return correlation (RETC ) is the daily stock return correlation of the announcing and competing firms.  HHI is the 
sum of squared market shares based on year t-1 sales.  Turnover and return correlations are measured using daily data during the year ending thirty days prior to 
the announcement.  Relative leverage is the (log) ratio of competitor leverage to announcer leverage.  Leverage ratios are defined as total debt/(debt plus market 
value of equity in year t-1).   All ratios are calculated as ln(ratio+1).  There are 772,418 valid observations.
Superscript *** corresponds to a rejection of the null hypothesis at the .01 significance level; ** represents the .05 significance level; and * represents the .10 
significance level. 
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
i=6; w=3
6
6
6
6
w
w
w
w
t
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
6+i,X
t-i
6+i,w,X
t-i
i
t-i
i,w
t-i
7+i,x
t-i
7+i,w,X
t-i
t
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=1
i=1;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
i=0
i=0;w=1
R = X + 
β R +
β
R D +
β
RC X +
β
RC XD +
V +
V D +
γ
VC X +
γ
VC XD +ε
δ
γ
γ
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
