 
i
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading Styles and Trading Volume 
 
 
 
 
 
Stefan Nagel* 
 
Stanford University and NBER 
 
 
 
 
August 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I thank Viral Acharya, Malcolm Baker, Nick Barberis, Markus Brunnermeier, Elroy Dimson, James Dow, Wayne 
Ferson, Francisco Gomes, Ilan Guedj, Denis Gromb, Jon Lewellen, Chris Malloy, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, 
Jannette Papastaikoudi, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Hongjun Yan, and seminar participants at Boston College, 
Columbia, Dartmouth, Harvard Business School, London Business School, London School of Economics, 
University of Mannheim, MIT, NYU, Stanford, and Yale for comments.  Thanks also to Chris Malloy and 
I/B/E/S for providing data on analyst forecast dispersion. 
*Stanford University, Graduate School of Business, 518 Memorial Way, Stanford, CA 94304, USA. 
Nagel_Stefan@gsb.stanford.edu; http://faculty-gsb.stanford.edu/nagel; Phone 650-724-9762, Fax 650-725-7979. 

 
ii
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading Styles and Trading Volume 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT.  Many investors in equity markets follow trading styles based on 
stock characteristics like firm size or momentum.  Because stocks’ characteristics change 
over time, style investors must rebalance their portfolios to avoid style drift.  In this paper, 
I analyze how the rebalancing trades of style traders affect the cross-section of trading 
volume.  Specifically, I estimate, using mutual fund stock holdings data, how the 
propensity to sell a stock depends on recent changes in stock characteristics.  It turns out 
to be most strongly related to changes in firm size, value, and momentum characteristics.  
The fitted values of the propensity-to-sell model explain a significant portion of the crosssectional variation in total trading volume, controlling for other determinants of volume 
and using instrumental variables to deal with the endogeneity of stock characteristics.  The 
results suggest that style investing is an important source of trading volume.   
 
Keywords: Trading Volume; Style Investing; Mutual Funds 
  
JEL classification: G10, G20 

 
1
1. Introduction 
One striking fact about trading in equity markets is the widespread specialization of investors 
into various kinds of trading styles.  Some professional traders focus on technical analysis and 
quantitative trading strategies; mutual funds specialize into value or growth, small or large-cap stocks; 
and retail investors, too, often follow styles such as momentum or contrarian trading strategies, for 
example (see, e.g., Brown and Goetzmann 1997; Fung and Hsieh 1997; Grinblatt and Keloharju 2001; 
Chan et al. 2002).  The common thread of these “styles” is that investors aim to hold stocks that have a 
few common pre-defined characteristics, such as, say, positive momentum or a high book-to-market 
ratio.   
Style trading has interesting implications for trading volume.  When stocks’ characteristics 
change over time and some stocks drift away from the style target, style investors have to trade to 
discard those stocks that are out-of-line.  The more volatile the characteristic the style is based on and 
the narrower investors’ style focus, the higher the trading volume that is required to maintain a styleconsistent portfolio.  Given the apparent pervasiveness of style investing in equity markets, these 
rebalancing trades of style investors could potentially account for a substantial portion of trading 
volume.  If so, we can hope for two kinds of insights from an investigation of trading styles:  From a 
purely empirical perspective, it could improve our understanding of the determinants of trading 
volume.  From a theoretical perspective, it could point to trading styles as an important channel for 
trading activity, which carries implications for why investors trade (so much)—a question that is often 
seen as a puzzle by researchers, including Black (1986), Ross (1989), and Dow and Gorton (1997).   
To shed light on this issue, I analyze empirically the implications of style trading for the crosssection of trading volume.  The main challenge is to find ways to quantify the extent of style trading 
and its consequences for trading volume.  In this respect, the key innovation in this paper is the 
estimation, using mutual fund portfolio holdings data, of how investors’ propensity to sell a stock 
depends on changes in certain stock characteristics.  The idea is that if many funds follow trading 
styles based on these characteristics, then the more a stock’s characteristics change, the more likely it is 

 
2
that the previous owners will sell because the stock no longer fits into their style category.  To take a 
simple example, when a stock’s price-to-earnings ratio is low, it is likely to be owned by investors 
following a “value” style.  If the price-to-earnings ratio increases, value investors are likely to sell to 
“growth” investors.  I estimate the relationship between the propensity to sell and changes in stock 
characteristics with a multivariate linear probability model.  The estimated model shows that a one 
cross-sectional standard deviation change in the momentum (12-month past returns), value (sales-toprice) and size (market capitalization) characteristic each lead to a marginal increase in the propensity 
to sell by about 3%, measured over an annual period.  One-standard deviation changes in long-term 
growth rate forecasts and past 36-months returns each contribute a further 2%.  These characteristics 
appear to be the most important drivers of style-related trading volume.   
The linear probability model provides a convenient way to aggregate the effects across 
different characteristics.  For each stock in each year, the observed changes in all of the characteristics 
can be used to calculate the fitted propensity to sell.  This fitted propensity to sell should be correlated 
with differences in trading volume across stocks.  Indeed, to the extent that not only mutual funds, but 
also other investors follow trading styles, the propensity-to-sell measure should be correlated with 
cross-sectional differences not only in the volume of trading by mutual funds, but also in overall 
trading volume.  For NYSE and AMEX stocks I find that a one cross-sectional standard deviation 
difference in the propensity to sell measure is associated with a difference in annual turnover of around 
20% to 30%.  For Nasdaq stocks it is about twice that number, consistent with the fact that the recorded 
trading volume on Nasdaq is about twice as high as on NYSE and AMEX due to the different market 
structure.  Compared with the average turnover of about 87% and 174% per year for NYSE/AMEX 
and Nasdaq stocks, respectively, this is a sizeable magnitude.  Apparently, a considerable part of 
trading volume in equity markets is indeed driven by the rebalancing needs of style traders in response 
to changes in stock characteristics.  In fact, this estimate might be conservative, because the 
methodology in this paper is not designed to capture the effects of trading rules operating at high 
frequency—such as various technical trading rules, for example.   

 
3
The results are robust to controlling for other known determinants of cross-sectional 
differences in trading volume, such as volatility, market capitalization, and stock price.  One concern 
that one might have about these results is that trading causes prices to change which in turn leads to 
changes in price-based stock characteristics such as book-to-market or momentum.  Under this 
alternative view, it would be volume that drives changes in characteristics rather than the other way 
round.  Yet, the results still hold up when the propensity-to-sell measure based on all stock 
characteristics is instrumented with a propensity-to-sell measure calculated using only stock 
characteristics that are not price-based, such as book leverage or book return on assets, for example.  
Hence, the correlation between trading volume and the propensity-to-sell measure is not driven by 
reverse causality from volume to prices and price-dependent characteristics.  
In related empirical work researchers have shown that there is abnormal trading volume 
following certain technical trading signals, which may indicate the presence of traders with technical 
trading rules.  Chu and Osler (2004) show that trading volume is abnormally high following “headand-shoulders” patterns in stock prices.  Huddart, Lang, and Yetman (2003) find that there are pikes in 
trading volume when a stock’s price leaves a prior “trading range”.  My analysis in this paper is also 
related to work by Lo and Wang (2000).  Lo and Wang show that there is a factor structure in trading 
volume when investors switch their investments between separating funds, i.e. baskets of stocks.  In 
their setting stocks do not switch between baskets.  This paper, too, is based on the notion that 
investors hold baskets of stocks, defined by some stock characteristics, but it focuses on the trading 
volume effects when stocks, not investors, switch between baskets.  Of course, style-switching by 
investors, for example as in Barberis and Shleifer (2003), could lead to additional trading volume.  
However, while the rebalancing trades of investors with fixed styles can be related empirically to 
changes in stock characteristics, it is not clear how one could isolate empirically the trading volume 
effects of style-switching.  Hence my focus in this paper on the trades arising from fixed trading styles.   
Existing theoretical work is largely silent on trading styles and their implications for volume.  
In one strand of the theoretical volume literature, trading arises from differential or asymmetric 

 
4
information, coupled with trading for liquidity or hedging reasons (e.g., Admati and Pfleiderer 1988; 
Wang 1994; He and Wang 1995).  Because trading styles are based mostly on public information, style 
trading does not readily fit into this framework.  In a different class of models, trading arises from 
differences in beliefs (Varian 1989; Harris and Raviv 1993; Kandel and Pearson 1995).  Differences in 
trading styles could reflect differences in beliefs to the extent that heterogeneity in trading styles arises 
because investors use different data sets, differ in modeling techniques and sophistication, employ 
different heuristics to simplify the decision problem, and therefore come up with different trading 
rules.  In Mullainathan (2002) and Hong and Stein (2003), for example, investors use such simplified 
models to form their beliefs.  This view also fits with the notion in Black (1986) that some investors 
trade one “noise” because they use simple rules of thumb.  However, the pervasiveness of trading 
styles among institutional investors may also have to do with industrial organization and agency issues 
(Massa 2000; Mamaysky and Spiegel 2002; Barberis and Shleifer 2003), which are issues that the 
trading volume literature typically abstracts from (with the exception of Dow and Gorton 1997).  The 
evidence I present in this paper indicates that these institutional arrangements in money management 
may hold clues about the origins of trading volume.   
 
2. Estimating the trading volume effects of style investing 
 
2.1 The propensity-to-sell measure 
The degree to which style investing drives trading volume depends on how many style traders 
there are, how strongly their portfolios are focused on a certain style, and how volatile a stock’s stylerelated characteristics are.  Existing work attempting to measure the extent to which investors engage 
in style investing examines how strongly investors cluster in terms of returns (Brown and Goetzmann 
1997) or in terms of the characteristics of stocks in their portfolios (Wermers 2002).  However, none of 

 
5
these style measures allows a quantitative assessment of how changes in stock characteristics translate 
into rebalancing needs, and therefore trading volume, for style traders.   
My empirical strategy uses the fact that, on average, a stock that experiences a change in a 
style-relevant characteristic tends to move away from its current owner’s style target (e.g., if a “value” 
stock is owned by a “value” investor, mean-reversion in the characteristic implies that it will tend to 
drift towards “growth”).  Hence, the bigger the change in the characteristic, the more likely it is that the 
current owner will sell it.  Of course, this is unlikely to be true in every single case, but it should hold 
on average.  The more style traders there are, and the stronger there style focus, the greater should be 
the average effect of a change in characteristics on the propensity to sell a stock.  
Following this intuition, I use mutual fund portfolio holdings data to estimate how the typical 
mutual fund’s propensity to sell a stock depends on changes in this stock’s characteristics.  More 
precisely, to model how mutual funds j’s selling decisions during period t are related to changes in 
stock i’s characteristics during the same period, I use a linear probability model 
P(sjit = 1| |∆cit|) = αt + β′|∆cit| , 
(1) 
where the indicator variable sijt is a Bernoulli random variable that equals one if all of mutual fund j’s 
holdings of stock i are sold during period t and zero if not.  The vector ∆cit represents the changes in 
stock i’s characteristics during period t and β is a column vector of regression coefficients.  I estimate 
this model with OLS.  Fitted values, ŝit , then provide the probability, conditional on ∆cit, that a current 
owner of stock i will sell it.  A disadvantage of linear probability models can be that some fitted values 
are higher than one or smaller than zero.  However, it turns out that in this application here this never 
happens.  Because coefficients are easier to interpret in a linear model than in a Probit or Logit model, I 
use a linear model.   
In principle, one could also estimate a relationship similar to Equation (1) with each stock’s 
total trading volume as dependent variable.  I use a two-step approach—first estimating (1) with 
mutual fund portfolio holdings data and then using the fitted value to explain total trading volume—

 
6
because of several reasons.  Most importantly, by focusing on quarterly portfolio holdings of mutual 
funds in the first step, we are looking at trades for which we can largely rule out alternative trading 
motivations such as dynamic hedging of derivative exposures, for example.  Moreover, from the prior 
literature, we know that mutual funds tend to follow styles.  These conditions make it more plausible 
that what the regressions pick up is indeed related to style investing, and not some other reason for 
trade.  Testing whether the fitted values from the first step have explanatory power for total trading 
volume in the second step then provides a useful out-of-sample check (given that the share of 
outstanding equity held by mutual funds is relatively small), showing whether the selling propensities 
estimated for mutual funds have any predictive power for what other investors tend to do.  Also, having 
aggregated the changes in all the different characteristics into one fitted value, it is then easier to 
introduce control variables in the second step (without running into multicollinearity problems) and to 
use instrumental variables.  
Instead of using the propensity to sell to estimate equation (1), I could also use the propensity 
to buy.  However, since funds have a much larger universe to choose from in their buying decisions 
compared with their selling decisions (the portfolio holdings data do not include short positions, but 
they are rare for mutual funds anyway, as shown by Almazan, Brown, Carlson, and Chapman 2004).  
The propensity to buy is therefore much smaller on average and harder to estimate than the propensity 
to sell.  
 
2.2 Data  
Estimation of the propensity to sell requires portfolio holdings data, which I obtain from the 
Thomson Financial Mutual Funds (Spectrum) Database.  The database contains quarterly stock-bystock positions of most U.S. mutual funds, and is explained is explained in great detail in Wermers 
(1999).  The timing of holdings is based on the report date (RDATE) in the Thomson database.  For 
those funds that do not report each quarter, I fill in the missing quarter by bringing forward the latest 
available (stale) holdings report, but using current prices.  The vast majority of funds report data at 

 
7
least at the semiannual frequency (see, also, Wermers 1999).  When RDATE and vintage date 
(FDATE) do not agree, Thomson applies a split-adjustment that I undo using split-adjustment factors 
from CRSP to make the data comparable to other observations with the same RDATE. 
I match these quarterly holdings observations with data on stock characteristics from CRSP, 
COMPUSTAT and I/B/E/S.  In principle, one would want to select the stock characteristics that mutual 
funds are known to use as a basis for their trading styles.  There is some guidance from the existing 
literature as to what these characteristics are.  Brown and Goetzmann (1997), Chan et al. (2002), and 
Wermers (2002) show that mutual funds tend to cluster on firm size, measures related to growth or 
glamour (e.g., book-to-market) and momentum; Hotchkiss and Lawrence (2003) find that institutional 
investors differ in their preferences for dividend yield.  However, an exhaustive search has not yet been 
conducted in the literature.  For this reason, I consider a wide range of characteristics and let the data 
speak as to their relevance for mutual funds’ trading styles.   
My initial list of candidate characteristics is drawn up based on the following principles.  First, 
they should be plausibly related to firm value or risk.  The idea here is that investors might most likely 
condition their trading rules on such characteristics.  Second, the characteristics should be continuous 
variables.  This rules out discrete variables such as analyst recommendations or index membership.  
Third, the characteristics should have sufficient time-variation.  Only relatively volatile characteristics 
are likely to be sources of rule-driven trading volume.  For example, while it might seem plausible that 
some investors select firms based on R&D expenses, most firms have quite persistent ratios of R&D 
expenses to sales, making it an unlikely candidate to explain trading volume.  The same is true for 
many other accounting variables. 
Based on this reasoning, I select the following characteristics: Momentum (Return(-12:-1) = 
past 12-month returns; Return(-3:-1) = past 3-month returns), value (or “glamour”) characteristics 

 
8
(Return(-36:-1) = past 36-month return; Sales/MarketCap1), profitability (Earnings/Assets), leverage 
(Liabilities/MarketCap), firm liquidity (Cash/CurrLiab = cash and short-term investments/current 
liabilities), expected growth (LTGrowthForecast = I/B/E/S median long term growth rate forecast), 
yield (DividendYield), risk measures (Beta = past 36-month beta on the value-weighted CRSP index; 
Volatility = one-year sum of squared daily returns), and firm size (MarketCap).  In the end, any prior 
selection of characteristics involves some arbitrary element, but the results are unlikely to be sensitive 
to the exact definition of the characteristics set.  It seems hard to think of other firm characteristics that 
would not be correlated with the chosen ones.  Two additional characteristics (book liabilities/book 
assets and the one-year growth rate in sales) will be used as instruments in some of the tests below.  
For an observation to be included in the tests in a given quarter, availability of valid observations on all 
characteristics, including the two additional instruments, is required.  Because investors are likely to 
select stocks based on the relative rank rather than the absolute level of characteristics, and because the 
cross-sectional distributions of some of the raw characteristics are not well-behaved, I transform all 
characteristics into percentile ranks each quarter.   
Because one-year changes are required for all characteristics, and I/B/E/S long-term growth 
forecasts are not available for a sufficiently large number of stocks before 1983, the sample period 
starts in the first quarter of 1984.  It ends in the fourth quarter of 2002.  The sample includes NYSE, 
AMEX and Nasdaq stocks, excluding primes, scores, and ADRs.  Tests using trading volume reported 
on CRSP, however, are run separately for NYSE/AMEX and for Nasdaq stocks, because trading 
volume figures are not directly comparable due to different market structures (see Atkins and Dyl 
1997).   
In each quarter and for every stock, I use the transformed characteristics to measure changes in 
characteristics (∆cit)—the inputs for the linear probability model—over overlapping annual intervals.  
There are two reasons for this choice of interval: First, some characteristics based on accounting data 
                                                 
1 I use sales/price and not the perhaps more popular book-to-market to avoid having to eliminate observations 
with negative book values. Towards the end of the 1990s there is a fairly large number of firms with negative 
book values, for which the book-to-market ratio is not a meaningful valuation ratio.   

 
9
change only once per year.  Shorter observation intervals would not make much sense for these 
characteristics.  Second, for some funds, the portfolio holdings data are reported at semi-annual or even 
annual frequency only.  Annual observation intervals thus circumvent complications arising from stale 
holdings information.  Correspondingly, the selling indicator variable, sijt, is also measured over annual 
intervals.  More precisely, it equals one if fund j holds zero shares of stock j at time t, but held more 
than zero shares four quarters earlier.  It equals zero, if fund j holds more than zero shares at both time t 
and four quarters earlier.  It is set to missing for fund-stock observations where fund j did not hold a 
position in stock i four quarters earlier.  
 
2.3 Summary statistics 
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample of stocks and mutual funds used in this 
study.  These statistics are time-averaged cross-sectional estimates.  As shown in the bottom line, the 
data requirements leave, on average, 1,730 stocks in the sample, which is about 30% of all eligible 
stocks on CRSP.  Yet, since these stocks tend to be large stocks, they account for about 75% of market 
capitalization.  The average number of mutual funds in the Thomson Financial database that hold at 
least one of these stocks with valid data is 3,788, and the median fund holds 39 stocks satisfying the 
data requirements, while the mean is 25.   
The first set of rows in Table 1 shows statistics on the cross-sectional distribution of mutual 
funds’ mean portfolio characteristics.  Mean portfolio characteristics are the value-weighted average, 
using portfolio weights from the quarterly holdings snapshots, of the characteristics of the stocks held 
by a fund.  The cross-sectional distribution of these mean portfolio characteristics reveals whether 
mutual funds in aggregate have preferences for certain characteristics.  To judge the magnitudes, recall 
that all of the underlying characteristics are transformed to percentile ranks (ranging from 0 to 99).  As 
the first block of rows shows, the mean and median fund seem to have some preference for stocks with 
high past returns, growth stocks (low Sales/MarketCap), high dividend yield, low Volatility, and large 
size.  The 5th and 95th percentile values show that the most dispersion in funds’ characteristics exposure 

 
10
is with respect to forecasted long-term growth and dividend yield.  Such dispersion hints at the 
presence of heterogeneous trading styles.  Alternatively, the dispersion could simply reflect the fact 
that funds are randomly switching between different groups of stocks.  Whether funds persistently stick 
to trading styles cannot be determined from dispersion alone.  
The matrix in the second block shows cross-sectional correlation estimates for stock 
characteristics, cit, (upper triangular part) and funds’ mean portfolio characteristics.  The most salient 
patterns are that return-based characteristics have, not surprisingly, strongly positive correlation; stocks 
with high Sales/MarketCap tend to have low profitability (Earnings/Assets), high leverage 
(Liabilities/MarketCap), and low expected growth (LTGrowthForecast); firms with high profitability 
have high leverage; and high dividend yield stocks tend to have low forecasted growth and low 
volatility and beta.  The multivariate version of the linear probability model that I estimate below 
accounts appropriately for these correlations.  A pairwise comparison of the correlations of funds’ 
mean characteristics and of the correlations of characteristics themselves shows that they are usually 
quite similar.  To provide a specific example, the typical high yield fund also holds stocks with low 
volatility (corr. –0.85), just as the typical high yield stock tends to have low volatility (corr. –0.65).  
Table 2 provides some simple summary statistics for annual trading volume on NYSE/AMEX 
and Nasdaq, as well as a proxy for mutual fund trading volume constructed from the quarterly mutual 
fund holdings data.  This is the data that the propensity-to-sell measure will be asked to explain.  The 
table shows trading volume measured as turnover.  Turnover is calculated as the number of shares 
traded during a month divided by the average of the number of shares outstanding at the beginning and 
at the end of the month.  This monthly turnover is then averaged summed up over 12-month periods.  
Mutual fund selling volume is calculated from the portfolio holdings data.  For each stock i, I compare 
mutual funds’ holdings at time t to those 12 months earlier.  For each fund with non-zero holdings 12 
months earlier, sales are defined as the reduction in the number of shares (split-adjusted) between these 
two dates (zero if no reduction).  Summing all sales across funds, selling volume is then defined as the 

 
11
number of shares of stock i sold by all mutual funds, divided by the number of shares held 12 months 
earlier. 
As can be seen in the table, the (equal-weighted) mean turnover on Nasdaq (174%) is about 
twice as large as on NYSE and AMEX (87%).  This discrepancy reflects the fact that Nasdaq is a 
dealer market where trading volume can be double-counted.  Some researchers therefore divide Nasdaq 
turnover by two to make it comparable to NYSE and AMEX trading volume.2  In this paper, instead, I 
run separate regressions for Nasdaq and NYSE/AMEX data.  With 42%, the turnover of mutual 
funds—in terms of selling volume—is considerably lower.  It is also lower than the turnover of mutual 
fund portfolios reported, for example, in the CRSP mutual funds database, which is around 80% - 90% 
per year over the same sample period.  This partly reflects the fact that the mutual fund trading volume 
proxy is constructed by comparing holdings at annual intervals, which misses intra-year fluctuations in 
holdings and therefore a considerable part of higher-frequency trading volume.   
 
3. Results 
 
3.1 Propensity-to-sell estimates 
Table 3 presents three types of information.  The first column reports the mean absolute 
change in each stock characteristic.  This is a measure for the volatility of each characteristic.  The 
second column shows the coefficient estimates of the linear probability model, Equation (1), when it is 
run as a univariate model, with only one characteristic as an explanatory variable.  The third column 
presents the coefficient estimates of the multivariate version of the model, where all characteristics are 
included jointly (intercepts are omitted in the table).  To make the coefficient estimates easily 
comparable, changes in each stock characteristic are standardized by their average cross-sectional 
standard deviation before running the regressions.  Both the characteristics volatility in the first column 
                                                 
2 See Atkins and Dyl (1997) for a detailed discussion of this practice. 

 
12
and the slope coefficient in the second and third columns are first estimated for each cross-section.  
The table shows the time-averaged estimates.  For the slope coefficient estimates, one could draw 
inference by calculating the standard error from their variation across time.  However, it turns out that 
these standard errors are tiny and negligible for all slope coefficient estimates.  Therefore, to reduce 
clutter, they are not reported in the table.   
Focusing on the first column, it can be seen that the short-term momentum characteristics 
Return(-12:-1) and Return(-3:-1) are the most volatile characteristics.  Their mean absolute change is 
close to 40 (For comparison, recall that characteristics are expressed as percentile ranks ranging from 0 
to 99).  Not surprisingly, the least volatile characteristic is size (MarketCap) with a mean absolute 
change of 8.26.  With mean change of 9.42, the dividend yield is also quite stable over time.  
The univariate regression slopes from the linear probability model in column 2 show that onestandard deviation changes in MarketCap, Liabilities/MarketCap, and Sales/MarketCap are associated 
with the highest increases in mutual funds’ propensity-to-sell.  For example, a one-standard deviation 
change in Sales/MarketCap leads to an increase in the propensity to sell by 7.6%.  The characteristic 
with the smallest impact is Cash/CurrentLiab with a slope coefficient of 1.8%.   
To check whether a linear model provides a sufficiently good approximation, Figure 1 
provides some non-parametric estimates of the relationship between changes in characteristics and the 
propensity-to-sell.  I use a simple binning estimator.  Stocks are binned by the standardized change in 
their characteristic with a bin width of 0.01 standard deviations.  Within each bin, I then calculate the 
equal-weighted mean of sijt.  The time-averages of these quarterly means are shown as solid lines, 
plotted against the (standardized) change in characteristics.  The dotted lines represent two-standarderror bands, calculated from the time-variation of the quarterly means.  It is apparent from these graphs 
that for the three return-based characteristics, there is not much increase in the propensity to sell for 
small changes in characteristics, only for larger changes the slope is steeper.  In contrast, for size 
(MarketCap) the propensity to sell increases quickly with small changes size and then the curve flattens 

 
13
out a bit.  But otherwise the graphs show that there is not too much non-linearity, which suggests that 
the linear model should be a reasonably good approximation.   
The coefficient estimates from the univariate model, however, cannot be used to aggregate the 
propensity to sell across characteristics, because this would ignore correlation among characteristics.  
The multivariate model in column 3 takes this correlation into account.  As a result, the slopes in the 
multivariate model are generally lower than in the univariate model.  For example, the coefficient on 
MarketCap drops from 6.51% to 3.09% but it remains among the characteristics with the highest 
slopes.  The coefficient on Liabilities/MarketCap drops from 7.30% to 0.73%, which indicates that 
most of the univariate slope is driven by correlation with changes in other characteristics, but holding 
those fixed, changes in Liabilities/MarketCap have little impact on the propensity to sell.  In the 
multivariate model, the most important characteristics with the highest slopes are MarketCap, 
Sales/MarketCap, and Return(-12:-1).  Thus, the size, value, and momentum characteristics that the 
previous literature on mutual fund styles has focused on also turn out to be most relevant here in 
explaining mutual funds’ selling decisions.   
While those three characteristics are the most important drivers of the propensity to sell, which 
is the main focus in this paper, size appears to be the single most important one in terms of how 
narrowly mutual funds focus their portfolios.  A one standard deviation move in MarketCap is much 
smaller than for Sales/MarketCap or Return(-12:-1), which means that mutual funds tolerate much less 
dispersion with respect to size in their portfolios compared with value or momentum characteristics.  It 
is also useful to keep in mind that the fact that MarketCap, Sales/MarketCap, and Return(-12:-1) turn 
out to be the most important drivers of the propensity to sell does not mean that funds actually use 
exactly those characteristics for their portfolio decisions.  They might instead use other characteristics 
that are not included here, but that are highly correlated with MarketCap, Sales/MarketCap, and 
Return(-12:-1).  For example, many technical trading signals are likely to be correlated with the 
Return(-12:-1) characteristic.  A stock that switches from being a loser to being a winner stock is also 
likely to break through “trendlines” and experience changes in other technical indicators.  For the 

 
14
purposes of this paper that’s fine.  In that case, the characteristics used here pick up the effects of these 
other unobserved characteristics.   
 
3.2 Explaining the cross-section of trading volume 
I now explore whether the propensity-to-sell estimates from the fitted model help explain the 
cross-section of total trading volume.  The estimation of the propensity-to-sell model has focused on 
mutual funds, because this is the only group of investors for which comprehensive portfolio holdings 
data is available over a long sample period.  However, other classes of investors are also likely to 
engage in style trading.  To the extent that their style trading is similar to that of mutual funds, the 
propensity to sell estimates for mutual funds should be useful to predict overall trading volume in stock 
markets, not just mutual fund trading volume.   
Table 4 presents the results of pooled OLS panel regressions of total turnover on each stock’s 
fitted propensity to sell, which is calculated using the coefficient estimates from the multivariate model 
shown in Table 3.  In addition to the contemporaneous propensity to sell, ŝit, I also use its first lag, ŝit-1, 
as an explanatory variable.  The reason is that investors might react with some delay to changes in a 
stock’s characteristics.  Using only ŝit, which is based on contemporaneous changes in characteristics, 
would ignore the trading volume that arises with a lag.  In addition to ŝit and ŝit-1, some specifications 
also contain stock return volatility (the sum of squared daily returns over the contemporaneous annual 
interval), firm size (beginning of period log of market capitalization), and stock price (beginning of 
period log of price) as control variables.  Lo and Wang (2000) show that these variables are the 
important determinants of trading volume in the cross-section.  For ease of interpretation, all 
explanatory variables, including ŝit and ŝit-1, are standardized to unit cross-sectional standard deviations 
and zero mean within each quarterly cross-section.  In addition, all specifications also contain timeperiod dummies (coefficients not reported).   
Because there is commonality in turnover, as shown by Lo and Wang (2000) and Cremers and 
Mei (2004), the residuals in these regressions are likely to have substantial cross-sectional correlation.  

 
15
Moreover, since turnover is measured quarterly using overlapping annual intervals, there is substantial 
autocorrelation.  To get accurate standard errors in the presence of such cross-sectional and time-series 
dependence in residuals, I use a moving-block bootstrap.  It involves drawing entire blocks of adjacent 
quarterly cross-sections to construct bootstrap samples.  The method is described in detail in the 
appendix.   
Panel A presents the results for NYSE and AMEX stocks.  Regression A.1 contains only ŝit and 
ŝit-1 as explanatory variables.  The point estimate for the coefficients on ŝit and ŝit-1 of 0.18 (std.err. 0.02) 
and 0.08 (std.err. 0.02), respectively, imply that a one-standard deviation increase in ŝit is associated 
with an increase in trading volume of 18% contemporaneously and an additional 8% at a one-year lag.  
The adjusted R2 is about 10%.  Compared with a mean turnover for NYSE and AMEX stocks of 87% 
per year and a cross-sectional standard deviation of 65% per year, these coefficient estimates, taken at 
face value, indicate a relatively large impact of style trading on turnover.  In particular, there are other 
sources of trading activity besides style trading and so one would not expect style trading to account 
for all trading volume.  Some of these other sources of trading activity may also be correlated with 
changes in stock characteristics and hence with ŝit.  Specification A.2 is an attempt to control for such 
other sources of trading activity.  It includes volatility, which can be seen as a proxy for informationbased trading (Karpoff 1987).  The inclusion of size is motivated by the fact that trading volume of 
larger firms is more likely to be affected by index arbitrage and program trading.  Including the level of 
the stock price helps controlling for thin trading of stocks with extremely low prices.  Interestingly, 
including these control variables does not have a major effect on the estimates for the coefficients on ŝit 
and ŝit-1.  With 0.14 (std.err. 0.01) and 0.10 (std.err. 0.01) they are still large.  Specification A.3 
includes a 12-month average of the Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002) analyst forecast dispersion 
measure.  The idea here is that analyst forecast dispersion might proxy for differences in opinion 
among investors other than those that manifest itself as different trading styles.  The results show that it 
is indeed positively related to trading activity, but with an economically small coefficient estimate of 

 
16
0.02 (std.err. 0.01).  It leads to a further small drop in the coefficients on ŝit and ŝit-1 to 0.12 and 0.09, 
respectively.  
Panel B repeats these regressions for Nasdaq stocks.  The results are remarkably similar to the 
NYSE/AMEX ones.  Apart from the fact that coefficients are all a bit more than twice the 
NYSE/AMEX coefficients, there is little difference between Panel A and Panel B.  This difference in 
magnitudes simply reflects the fact that trades on Nasdaq are double-counted, compared with 
NYSE/AMEX.   
In Panel C, for mutual fund trading volume, the coefficients on ŝit and ŝit-1 are smaller than in 
Panel A.  For example, in specification C.1, the coefficient estimates of 0.06 and 0.02, respectively, are 
about one third of the values in Panel A, specification A.1.  Most likely, this difference reflects the fact 
that the mutual fund trading volume proxy is constructed by comparing portfolio holdings snapshots at 
annual intervals.  This misses intra-year trades if a fund purchases and sells shares of the same stock 
multiple times during a year.  Apart from the fact that coefficient estimates are generally closer to zero, 
the results in for mutual fund trading volume are similar to those for total trading volume in Panels B 
and C.   
One potential problem with these OLS regressions in Table 4 is that the propensity-to-sell 
measures on the right-hand side are endogenous.  In particular, one might be concerned that what the 
regressions pick up is not that changes in stock characteristics make style investors trade, but that trade 
occurring for other reasons causes prices to change, which in turn leads to changes in stock 
characteristics that are based on price, such as past returns or the Sales/MarketCap ratio, for example.  
In other words, there could be a reverse causality problem.  I address this concern by instrumenting ŝit 
with the propensity-to-sell measure calculated in the same way, but using only characteristics that are 
not based on price.  I also exclude the analyst growth long-term growth forecast characteristics, 
because analysts might use changes in prices as a signal to update their forecasts.  Specifically, I redo 
the estimation of the multivariate linear probability model using only Earnings/Assets, Cash/CurrLiab, 
one-year sales growth (as a replacement the long-term analyst growth forecasts), Liabilities/Assets 

 
17
(which replaces market leverage).  I then use the fitted value of this modified propensity to sell and its 
lag as instruments, denoted ŝit* and ŝit-1*.  The instruments are correlated with ŝit and ŝit-1, but they are 
not subject to the reverse causality critique and should therefore be valid instruments.   
This instrumental variables strategy should address the concerns about reverse causality in the 
relationship between trading volume and ŝit.  It is important to keep in mind, though, that this does not 
fully resolve all potential endogeneity issues in these regressions.  For example, trading volume and 
volatility are simultaneously determined in the trading process.  Since volatility is endogenous, the 
coefficient estimate on volatility therefore does not have a structural interpretation, and this could also 
have some effect on the coefficient estimates on ŝit and ŝit-1.  Ideally, one would like to have controls 
for the structural causes of trading volume unrelated to style trading, such as information flow, for 
example.  However, lacking a structural model and suitable instruments for the latent variables causing 
volatility and volume there is little more that can be done.   
Table 5 presents the results of the two-stage least squared (2SLS), using ŝit* and ŝit-1* as 
instruments for ŝit and ŝit-1.  The specification of the regression is similar to models A.2, B.2, and C.2 in 
Table 4 (Unreported results show that including forecast dispersion here, too, has little effect).  To get 
the standard errors right in the presence of cross-sectional and auto-correlation of the residuals, I use a 
moving-block bootstrap in similar fashion as for the OLS regressions above.  Panel A shows estimates 
for the sample with NYSE and AMEX stocks.  As can be seen in the table, the point estimates of the 
coefficients on ŝit and ŝit-1 (0.17 and 0.16, respectively) are somewhat larger than with OLS.  However, 
standard errors are larger, too (0.04 and 0.03, respectively).  As a result, the 2SLS point estimates are 
less than two standard errors away from the OLS point estimates.  So there is a lot of uncertainty about 
whether they really are different.  For Nasdaq stocks in Panel B coefficients are also larger than in the 
OLS regressions.  For mutual fund volume in Panel C, the point estimates are almost identical to those 
with OLS in Table 4.  Overall, the 2SLS regressions confirm that ŝit and ŝit-1 have a strong influence on 
the cross-section of trading volume.  The 2SLS results do not give reason to suspect that the positive 
relationship between ŝit and ŝit-1 discovered in the OLS regressions is driven by reverse causality.   

 
18
 
3.3 Subperiod results and out-of-sample tests 
To check whether style trading had an impact on trading volume throughout the sample period, 
Table 6 presents subperiod results, where the sample is split into the 1985 – 1993 and 1994 – 2002 
periods.  In addition, Table 6 also presents out-of-sample results where the multivariate linear 
probability model for the propensity-to-sell measure is estimated in the first subperiod, and the thus 
estimated coefficients are used in the second subperiod to calculate the fitted values, ŝit, used in the 
panel regressions to explain the cross-section of trading volume.  This out-of-sample test should 
address concerns that the linear probability model picks up some spurious, sample-specific correlations 
between characteristics changes and mutual fund trades.  Because mutual fund trades are part of overall 
trading volume, this could then lead to a spurious between ŝit and total trading volume.   
As can be seen in Table 6, the estimates for the coefficients on ŝit and ŝit-1 are somewhat larger 
in the second subperiod (1994 – 2002), both for NYSE and AMEX stocks (Panel A) and for Nasdaq 
stocks (Panel B).  For mutual fund trading volume in Panel C, the coefficient estimates are almost 
identical across subperiods.  A potential explanation for these results is that mutual funds hold a much 
larger fraction of the total market in the second subperiod.  Based on the portfolio holdings data, their 
share of total market equity of the stocks in my sample has increased from about 5% in 1985 to about 
23% at the end of 2002.  If style trading is more prevalent among mutual funds than among other 
investors, or if the estimated propensity-to-sell model would be different for other investors, then, as 
mutual funds’ share of the market and total trading volume goes up over time, one would expect the 
coefficient estimates on ŝit and ŝit-1 to change in the regressions with total trading volume (Panels A and 
B), but not the in regressions with mutual fund trading volume (Panel C).  
Interestingly, the coefficient estimates in the out-of-sample regressions (A.3, B.3, and C.3) are 
similar to those in the in-sample regressions for the same subperiod 1994 – 2002 (A.2, B.2, and C.2).  
This shows that the positive relationship between trading volume and ŝit is not some spurious, insample relationship picked up when the multivariate linear probability model is estimated on the same 

 
19
sample as the panel regressions with trading volume and ŝit.  The fact that the out-of-sample results are 
similar can also be anticipated from the fact that the (unreported) estimates for the linear probability 
model don’t differ much across the two subperiods.  The relationships between changes in 
characteristics and the propensity-to-sell seem to be quite stable over time.  This can also be seen in 
Figure 2, which shows the univariate non-parametric estimates of this relationship, similar to Figure 1, 
but broken up into two subperiods.  The solid lines represent the first subperiod (1985 – 1993), the 
dashed lines represent the second subperiod (1994 - 2002).  The graphs show that for most 
characteristics, the relationship between characteristics changes and the propensity to sell is similar in 
both subperiods.  Overall, the propensity to sell is lower in the second subperiod.  For volatility, growth 
forecasts, and dividend yield, and perhaps also for the returns characteristics, the slopes are somewhat 
steeper in the second subperiod, but other than that there is not much difference across subperiods.   
 
3.4 Further robustness checks 
In additions to those reported in the tables, I have also explored regression specifications that 
include one-year-lagged volatility, lagged annual returns, absolute annual returns as an additional 
volatility measure, and lagged leverage, both with OLS and 2SLS.  Chordia, Huh, and Subrahmanyam 
(2004) show that these variables have additional explanatory power for the cross-section of trading 
volume.  I also find that they are significantly related to trading volume, in particular lagged returns 
and lagged volatility, but including these variables has little impact on the coefficient estimates for ŝit 
and ŝit-1.   
 
4. Concluding remarks 
Style trading is important for the cross-section of trading volume.  The results in this paper 
suggest that one key to explaining trading activity is to understand the forces that make investors 
specialize into diverse style categories and lead them to follow heterogeneous trading rules.  At present 
neither the agency and industrial organization issues that might drive the specialization into styles, nor 

 
20
the notion of fixed trading rules as heuristics in investment decisions have a natural place in theoretical 
models of trading volume.  Models that come closest are perhaps those where portfolios related to, say, 
size or value characteristics serve as hedging portfolios, such as in Lo and Wang (2001) and 
Mamaysky and Spiegel (2002), although it’s not clear that this is the empirically most relevant 
mechanism.  In a different literature, the emergence and evolution of investors’ trading strategies has 
been studied in simulated stock markets with artificial agents that trade against each other.  One of the 
findings in this literature is that certain heterogeneous trading strategies, reflecting heterogeneous 
beliefs, can emerge and co-exist (see, e.g., LeBaron 2000).  While these papers give some hints as to 
what could perhaps drive investors’ heterogeneity in trading styles, it seems that currently our 
theoretical understanding of this heterogeneity is still very limited.  
The attempt in this paper to relate trading volume and style investing can be seen as part of a 
broader effort to use institutional and individual portfolio holdings data to understand why investors 
trade as, for example, in Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000, 2001), Barber and Odean (2001), Dorn and 
Huberman (2003), and Glaser and Weber (2004).  A nice feature of the analysis here in this paper is 
that the connection of style-trading to changes in stock characteristics allows me to explain observed 
total trading volume, not only the trades in the portfolio holdings datasets.  Given the apparent 
importance of heuristics for trading decisions, it seems that much can be learned from further 
investigations of how investors actually behave.  

 
21
Appendix: Moving-Block Bootstrap  
Let the data be a panel consisting of observations on the dependent variable, yit, and a vector of 
explanatory variables, xit, with i = 1, …, N and t = 1, …, T.  Consider a regression model  
yit = αt + β′ xit + εit , 
(2) 
where the residuals, εit, uncorrelated with xit, can be dependent across time, t, and within each crosssection i.  Consider the (OLS or 2SLS) estimator of β, denoted by βT.  Gonçalves and White (2004) 
show that under some weak conditions on the form of temporal dependence one can obtain consistent 
estimates of the standard errors of the linear regression coefficient estimates using a moving-block 
bootstrap (see, also, Künsch 1989; Hall, Horowitz and Jing 1995).  To address both the temporal and 
the cross-sectional dependence in residuals, I draw blocks of entire cross-sections to construct the 
bootstrap samples.  More precisely, the data can be organized into overlapping blocks of temporal 
length L, where block 1 includes the observations {x1t, …, xNt; y1t, …, yNt: t = 1, …, L}, block 2 
includes {x1t, …, xNt; y1t, …, yNt: t = 2, …, L+1}, and so on.  I then sample K = T/L times from these 
T-L+1 overlapping blocks with replacement such that the resulting bootstrap sample, with the K 
sampled blocks concatenated in the order sampled, is of length T in the time dimension.  The j-th 
bootstrap sample is then used to estimate the regression model (OLS or 2SLS) and record the 
coefficient estimates βΤ
j.  The resampling procedure and regression estimation is repeated 1,000 times.  
The variance-covariance of βΤ
j across the bootstrap samples then provides an estimate of the variancecovariance of βT.   
The choice of block size is important to ensure that the variance-covariance estimate is 
accurate.  Since in the setting here most of the autocorrelation comes from the fact that the quarterly 
cross-sections are overlapping annual observation intervals, this suggests that the block size should be 
four quarters at a minimum.  To allow for further autocorrelation, I use 12 quarters (T = 72 quarters for 
the full sample).   
 

 
22
References 
Admati, A.R., and P. Pfleiderer, 1998, A Theory of Intraday Patterns: Volume and Price Variability, 
Review of Financial Studies 1, 3-40.  
 
Almazan, Andres, Keith C. Brown, Murray Carlson, and David A. Chapman, 2004, Why Constrain 
your Mutual Fund Manager?, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming. 
 
Atkins, A., and E. Dyl, 1997, Market Structure and Reported Trading Volume, Journal of Financial 
Research 20, 291-304. 
 
Barber, B.M, and T. Odean, 2001, Boys Will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and Common Stock 
Investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261-292. 
 
Barberis, N., and A. Shleifer, 2003, Style Investing, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 161-199. 
 
Black, F., 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance 56, 529-543. 
 
Brown, S.J., and W.N. Goetzmann, 1997, Mutual Fund Styles, Journal of Financial Economics 43, 
373-399. 
 
Chan, L., H. Chen, and J. Lakonishok, 2002, On Mutual Fund Investment Styles, Review of Financial 
Studies 15, 1407-1437. 
 
Chordia, T., S.-W. Huh, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2004, The Cross-Section of Expected Trading 
Activity, Working paper, UCLA.  
 
Chu, J., and C.L. and Osler, 2004, Microstructual Benefits of Imperfectly Rational Trading, Working 
Paper, Brandeis University.  
 
Cremers, K.J.M., and J. Mei, 2004, Turning Over Turnover, Working Paper, Yale School of 
Management and NYU.  
 
Dorn, D. and G. Huberman, 2003, Talk and Action: What Individual Investors Say and What They Do, 
Working Paper, Columbia University.  
 
Dow, J., and G. Gorton, 1997, Noise Trading, Delegated Portfolio Management, and Economic 
Welfare, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1024-1050. 
 
Diether, K.B, C.J. Malloy, A. Scherbina, 2002, Differences in Opinion and the Cross-Section of Stock 
Returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141. 
 
Fung, W., and D.A. Hsieh, 1997, Empirical Characteristics of Dynamic Trading Strategies: The Case 
of Hedge Funds, Review of Financial Studies 10, 275-302. 
 
Glaser, M., and M. Weber, 2004, Overconfidence and Trading Volume, Working Paper, University of 
Mannheim.  
 
Gonçalves, S., and H. White, 2004, Bootstrap Standard Error Estimation for Linear Regressions, 
Working Paper, UC San Diego.  
 

 
23
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001, What Makes Investors Trade? Journal of Finance 66, 589-616. 
 
Harris, M., and A. Raviv, 1993, Differences in Opinion Make a Horse Race, Review of Financial 
Studies 6, 473-506. 
 
He, H., and J. Wang, 1995, Differential Information and Dynamic Behavior of Stock Trading Volume, 
Review of Financial Studies 8, 919-972. 
 
Hong, H., and J.C. Stein, 2003, Simple Forecasts and Paradigm Shifts, Working Paper, Princeton 
University and Harvard University.  
 
Hotchkiss, E.S., and S. Lawrence, 2003, Empirical Evidence on the Existence of Dividend Clienteles, 
Working Paper, Boston College.  
 
Hall, P., J. L. Horowitz, and B. Jing, 1995, On Blocking Rules for the Bootstrap with Dependent Data, 
Biometrika 82, 561-74.   
 
Huddart, S., M. Lang, and M. Yetman, 2003, Psychological Factors, Stock Price Paths and Trading 
Volume, Working Paper, Pennsylvania State University.  
 
Kandel, E., and N.D. Pearson, 1995, Differential Interpretation of Public Signals and Trade in 
Speculative Markets, Journal of Political Economy 103, 831-872. 
 
Karpoff, J.M., 1987, The Relation between Price Changes and Trading Volume: A Survey, Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 109-126. 
 
Künsch, H.R., 1989, The Jackknife and the Bootstrap for General Stationary Observations, Annals of 
Statistics 17, 1217-41. 
 
LeBaron, B., 2000, Agent Based Computational Finance: Suggested Readings and Early Research, 
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24, 679-702. 
 
Lo, A.W., and J. Wang, 2000, Trading Volume: Definitions, Data Analysis, and Implications of 
Portfolio Theory, Review of Financial Studies 13, 267-300. 
 
Lo, A.W., and J. Wang, 2001, Trading Volume: Implications of an Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing 
Model, Working Paper, MIT. 
 
Mamaysky, H., and M. Spiegel, 2002, A Theory of Mutual Funds: Optimal Fund Objectives and 
Industrial Organization, Working Paper, Yale School of Management.  
 
Massa, M., 2000, Why So Many Mutual Funds? Mutual Funds, Market Segmentation, and Financial 
Performance, Working Paper, INSEAD.  
 
Mullainathan, S., 2002, Thinking Through Categories, Working Paper, MIT.  
 
Ross, S.A., 1989, Discussion: Intertemporal Asset Pricing, in: Theory of Valuation: Frontiers of 
Modern Financial Theory, edited by S. Bhattacharya and G.M. Constantinides, Totowa, N.J., 
Rowman & Littlefield. 
 

 
24
Varian, H.R., 1989, Differences in Opinion in Financial Markets, in C.C. Stone (Ed.) Financial Risk: 
Theory, Evidence and Implications, Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Economic Policy 
Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Kluwer Academic, Norwell, MA. 
 
Wang, J., 1994, A Model of Competitive Stock Trading Volume, Journal of Political Economy 102, 
127-168. 
 
Wermers, R., 1999, Mutual Fund Herding and the Impact on Stock Prices, Journal of Finance 54, 581622. 
 
Wermers, R., 2002, A Matter of Style: The Causes and Consequences of Style Drift, Working Paper, 
University of Maryland. 
 

 
25
Table 1: Summary Statistics 
 
This table shows summary statistics using stocks that have a valid observation on each of the 12 stock 
characteristics in a given quarter.  The sample period runs from the first quarter of 1984 to the last quarter of 
2002.  Stock characteristics are first transformed into percentile ranks ranging from 0 to 99.  For stock-level 
characteristics the unit of observation is a stock.  For fund-level statistics, the unit of observation is a fund.  Mean 
fund characteristics are calculated as a value-weighted (using portfolio weights) average of the characteristics of 
the stocks in a fund’s portfolio each quarter.  The first block of rows shows statistics on the cross-sectional 
distribution of these fund mean characteristics.  The second block shows the sample correlation matrices for 
stocks’ characteristics (upper triangular part) and fund mean characteristics (lower triangular part).  Medians, 
percentiles, and correlations are calculated cross-sectionally each quarter and are then averaged over time.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Return(-12:-1) 
Return(-3:-1) 
Return(-36:-1) 
Sales/MarketCap 
Earnings/Assets 
Liabilities/MarketCap 
Cash/CurrLiab 
LTGrowthForecast 
DividendYield 
Beta 
Volatility 
MarketCap 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cross-sectional distribution of mean characterics of fund portfolios 
 
Mean 
58.35 54.42 62.06
35.93 57.91
42.86 49.00 46.46 59.54 49.58 35.20 83.50
Median 
58.91 54.81 63.11
35.08 59.63
42.26 47.25 44.64 61.66 48.79 31.62 88.82
5th pct. 
36.44 34.59 37.68
13.44 31.90
17.24 30.21 18.44 29.99 24.70 15.21 51.20
95th pct. 
78.11 72.80 82.16
60.51 78.18
71.59 72.77 78.80 85.30 73.82 65.30 97.16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 -- correlation among stock characteristics --  
 
Return(-12:-1) 
 
0.49 0.55
-0.27
0.05
-0.23
-0.04
0.00
0.10 -0.09 -0.22
0.29
Return(-3:-1) 
0.51  
0.28
-0.15
0.03
-0.13
-0.01
-0.03
0.06 -0.03 -0.09
0.16
Return(-36:-1) 
0.61 
0.29  
-0.43
0.30
-0.39
0.03
0.16
0.07 -0.01 -0.23
0.36
Sales/MarketCap 
-0.25 -0.12 -0.47 
-0.31
0.74
-0.42
-0.39
0.13 -0.12 
0.00
-0.30
Earnings/Assets 
0.09 
0.04 0.38
-0.46 
-0.51
0.19
0.10
0.08 -0.01 -0.18
0.21
Liabilities/MarketCap 
-0.23 -0.12 -0.47
0.82
-0.62 
-0.51
-0.51
0.26 -0.20 -0.14
-0.11
Cash/CurrLiab 
0.00 
0.00 0.15
-0.53
0.23
-0.65 
0.34
-0.30 
0.20 
0.27
-0.11
LTGrowthForecast 
0.16 
0.06 0.40
-0.53
0.27
-0.70
0.60 
-0.60 
0.41 
0.50
-0.23
DividendYield 
-0.07 -0.03 -0.20
0.36
-0.07
0.55
-0.63
-0.83 
-0.39 -0.67
0.42
Beta 
0.03 
0.04 0.17
-0.18
0.07
-0.37
0.41
0.67
-0.66  
0.44
-0.07
Volatility 
-0.04 -0.01 0.02
-0.20
-0.13
-0.37
0.59
0.68
-0.85 
0.64  
-0.56
MarketCap 
0.14 
0.07 0.19
-0.17
0.24
0.01
-0.30
-0.34
0.55 -0.25 -0.65 
 
 -- correlation among mean fund characteristics -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
average number of  stocks: 
1730  
average number of stocks per fund:  
39 (mean) 
 
average number of funds: 
3788  
 
 
 
 
 
25 (median) 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
26
Table 2: Cross-Sectional Distribution of Trading Volume (Turnover) 
 
The sample period runs from the first quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 2002.  NYSE/AMEX and Nasdaq 
turnover is computed monthly as the number of shares traded during a month divided by the average of the 
number of shares outstanding at the beginning and at the end of the month.  This monthly turnover is then 
summed over 12-month periods to an annual turnover figure.  Mutual funds selling volume is calculated for each 
stock from the mutual fund portfolio holdings data as the number of shares (split-adjusted) of this stock sold by 
mutual funds during an annual period, divided by the number of shares held by these funds at the beginning of 
the annual period.  The statistics shown in the table are first calculated for each (overlapping) quarterly crosssection and are then averaged over time.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Mean 
Median 
Std.dev. 
5th pctile 
95th pctile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NYSE and AMEX 
87% 
70% 
65% 
23% 
203% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nasdaq 
174% 
127% 
154% 
28% 
476% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mutual funds selling volume 
42% 
39% 
24% 
6% 
87% 
(from quarterly holdings) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
27
Table 3: Changes in Stock Characteristics and Mutual Funds’ Propensity to Sell 
 
The first column reports the mean absolute change in stock characteristics, where the change is calculated for 
each stock in each quarter over an annual period.  Stock characteristics are first transformed into percentile ranks, 
ranging from 0 to 99.  The mean absolute change is first calculated within each overlapping quarterly crosssection, and is then averaged across time.  The second column shows point estimates of the slope coefficients in 
the linear probability model, estimated as a univariate model with the absolute change of only one characteristic 
as the explanatory variable.  The third column shows point estimates for the slope coefficients in the multivariate 
version, where the absolute changes of all characteristics jointly serve as explanatory variables.  The dependent 
variable is an indicator variable, sijt, that equals one if fund j sold all its holdings of stock i during period t, and 
zero otherwise.  The models are estimated first cross-sectionally each quarter across all fund-stock observations, 
and then the coefficient estimates are averaged over time.  Standard errors of the coefficient estimates (not 
reported) are negligibly small.  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
Change in propensity to sell for a onestandard deviation change in characteristcs 
Characteristic 
  
Mean absolute 
change per year
 
Univariate slopes 
(in %) 
  
Multivariate slopes 
(in %) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Return(-12:-1) 
 
38.78 
 
5.83 
 
2.68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Return(-3:-1) 
 
39.03 
 
3.94 
 
1.25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Return(-36:-1) 
 
25.12 
 
5.83 
 
1.94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sales/MarketCap 
 
13.95 
 
7.60 
 
3.30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earnings/Assets 
 
23.65 
 
1.85 
 
1.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Liabilities/MarketCap 
 
13.21 
 
7.30 
 
0.73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash/CurrLiab 
 
17.65 
 
1.80 
 
0.30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LTGrowthForecast 
 
16.45 
 
5.17 
 
2.19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DividendYield 
 
9.42 
 
5.01 
 
1.14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beta 
 
19.25 
 
3.39 
 
1.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Volatility 
 
15.73 
 
3.80 
 
1.67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MarketCap 
 
8.26 
 
6.51 
 
3.09 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
28
Table 4: Explaining the Cross-Section of Trading Volume, OLS Regressions 
 
This table reports results of OLS panel regressions of annual trading volume from CRSP on the propensity to sell, 
ŝit and ŝit-1, calculated as the fitted values from the multivariate linear probability model.  For NYSE/AMEX 
(Panel A) and Nasdaq stocks (Panel B), trading volume is calculated as turnover, i.e., the monthly number of 
shares traded, divided by the average of the beginning and end-of-month number of shares outstanding, and 
summed up over a 12-month period.  Mutual fund trading volume in Panel B is calculated for each stock as the 
number of shares (split-adjusted) of this stock sold by mutual funds during an annual period, divided by the 
number of shares held by these funds at the beginning of the annual period.  Volatility is calculated as the squared 
daily return over an annual period.  Size is the four-quarter lagged market capitalization, and Price is the fourquarter lagged stock price (i.e., both measured at the beginning of the annual period t).  Forecast dispersion is a 
12-month average of the Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002) analyst forecast dispersion measure.  All 
explanatory variables, including ŝit and ŝit-1, are demeaned and standardized to unit cross-sectional standard 
deviation within each quarterly cross-section.  Standard errors shown in parentheses are obtained from a movingblock bootstrap, described in the appendix, which accounts for both cross-sectional and temporal dependence in 
residuals.  The sample period runs from the first quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 2002.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Propensity to sell from fitted linear 
probability model 
 
Control variables 
 
 
  
ŝit 
ŝit-1 
 
Volatility 
Size 
Price 
Forecast 
Dispersion   adj. R2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel A: Total trading volume (turnover), NYSE and AMEX stocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.1 
0.18 
0.08 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.2% 
 
(0.02) 
(0.02) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.02) 
A.2 
0.14 
0.10 
 
0.27 
0.08 
0.19 
 
 
25.2% 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.04) 
(0.01) 
(0.04)  
 
(0.03) 
A.3 
0.12 
0.09 
 
0.35 
0.05 
0.19 
0.02 
 29.1% 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.07) 
(0.01) 
(0.04) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.04) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel B: Total trading volume (turnover), Nasdaq stocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.1 
0.35 
0.17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.5% 
 
(0.04) 
(0.02) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.01) 
B.2 
0.32 
0.25 
 
0.64 
0.60 
0.42 
 
 
30.3% 
 
(0.03) 
(0.03) 
 
(0.15) 
(0.05) 
(0.13)  
 
(0.05) 
B.3 
0.26 
0.26 
 
1.03 
0.52 
0.50 
0.04 
 35.0% 
 
(0.04) 
(0.03) 
 
(0.16) 
(0.05) 
(0.14) 
(0.03) 
 
(0.05) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel C: Mutual fund selling volume (turnover, from quarterly holdings data), NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq stocks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
C.1 
0.06 
0.02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.2% 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.01) 
C.2 
0.06 
0.02 
 
0.06 
0.04 
0.03 
 
 
16.1% 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.01)  
 
(0.02) 
C.3 
0.06 
0.02 
 
0.07 
0.02 
0.03 
0.00 
 16.1% 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.02) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
29
Table 5: Explaining the Cross-Section of Trading Volume, 2SLS Regressions 
 
The regressions presented in this table are similar to those of Table 4, but now estimation is done with 2SLS.  
The explanatory variables ŝit and ŝit-1 are instrumented with ŝit* and ŝit-1*, which are calculated in exactly the same 
way as fitted values of the multivariate linear probability model, but using only characteristics that are not based 
on stock price (Earnings/Assets, Liabilities/Assets, Cash/CurrLiab, and one-year sales growth).  All explanatory 
variables, including ŝit and ŝit-1 and the instruments, are demeaned and standardized to unit cross-sectional 
standard deviation within each quarterly cross-section.  Standard errors shown in parentheses are obtained from a 
moving-block bootstrap, described in the appendix, which accounts for both cross-sectional and temporal 
dependence in residuals.  The sample period runs from the first quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 2002.  
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
  
 
Propensity to sell from fitted 
linear probability model 
Control Variables 
 
Instruments 
  
ŝit 
ŝit-1 
 Volatility 
Size 
Price 
 
ŝit* 
ŝit-1* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel A: Total trading volume (turnover), NYSE and AMEX stocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First Stage: 
X 
 
 
0.31 
-0.18 
0.02 
0.20 
0.07 
 
 
 
 
(0.02) 
(0.01) 
(0.01)  
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
First Stage: 
 
X 
 
0.18 
-0.16 
-0.10 
0.12 
0.24 
 
 
 
 
(0.03) 
(0.01) 
(0.03)  
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second stage: 
0.17 
0.16 
0.24 
0.10 
0.20 
 
 
 
(0.04) 
(0.03) 
(0.03) 
(0.01) 
(0.04) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel B: Total trading volume (turnover), Nasdaq stocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First Stage: 
X 
 
 
0.18 
-0.02 
-0.02 
0.21 
0.07 
 
 
 
 
(0.04) 
(0.02) 
(0.03)  
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
First Stage: 
 
X 
 
0.10 
-0.04 
-0.09 
0.13 
0.24 
 
 
 
 
(0.02) 
(0.02) 
(0.03)  
(0.01) 
(0.02) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second stage: 
0.71 
0.49 
0.52 
0.62 
0.47 
 
 
 
(0.11) 
(0.06) 
(0.12) 
(0.05) 
(0.12) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Panel C: Mutual fund selling volume (turnover), NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq stocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First Stage: 
X 
 
 
0.27 
-0.15 
-0.01 
0.21 
0.07 
 
 
 
 
(0.02) 
(0.02) 
(0.02)  
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
First Stage: 
 
X 
 
0.16 
-0.15 
-0.10 
0.13 
0.24 
 
 
 
 
(0.02) 
(0.01) 
(0.02)  
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second stage: 
0.06 
0.03 
0.06 
0.04 
0.03 
 
 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
30
Table 6: Subperiod and Out-of-Sample Tests, 2SLS (second-stage) regressions 
 
The 2SLS regressions presented in this table are similar to those in Table 5 (only the second stage is shown here), 
but they run here over the subsamples 1985-1993 and 1994-2002.  For the second subperiod, the table also shows 
out-of-sample regressions, which means that the multivariate linear probability model is estimated over the first 
subperiod.  The estimated model is then used to generate the fitted propensity to sell ŝit and ŝit-1 and the 
instruments ŝit* and ŝit-1* in the second subperiod.  Standard errors shown in parentheses are obtained from a 
moving block-bootstrap, described in the appendix, which accounts for both cross-sectional and temporal 
dependence in residuals.   
  
  
  
    
  
  
 
Propensity to sell from fitted 
linear probability model 
 
Control Variables 
  
ŝit 
ŝit-1 
 
Volatility 
Size 
Price 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel A: Total trading volume (turnover), NYSE and AMEX stocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.1 (1985 - 1993) 
0.11 
0.13 
 
0.15 
0.10 
0.09 
 
(0.04) 
(0.03) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.02) 
(0.02) 
A.2 (1994 - 2002) 
0.22 
0.17 
 
0.31 
0.09 
0.27 
 
(0.03) 
(0.05) 
 
(0.02) 
(0.01) 
(0.05) 
A.3 (1994 - 2002, out-of-sample) 
0.23 
0.18 
 
0.30 
0.09 
0.27 
 
(0.03) 
(0.05) 
 
(0.02) 
(0.01) 
(0.05) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel B: Total trading volume (turnover), Nasdaq stocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.1 (1985 - 1993) 
0.35 
0.47 
 
0.10 
0.43 
0.01 
 
(0.17) 
(0.08) 
 
(0.02) 
(0.03) 
(0.06) 
B.2 (1994 - 2002) 
0.84 
0.46 
 
0.63 
0.70 
0.61 
 
(0.06) 
(0.07) 
 
(0.05) 
(0.02) 
(0.11) 
B.3 (1994 - 2002, out-of-sample) 
0.81 
0.46 
 
0.64 
0.71 
0.61 
 
(0.07) 
(0.07) 
 
(0.05) 
(0.02) 
(0.11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel C: Mutual fund selling volume (turnover), NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq stocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.1 (1985 - 1993) 
0.05 
0.02 
 
0.07 
0.05 
0.02 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.00) 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
C.2 (1994 - 2002) 
0.06 
0.03 
 
0.06 
0.03 
0.04 
 
(0.01) 
(0.01) 
 
(0.01) 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
C.3 (1994 - 2002, out-of-sample) 
0.06 
0.04 
 
0.06 
0.03 
0.04 
 
(0.00) 
(0.00) 
 
(0.02) 
(0.02) 
(0.01) 
  
  
  
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
31
 
Figure 1. Univariate non-parametric estimates of the propensity to sell as a function of absolute 
changes in stock characteristics.  In each cross-section t, and separately for each stock characteristic, stocks 
are binned by the absolute change in the characteristic, standardized by the cross-sectional standard deviation of 
the characteristic.  The width of each bin is 0.1 standard deviations. For each bin, the mean of sijt, the selling 
indicator variable, is calculated.  For each characteristic, the solid lines in the figure show, for each bin from 0 to 
2 standard deviations (i.e., bin 1 to bin 20), the time-series average of these means.  The dotted lines represent 
two-standard error bands.  

 
32
 
Figure 2. Univariate non-parametric estimates of the propensity to sell as a function of absolute 
changes in stock characteristics for subperiod samples.  The figures are identical to those in Figure 1, 
except for the different sample periods.  Results for 1985 - 1993 are shown as solid lines, results for 1994 – 2002 
are shown as dashed lines.   
 
 
 
