 
 
* Corresponding Author: E-mail wen.jiang@uchicago.edu, Physical Sciences Division, University of 
Chicago, 5640 S. Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. These authors are also the first author of this paper 
and these authors thank those in WorldQuant who made helpful comments and suggestions. 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrated Global Asset Management:  
Quantitative Country ETF Trading Strategy 
 
𝐴𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑜 𝐴𝑔𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟∗, 𝑋𝑖𝑎𝑜𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑛 𝐿𝑖𝑛∗, 𝑊𝑒𝑛 𝐽𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑔∗ 
 
arturo.aguilarts@gmail.com, xiaochen.lin.2005@gmail.com, mikemailboxes@gmail.com 
 
April 2020 
 
 
 
Abstract 
  
This paper unveils the processes for building a country’ trading strategy can outperform the 
MSCI Indexes and on the factor basis. By exploring the belief and experimenting with the structure in 
place, there seems to be enough room to build a quantitative investment strategy that generates highquality predictive signals (alphas) considering each countries’ expected equity and currency 
performances. We created, developed and deployed a set of systematic strategies which produces 
impressive returns using country Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs) with the objective to generate returns, 
risk profiles, automations, modernizations, and optimizations to outperform the iShares MSCI ACWI 
ETF (ACWI) and the iShares MSCI ACWI ex US ETF (ACWX) and similar benchmarks and evidences 
within the industry based on extensive data, mathematical, market, and statistical analysis that we used 
in 1) risk and scoring metrics such as technical, fundamental, economic, market sentiment and 
alternative descriptors and 2) factor modeling paradigms and developments could reveal the weighted 
market exposure for the dynamic multi-step asset allocation by country in a world of multi-period 
electronic trading and information.  
  
The necessary codes and details can be found in the following link and are published on GitHub: 
https://github.com/xlinGithub/Quantitative-Country-ETF-Trading-Strategy. 
 
 
 
JEL Classification: C38; G11; G15 
Key Words: Asset, Capital, Economics, Data, Equity, ETF, Investing, Management, Portfolio, R&D, 
Risk, Strategy, Systematics, Technology, Trading, Wealth 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
2 
1. Introduction 
 
Over the last 20 years, we have seen many changes in the interactions of global markets and how they 
had become more economically, quantitatively and technically dependent on each other; financial 
diversification is becoming more complex that requires more than just managing the investments in the 
developed and emerging markets, and that the underlying correlations are becoming more dynamic and 
changing faster due to different exposed factors and control measures. 
 
“The main task for every fund manager is to deliver a better-diversified portfolio that is stable and with 
positive returns. To generate positive returns, managers are innovating based on methods and 
organizations such as those are inspired by the fundamental and quantitative analysis, shareholder 
activism, technological edge, superior understanding of the macroeconomics, geopolitical 
developments, human and others. As most managers can apply leverages to increase the returns and 
risks of their strategies, the task of reducing portfolio correlations, therefore, reducing portfolio 
risk, has become an equivalent reason for seeking new alpha opportunities. Strong growth in 
active assets under management over the past two decades has therefore led to an unrelenting search 
both for alpha and pockets of weakly correlated assets. For instance, in the 1990s, it was sufficient 
to include emerging market assets to lower portfolio correlations. An endowment model through 
allocation that included alternative assets, such as commodities and real estate, easily outperformed 
traditional bond-equity portfolios on a risk-adjusted basis. However, the growth in active assets and 
increased use of leverage depleted alpha and increased the correlation across all risky assets. In 
the 2008 market, the crisis exposed the limited diversification benefits of traditional assets, resulting in 
a total sharp increase in the portfolio risks and financial losses (Kolanovic & Wei 2013).” 
 
This study analyses, explains and provides insights for the management of an investment countryspecific ETF trading strategy which aims to outperform the MSCI Indexes. The executions behind this 
financial objective is to create systematic processes in order to take a well-informed balance between 
the overweight and the underweight positions in each country and taking into consideration of their 
expected performances. 
 
We assume the reader has a background in portfolio, trading, and finance. We also assume that the 
reader is comfortable with data, programming, science, and research. In a nutshell, our target reader is 
a professional who works with or for or employs in a data or investment-related position.  
 
Aiming to deliver custom solutions and key and sourcing initiatives in furthering our developed data 
analytics, mathematical and statistical tools of the market and scaling the integrations within the models 
and ensure that and how it contributed to  innovation in data-driven finance and analytics with the stateof-the-art data engineering, management, and governance and explore hands-on technologies to 
automate processes between development and operation and to define our data universe of the countries, 
we incorporate the following definition from MSCI Inc: 
 
The MSCI ACWI Index, a modern index strategy, is designed to represent the performance of the full 
opportunity set of large-cap and mid-cap stocks across 23 developed and 26 emerging markets. As of 
December 2019, it covers more than 3,000 constituents across 11 sectors and approximately 85% of the 
free float-adjusted market capitalization in each market. The index is built using MSCI’s Global 
Investable Market Index (GIMI) methodology, which is designed to take into account the variations 
reflecting conditions across regions, market-cap sizes, sectors, style segments and combinations (MSCI 
Inc, 2020). 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
3 
According to MSCI’s methodology, these markets include the Developed and Emerging Markets, 
Americas, 
Europe & Middle East, Pacific Americas, 
Europe, 
Middle 
East, 
Africa
 Asia, and their countries as specified in the following: 
 
Table 1. MSCI ACWI Index 
 
Developed Markets 
Emerging Markets 
Americas 
Europe & 
Middle East 
Pacific 
Americas 
Europe, 
Middle East 
& Africa 
Asia 
Canada 
Austria 
Australia 
Argentina 
Czech 
Republic 
China 
United States 
Belgium 
Hong Kong 
Brazil 
Egypt 
India 
 
Denmark 
Japan 
Chile 
Greece 
Indonesia 
 
Finland 
New Zealand 
Colombia 
Hungary 
Korea 
(South) 
 
France 
Singapore 
Mexico 
Poland 
Malaysia 
 
Germany 
 
Peru 
Qatar 
Pakistan 
 
Ireland 
 
 
Russian 
Federation 
Philippines 
 
Israel 
 
 
Saudi Arabia 
Taiwan 
 
Italy 
 
 
South Africa 
Thailand 
 
Netherlands 
 
 
Turkey 
 
 
Norway 
 
 
United Arab 
Emirates 
 
 
Portugal 
 
 
 
 
 
Spain 
 
 
 
 
 
Sweden 
 
 
 
 
 
Switzerland 
 
 
 
 
 
United 
Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
Source: MSCI ACWI Index (MSCI Inc, 2020) 
 
The investment strategy relies on the trading model for most of the countries from the list above and 
uses the country-specific ETFs as instruments for its implementations. It mainly relays on ETFs for 
which the underlined assets made up an MSCI country-specific index. In specific countries, ETFs that 
don’t use MSCI directly, we will use the most liquid ETF, i.e. S&P 500. The only countries we exclude, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
4 
because there is no ETF to track, are the Czech Republic and Hungary as in our ETF’s initial universe, 
see appendix A; later we also drop the other ETFs depending on their liquidity and data availability. 
 
 
2. Design and Framework 
 
Many institutional investors such as pension and mutual funds, insurance companies among others; 
usually have in their asset allocation mandates the MSCI ACWI Index as the benchmark for their 
international equity exposure. Taking this into consideration, there are many approaches and strategies 
of how they invest and try to outperform the index. There are teams that do stock picking; however, 
usually need large assets under management (AUM) to justify all the resources needed for stock 
selection; these constraints have pushed firms to use countries exchange-traded funds (ETFs) to 
accomplish this task, instead of just owning passively an AWCI ETF or Mutual Fund, and exploit 
market movements to generate alpha on a country level. 
 
Managing 47 equity country indexes and 37 currencies could be a complex task to achieve where there 
are too many variables to track in order to find good investment opportunities; so we think that using 
ETFs for each country as a building block can help us reduce this complexity such as those are 
associated with trading costs, taxes, operational trading complexity, and etc.. With this dispersion, we 
create value as the historical performance varies by country in the chart below for their ETF returns 
over a 12-month period. 
 
Chart 1. Countries’ ETFs 12 Months Performance in USD 2018-2019 
 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on data from Yahoo Finance!) 
 
The objective of this paper is to analyze economic, financial, market, sentiment and alternative data to 
engineer the process using data science and programming on features, signals, variables, and models 
could lead us to generate signals that help us decide when to buy or sell each country's ETF and our 
overall exposure in each one academically and commercially. 
 
This led us to many of the major questions and some of the points we are trying to understand and 
explain.: 1) Should we consider only a long/short strategy? 2) Should we consider it as a benchmarked 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
5 
long only? 3) 1 and 2 at the same time? 4) How should we implement the strategy rotation rebalances? 
5) Should we reallocate ETF´s weights in the portfolio monthly or semi-annually? 6) Should we have a 
threshold for each ETF to rebalance its weight when it reaches a specific level? 7) Should we use a 
triple barrier method for closing our bets? 
 
By collecting and collating our data, we further strengthen the belief that there could be enough room 
to design and build a set of strategic solutions to outperform the returns of the MSCI ACWI Index; as 
we could support our market and quantitative research findings with the wide correlations among them 
and returns as suggested in the heatmap below. 
 
Chart 2: Correlation Matrix since Jan 2016 - Feb 2020 
 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on data from Yahoo Finance!) 
 
Market conditions not only depend on the market data, fundamental and economic data; many 
movements are triggered by the quantitative within the financial systems, i.e. non-linear models 
powered by big data, commodity trading advisors (CTA), etc.), sentiment and alternative strategies; 
which have evolved from traditional multi-factor models like those are developed by Barra Inc in the 
70s to 80s. Understanding all these changes is important so we take advantage of the inefficiency of 
markets, when we incorporate enterprise reporting analytics such as geopolitical risks, extreme 
valuations, central bank’s policy rates, flows, etc.; cocreates buying/selling opportunities that could be 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
6 
tracked using algorithmics of the systematics via data filtering, processing and wrangling to leverage, 
find outliers, simulate, and profit from these movements. 
 
Our choice of software and programming language used in development follow another important 
changeover the last 10 to 15 years is the advancement of information technologies like the open-source 
software such as the popular programming languages, Python, R, client software such as those are in 
Google Products and MS Office, platforms like Bloomberg and Operating Systems, and cloud solutions 
such as QuantConnect and Quantopian, and the externalities with cheaper or free hardware; however, 
has high computational power. Being able to create and manage these changes in IT are requirements 
of understanding and taking advantage of the current sophisticated markets where active and passive 
trading, many other strategies and agents and participants interact in-person and online systematically, 
especially in international settings. 
 
All the above makes us think that market evolution will persist and despite its complexity, we develop 
smarter models and tools to create possible scenarios; giving us the edge to outperform competitors and 
implement new ideas. 
 
 
3. Development and Methodology 
 
In this section, we set the notation and provided some detailed descriptions of our simplified data and 
models we used and the market researches we conducted to define our own factors and is also supported 
by the book Advances in Financial Machine Learning by Marcos Lopez de Prado, where he highlights 
how we can structure the discovery of investment strategies as a production chain process is also 
included and independent of portfolio selection and evaluation. 
 
Solving in a systematic or discretionary way in an investment strategy is a complex task due to the 
combination of all the possible events and technologies; making it hard for investors to track all these 
information bases and define an objective strategy for the investment decision. To avoid biases is also 
complicated as investors usually have aspects which are regarding what should be rational or expected. 
Once the specific data sets and models are selected to create our factor signals; we should always keep 
in mind the process used to reach those results, clarity is obtained in the final portfolio selection and 
weightings to avoid a “black box or overfitting approach”. 
 
3.1 Scientific Literature 
 
Our findings contribute to the recent but limited literature showing that integrated asset managed in a 
modern strategic manner can yield significant values on the factor basis and to the understanding of the 
investment and procedure regarding each country and market. For developing investment strategies, 
there are many conditions and facts. After understanding our universe expansion with the specified asset 
classes, to work with the teams, we started looking at and reasoning which papers could help us to 
formula within our modern asset management practices. 
 
To achieve our goal, we started a brainstorming session in order to explore a top-down approach. We 
found the correct documentation to develop a data-driven strategy that contributed to various solutions 
to this problem. After some discussions and different points of views had been considered, we agreed 
to design models that are on the factor basis for which it could help us to track the investment 
opportunities to generate leading alpha among countries in the developed and emerging markets; and 
from this point, we started researching into the traditional papers and those from the practices, including 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
7 
but not limited to Barra GEM (MSCI Inc, 1998) & USE3 (MSCI Inc, 1998) Handbooks, Fama/French 
3 (Kenneth, 1993) & 5 Factors (Kenneth, 2014), Systematic Strategies Across Asset Classes (Marko 
and Zhen, 2013), and Factor Investing (Andrew, 2013). 
 
Most of the definitions from the papers specified the architecture above are more oriented on the style 
factors rather than on the macroeconomic factors, yet, we were able to find a mix of good examples 
from each one.  
 
Another important point to start is to have a clear definition of what is factor investing. For example: 
 
“Factor investing is a strategy that chooses securities on attributes that are associated with 
higher returns. There are two main types of factors that have driven returns of stocks, bonds, 
and other factors: macroeconomic factors and style factors. The former captures broad risks 
across asset classes while the latter aims to explain returns and risks within asset classes. 
 
Some common macroeconomic factors include credit, inflation, and liquidity, whereas style 
factors embrace style, value, and momentum—just to name a few. (Investopedia, 2020).” 
 
During this process, how the definitions had evolved and varied interestingly depending on the asset 
class or author should be found; which could explain the reason why the same factor returns varied so 
much like in the following: 
 
“Value investing looks to “buy low and sell high”, combining the market for stocks that are under or 
overvalued relative to their fundamentals. Problem is, what are these fundamentals? How do you define 
Value in a company? Is it P/E, Dvd Yield, Cash Flow, P/B, a combination of all, none of the above? 
These Quant approaches to investing, hence, include human skill or better said, human bias. Consider 
the chart below, 7 different types of Value investing vehicles, with an outperformance of almost 20% 
between them. Flaws in the accounting of intangibles, fundamental economic shifts, structural 
transformations and maybe even Social and Impact investing can partly explain the difference in Value 
strategies (Alberto, 2020).” 
 
Chart 3. Value By Another Name 
 
 
Source: Bloomberg (Bloomberg LP, 2020) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
8 
3.1.1 From GEM Handbook (Barra 1998) [5, page 13 & 53-55]: 
 
Factor Model Definition 
 
The long-term assumption and development of multiple-factor models (MFMs) are in pace with the 
theoretical advances of arbitrage pricing theory (APT) for the capital market. MFMs further partitioned 
the residual risk into specific and common factor risks. Moving beyond APT to select and estimate 
factors that affect the expected returns and risks of a security or portfolio, our expected asset return in 
excess of risk-free rate will then be the sum of all of product of beta and risk premium in each rewarded 
risk factor. These models provide the frameworks in understanding the business challenges and drive 
technical and quantitative solutions and tools for risk measurement, portfolio construction, and 
performance attribution. 
 
Risk Index Formulas 
 
1. Size 
A measure of company size 
 
             𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒 = 𝑙𝑛[(𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔) ∗(𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒)𝑡] 
where 
price = the latest monthly closing price. 
 
2. Success 
Stock price momentum 
 
Success = ∑𝑖=1,12
𝑙𝑛(1 + 𝑟𝑓𝑡−𝑖)  - ∑𝑖=1,12
𝑙𝑛(1 + 𝑟𝑓𝑙𝑡−𝑖)  
where 
𝑟𝑙= local return and 𝑟𝑓𝑙 = local risk-free rate. 
 
3. Value 
Includes the following four descriptors: 
 
i)  
Forecast E/P = (IBES fiscal year 1 earnings / share) / price 
where 
price = the latest monthly closing price. 
ii)  
Reported E/P = income before extraordinary items / (total shares outstanding) 
* price 
iii)  
Reported B/P = common equity / market capitalization 
where 
market capitalization = shares outstanding*(price per share) 
and 
price = the latest monthly closing price. 
iv)  
Yield = predicted annual dividend / pricet 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
9 
4. Variability in Markets 
 
rl - rfl = 𝛼+ 𝛽(𝑟𝑚−𝑟𝑓𝑙) + 𝜀 
where 
𝜎𝜖= the standard deviation of the residual term 𝜖in the regression: 
where 
rl = local return, 
rfl = local risk-free return, 
rm= local market return, 
𝛼= intercept, 
𝛽= beta, and 
𝜀= residual term. 
 
3.1.2 From USE3 Handbook (Barra 1998) [6, page 71-76] 
 
Risk Index Definitions 
 
1. Volatility 
This risk index captures relative volatility using measures of both long-term historical volatility (such 
as historical residual standard deviation) and near-term volatility (such as high-low price ratio, daily 
standard deviation, and cumulative range over the last 12 months). Other proxies for volatility (log of 
stock price), corrections for thin trading (serial dependence), and changes in volatility (volume beta) 
are also included in this descriptor. 
 
Descriptors: 
i. 
Beta times sigma 
ii. 
Daily standard deviation 
iii. 
High-low price 
iv. 
Log of stock price 
v. 
Cumulative range 
vi. 
Volume beta 
vii. 
Serial dependence 
viii. 
Option-implied standard deviation 
 
2. Momentum  
This risk index captures common variation in returns related to recent stock price behavior. Stocks that 
had positive excess returns in the recent past are grouped separately from those that displayed negative 
excess returns. 
 
Descriptors: 
i. 
Relative strength 
ii. 
Historical alpha 
 
3. Size 
This risk index captures differences in stock returns due to differences in the market capitalization of 
companies. 
 
Descriptor(s): 
i. 
Log of market capitalization 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
10 
4. Size Nonlinearity 
This risk index captures deviations from linearity in the relationship between returns and log of market 
capitalization. 
 
Descriptor(s): 
i. 
Cube of log of market capitalization 
 
5. Trading Activity 
This risk index measures the amount of relative trading in each stock. Stocks that are highly traded are 
likely to be those with greater institutional interest. Such stocks may display different returns behavior 
compared with those that are not widely held by institutions. 
 
Descriptors: 
i. 
Share turnover rate (annual) 
ii. 
Share turnover rate (quarterly) 
iii. 
Share turnover rate (monthly) 
iv. 
Share turnover rate (five years) 
v. 
Indicator for forward split 
vi. 
Volume to variance 
 
6. Growth 
This risk index uses historical growth and profitability measures to predict future earnings growth. 
 
Descriptors: 
i. 
Payout ratio over five years 
ii. 
Variability in capital structure 
iii. 
Growth rate in total assets 
iv. 
Earnings growth rate over the last five years 
v. 
Analyst-predicted earnings growth 
vi. 
Recent earnings change 
 
7. Earnings Yield 
This risk index combines current and historical earnings-to-price ratios with a measure of analystpredicted earnings-to-price. Stocks with similar values of earnings yield behave in a similar fashion 
with respect to their returns. 
 
Descriptors: 
i. 
Analyst-predicted earnings-to-price 
ii. 
Trailing annual earnings-to-price 
iii. 
Historical earnings-to-price 
 
8. Value 
This risk index distinguishes between value stocks and growth stocks using the ratio of book value of 
equity to market capitalization. 
 
Descriptor(s): 
i. 
Book-to-price ratio 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
11 
9. Earnings Variability 
This risk index measures the variability in earnings and cash flows using both historical measures and 
analyst predictions. 
 
Descriptors: 
i. 
Variability in earnings 
ii. 
Variability in cash flows 
iii. 
Extraordinary items in earnings 
iv. 
Standard deviation of analyst-predicted earnings-to-price 
 
10. Leverage 
This risk index measures the financial leverage of a company. 
 
Descriptors: 
i. 
Market leverage 
ii. 
Book leverage 
iii. 
Debt to total assets 
iv. 
Senior debt rating 
 
11. Currency Sensitivity 
This risk index measures the sensitivity of a company’s stock return to the return on a basket of foreign 
currencies. 
 
Descriptor(s): 
i. 
Exposure to foreign currencies 
 
12. Dividend Yield 
This risk index computes a measure of predicted dividend yield using the past history of dividends and 
the market price behavior of the stock. 
 
Descriptor(s): 
i. 
Predicted dividend yield 
 
3.1.3 From Fama/French 3 Factors (Kenneth, 1993) 
 
The Fama/French factors are constructed using the 6 value-weight portfolios formed on size and bookto-market. 
  
  
  
SMB (Small Minus Big) is the average return on the three small portfolios minus the average return 
on the three big portfolios, 
 
SMB = 1/3 (Small Value + Small Neutral + Small Growth) - 1/3 (Big Value + Big Neutral + Big 
Growth). 
 
HML (High Minus Low) is the average return on the two value portfolios minus the average return on 
the two growth portfolios, 
 
HML = 1/2 (Small Value + Big Value) - 1/2 (Small Growth + Big Growth). 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
12 
Rm-Rf, the excess return on the market, value-weight return of all CRSP firms incorporated in the US 
and listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ that have a CRSP share code of 10 or 11 at the beginning 
of month t, good shares and price data at the beginning of t, and good return data for t minus the onemonth Treasury bill rate (from Ibbotson Associates). 
 
Rm-Rf includes all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms. SMB and HML for July of year t to June of 
t+1 include all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks for which we have market equity data for 
December of t-1 and June of t, and (positive) book equity data for t-1. 
 
3.1.4 From AQR Daily 4 Factors (AQR Factor/Style Investing) [15 and 16] 
 
The difference between AQR and Fama/French Factors are 1) Sorting is a differentiator – We do a 
dependent sort (firstly, sort by size and then by metric), whereas French does an independent sort. 2) 
Universe is a differentiator – We use the same data sources as French (CRSP and XF), and we apply 
filters to get close to French’s universe, however, there is no guarantee that the universes will be exactly 
the same. 3) Historical refreshes are a differentiator – French refreshes his entire history every month, 
whereas AQR has not historically done that. We’ve just appended the last month to the time series. 
However as of late July, we started refreshing the historical data monthly. 4) Cutoffs are not a 
differentiator – We both use 30th and 70th NYSE percentiles for high/low and the median NYSE 
breakpoint for small/big. 5) Risk-free rate is not a differentiator – Both market and factor returns are in 
excess of the risk-free rate (t-bills).  
 
AQR Capital Management, LLC — Betting Against Beta: Equity Factors, Daily is the file contains 
daily self-financing excess returns of long/short equity Betting Against Beta (BAB) factors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The portfolios are an updated and extended version of the equity portfolios used in Frazzini, Andrea 
and Lasse H. Pedersen (2014), “Betting Against Beta," Journal of Financial Economics, 111, 1–25. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The portfolio construction is based on Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), however there can be differences 
in data sources and methodology. See the Data Sources and Definition tabs for details. 
 
 
MKT is a market factor in which the value-weighted return on all available stocks minus the one-month 
Treasury bill rate. 
 
RF is the daily U.S. Treasury bill rates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SMB is the total market value of equity or the average return on the 3 small portfolios minus the average 
return on the 3 big portfolios. 
 
SMB = 1/3 (Small Value + Small Neutral + Small Growth) - 1/3 (Big Value + Big Neutral + Big Growth) 
 
BAB factors are portfolios that are long low-beta securities and that short-sell high-beta securities.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here we construct BAB factors for U.S. equities and 23 international equity markets, as well as multiple 
aggregates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AQR Capital Management, LLC — Quality Minus Junk: Factors, Daily is a file contains daily 
self-financing excess returns of long/short Quality Minus Junk (QMJ) factors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
13 
The portfolios are an updated and extended version of the equity portfolios used in Asness, Frazzini 
and 
Lasse 
H. 
Pedersen, 
2014, 
"Quality 
Minus 
Junk," 
working 
paper, 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2312432. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The portfolio construction is based on Asness, Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), however there can be 
differences in data sources and methodology. See the Data Sources and Definition tabs for details. 
 
 
QMJ is our quality-minus-junk factor that goes long high-quality stocks and short low-quality stocks.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We 
construct QMJ factors for U.S. equities and 23 international equity markets, as well as multiple 
aggregates. 
 
QMJ = ½ (Small Quality – Small Junk) + ½ (Big Quality – Big Junk) = ½ (QMJ in small stocks) + ½ (QMJ in 
big stocks) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.5 From Fama/French 5 Factors (Kenneth, 2014) 
 
The Fama/French 5 factors (2x3) are constructed using the 6 value-weight portfolios formed on size 
and book-to-market, the 6 value-weight portfolios formed on size and operating profitability, and the 6 
value-weight portfolios formed on size and investment. 
 
SMB (Small Minus Big) is the average return on the nine small stock portfolios minus the average 
return on the nine big stock portfolios, 
 
SMB(B/M) = 1/3 (Small Value + Small Neutral + Small Growth) - 1/3 (Big Value + Big Neutral + Big 
Growth). 
 
SMB(OP) = 1/3 (Small Robust + Small Neutral + Small Weak) - 1/3 (Big Robust + Big Neutral + Big 
Weak). 
 
SMB(INV) = 1/3 (Small Conservative + Small Neutral + Small Aggressive) - 1/3 (Big Conservative + 
Big Neutral + Big Aggressive). 
 
SMB = 1/3 (SMB(B/M) + SMB(OP) + SMB(INV)). 
 
HML (High Minus Low) is the average return on the two value portfolios minus the average return on 
the two growth portfolios, 
 
HML = 1/2 (Small Value + Big Value) - 1/2 (Small Growth + Big Growth). 
  
 
RMW (Robust Minus Weak) is the average return on the two robust operating profitability portfolios 
minus the average return on the two weak operating profitability portfolios, 
 
RMW = 1/2 (Small Robust + Big Robust) - 1/2 (Small Weak + Big Weak). 
  
 
CMA (Conservative Minus Aggressive) is the average return on the two conservative investment 
portfolios minus the average return on the two aggressive investment portfolios, 
 
CMA = 1/2 (Small Conservative + Big Conservative) - 1/2 (Small Aggressive + Big Aggressive). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
14 
Rm-Rf, the excess return on the market, value-weight return of all CRSP firms incorporated in the US 
and listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ that have a CRSP share code of 10 or 11 at the beginning 
of month t, good shares and price data at the beginning of t, and good return data for t minus the onemonth Treasury bill rate (from Ibbotson Associates). 
Rm-Rf includes all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms. SMB, HML, RMW, and CMA for July of 
year t to June of t+1 include all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks for which we have market equity 
data for December of t-1 and June of t, (positive) book equity data for t-1 (for SMB, HML, and RMW), 
non-missing revenues and at least one of the following: cost of goods sold, selling, general and 
administrative expenses, or interest expense for t-1 (for SMB and RMW), and total assets data for t-2 
and t-1 (for SMB and CMA). 
 
3.1.6 From J.P. Morgan Systematic Strategies Across Asset Classes (Kolanovic & Wei 2013)  and 
(Marko and Zhen, 2013) 
 
Table 2. Stylized examples of risk factors across asset classes, with 365-day rolling 
 
Asset Classes Traditional 
Carry* 
Momentum* 
Value* 
Volatility 
Equities 
S&P 500 
Dividend 
yield 
Past 12month price 
return 
Book to price 
ratio 
Option 
writing on 
SPX 
Rates and 
Credit 
US Treasury 
Bond 
Slope of yield 
curve 
Past 12month price 
return 
Past 3-year 
change in 
yield 
Option 
writing on 
UST futures 
Currencies 
DXY 
Short-term 
deposit rate 
Past 12month price 
return 
Past 5-year 
loss of PPP 
Rolling 
currency vol 
swap 
Commodities S&P GSCI 
Ex-ante roll 
yield 
Past 12month price 
return 
Past 5-year 
average to 
current price 
Option 
writing on 
gold 
Source: J.P. Morgan Quantitative and Derivatives Strategy.) 
 
The Risk factors are created via a long-short portfolio of corresponding assets according to the 
definitions of Carry, Momentum, and Value respectively (MSCI Inc, 1998). 
 
Carry – Equities: Excess return of a long position in three equity indices with the highest dividend 
yield and a short position in the three equities indices with the lowest dividend yield (monthly 
rebalanced). Our index universe consisted of country equity benchmarks for Australia, Canada, France, 
Germany, HK, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK, and the U.S.. 
 
Carry – Currencies: Excess return of a long position in the top-three yielding currencies and a short 
position in the bottom-three yielding currencies (month míoly rebalanced). We used G10 versus USD 
pairs for the currency universe, and domestic short-term deposit rates for yields. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
15 
Momentum – Equities: Excess return of a long position in three equity indices with the highest past 
12-month returns and a short position in the three equities indices with lowest past 12-month returns 
(monthly rebalanced); Our index universe of country equity benchmarks included: Australia, Canada, 
France, Germany, HK, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., and the U.S.. 
 
Momentum – Currencies: Excess return of a long position in the three G10 currencies with the highest 
past 12-month returns and a short position in the three G10 currencies with lowest past 12-month returns 
(monthly rebalanced). 
 
Value – Equities: Fama-French (1993) HML value factor. The factor is long the top decile and short 
bottom decile of US stocks ranked by book to price ratio; the universe covers all non-financial firms 
listed on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ exchanges. 
 
Value – Currencies: Asness et.al (2013) currency value factor which is a long/short currency portfolio 
based on the 5-year change in purchasing power parity. The universe covers spot exchange rates of the 
following G10 currencies: Australia, Canada, Germany (spliced with the Euro), Japan, New Zealand, 
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. 
 
Volatility – Equities: Equal weighted combination of S&P 500 Buy-write (BXM) and Put-write (PUT) 
Index. 
 
Volatility – Currencies: Excess return of an equal-weighted position of volatility swaps on USD/JPY, 
USD/AUD and USD/CHF (receiving implied volatility swap) with unit vega notional, rolled monthly. 
 
3.1.7 From Factor Investing (Ang 2013) [9, page 40-42] 
 
Macro Factor Investing 
 
We have taken an investment and style approach to factor investing as our factors have all been 
tradeable investing strategies. An alternative approach to factor investing can be based on (non-traded) 
macro factors. This is academically purer, however, much harder to implement. 
 
This is because asset classes do not move one-for-one with macro factors, and in fact, many of their 
movements are perverse or at least unintuitive. Equities, for example, are a claim on real assets yet a 
terribly inadequate choice for tracking inflation (see Chapter 8). Real estate is a better inflation hedge; 
however, it is only partially “real” (see Chapter 11). Bond prices reflect inflation risk, however, other 
factors such as monetary policy risk and illiquidity risk are important drivers of long-term bonds (see 
Chapter 9). 
 
3.1.8 Theoretical Models 
 
Taking a macro view requires a framework for how macro factors simultaneously affect many asset 
classes. Ang and Ulrich (2012) is one model that could be used for macro-factor investing. We develop 
a model where real bonds, nominal bonds, and equities are jointly determined by two macro factors, 
inflation, and economic growth, along with a factor capturing how the Fed sets monetary policy. If there 
is an inflation shock, for example, the model shows how the prices of all asset prices move. Macro 
factors are responsible for a very large amount of variation in expected returns: economic growth 
accounts for approximately 60% of the variation in the equity risk premium, while expected inflation 
accounts for 40% of the variation in real rates and 90% of the variation in nominal bonds. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
16 
 
3.1.9 Corporate Models 
 
Bridgewater Associates, LP 
 
A practitioner framework where macro factors affect asset prices has been developed by 
Bridgewater Associates, a large hedge fund. Bridgewater’s All-Weather Strategy considers 
inflation and economic growth as macro factors, as shown in Figure 14.8. Although Bridgewater 
deviated from its originally intended strategy during the financial crisis, it is worth examining the 
overall framework. Bridgewater estimates how different assets perform during periods when growth is 
high or low, or when inflation is rising or falling. They fill in a 2x2 matrix corresponding to these 
scenarios. In Figure 14.8, they expect that nominal bonds do well when growth is falling and inflation 
is falling. Equities, on the other hand, outperform when growth is high and inflation is subdued. This is 
clearly a much more simplified version compared to a formal model like Ang and Ulrich (2012). The 
idea is the same, in order to observe how assets, react when macro factors change. 
 
Table 4.18. Bridgewater’s All-Weather Strategy 
 
 
Growth 
Inflation 
Rising 
25% of risk 
25% of risk 
- Equities 
- Inflation-Linked Bonds 
- Corporate Spreads 
- Commodities 
- Commodities 
- EM Debt Spreads 
- EM Debt Spreads 
Falling 
25% of risk 
25% of risk 
- Nominal Bonds 
- Nominal Bonds 
- Inflation-Linked Bonds 
- Equities 
Source: Factor Investing (Andrew, 2013) 
 
Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation 
 
Table 14.9 reports the asset allocation of Alaska’s sovereign wealth fund, officially Alaska Permanent 
Fund Corporation, which is funded by mineral lease rentals and royalties. Alaska places its asset classes 
into different groups motivated by how they respond to different macro factor risks. The company 
exposure category contains equities, naturally, and “benefits from times of growth and prosperity.” Note 
that corporate bonds are also lumped in the same category – not in a separate fixed income allocation. 
Chapter 9 shows that corporate bonds are affected by many of the factors that affect equity – if a 
company is doing poorly, both bondholders and shareholders suffer. The correlations between corporate 
bond returns and stock returns, both in excess of Treasury bonds, turn out to be high: at 48% for Baa 
grade bonds and 65% for high yield bonds (see Figure 9.17 and Section 4.3 of Chapter 9). Alaska does 
not consider them separate asset classes as they respond in the same way to macro risk. 
 
Table 4.19. Alaska Permanent Fund Asset Allocation at April 2012 
 
Asset Class 
Weights 
Comment 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
17 
Cash 
2% 
Aim: To meet expected liabilities and manage liquidity 
needs from rebalancing. 
Interest Rates 
6% 
Example: Safe sovereign bonds. 
Aim: To provide insurance against severe equity market 
correlations and to provide high liquidity. 
Company 
Exposure 
55% 
Examples: Global equities, corporate bonds, bank loans, 
private equity. 
Aim: Benefit from times of growth and prosperity. 
Real Assets 
19% 
Examples: Real bonds, real estate, infrastructure. 
Aim: Hedge inflation risk. 
Special 
Opportunities 
18% 
Examples: Absolute and real return mandates, emerging 
markets, distressed debt. 
Aim: Take advantage of special investment opportunities. 
The allocation is not fixed, and the allocation not invested 
resides in the company exposure risk class. 
Source: Factor Investing (Andrew, 2013) 
 
Alaska is also interesting because it follows the Merton (1971) model outlined in Chapter 4 for longhorizon investing. It has a special opportunities class, with a target allocation of 18%. Long-horizon 
investors take positions in a portfolio that is optimal for short-run investors, called the myopic portfolio, 
as well as an opportunistic portfolio (Merton actually labels it a long-run hedging demand portfolio) in 
which the long-horizon investor takes advantage of time-varying expected returns. When there are 
special deals for distressed assets, or it believes there are good deals in more illiquid investment 
opportunities which Alaska can exploit because of its long horizon, it invests through its Special 
Opportunities allocation. If there are no such attractive opportunities, the allocation not invested resides 
in the Company Exposure asset class. 
 
In summary, Alaska’s macro factor investing looks through asset class labels by categorizing the way 
different asset classes react to economic growth, inflation, and other macro risks. 
 
3.2 Development Process 
 
There is no specific magic formula or recipe to generate a unique and successful trading strategy, 
however, from our experience how one can structure the process in empirical research is fundamental 
for the development and implementation of an idea. Therefore, we followed with the principles as 
suggested for the following teams and responsibilities breakdowns within our process.  
 
3.2.1 Unit Management 
 
Data Curators 
 
This is the station responsible for collecting, cleaning, indexing, storing, adjusting and delivering all 
data to the production chain [4, page 7th]. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
18 
During this stage, we tried to understand the availability of the data we thought would be useful to 
develop the model. We searched in different sources like Quandl, Bloomberg, Yahoo Finance and 
Trading Economics; after gathering the raw data, we analyzed it and kept the most representative data 
sets. 
 
Feature Analysts 
 
This is the station responsible for transforming raw data into informative signals. Team members are 
experts in information theory, signal extraction and processing, visualization, labeling, weighting, 
classifiers and feature importance techniques [4, page 7th]. 
 
We divided the work, so the person who collected the data was different from the feature analyst to 
avoid missing errors in the data sets and open communication for ideas to create some features. 
 
Strategists 
 
In this station, informative features are transformed into actual investment algorithms. Team members 
are data scientists with a deep knowledge of financial markets and the economy [4, page 7th]. 
 
We worked together in developing the idea and divide the tasks for writing and coding in constant 
communication; with the objective of avoiding useless work and keeping the idea together.   
 
Backtesters 
 
This station assesses the profitability of an investment strategy under various scenarios. Team members 
are data scientists with a deep understanding of empirical and experimental techniques [4, page 8th]. 
 
Once we had the investment model, we did backtesting analysis, optimized the portfolio and assessed 
the associated risk to see how reliable it was through the lens of the middle office. 
 
The following two steps should be the ones we could try once we had decided to implement the strategy 
and have a seed capital investment. 
  
Deployment Team 
 
The deployment team is tasked with integrating the strategy code into the production line. Team 
members are algorithm specialists and hardcore mathematical programmers [4, page 8th]. 
 
Portfolio Oversight 
 
Once a strategy is deployed, it follows a cursus honorum, which entails the following stages or lifecycle 
[4, page 8-9]: 
i. 
Embargo - if embargoed performance is consistent with backtest results, the strategy is 
promoted to the next stage. 
ii. 
Paper trading - paper trading will take place for as long as it is needed to gather enough 
evidence that the strategy performs as expected. 
iii. 
Graduation - Performance is evaluated precisely, including attribute risk, returns and costs.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
19 
iv. 
Re-allocation - the initial allocation (at graduation) is small. As time passes, and the strategy 
performs as expected, the allocation is increased. Over time, performance decays, and 
allocations become gradually smaller.  
v. 
Decommission - eventually, all strategies are discontinued.  
 
3.2.2 Organizational Management 
 
While we are doing the project in the financial engineering and data science domains, the above 
interconnected components for the data aspects of our project can be better visualized as below. 
 
Chart 4. DataOps Components  
 
 
Source: Eckerson (Wayne, 2018) 
 
To build and support the analytics application, performance reporting and information technology for 
the asset manager using each of the above domain for differentiating capabilities, we rely on the skill 
sets from each other and are able to coordinate and execute each of our specialized plan in 
monitoring, managing and researching for innovative risk assessment and reporting used in the 
industry globally in a control environment, data center, end user computing and virtualization.  
 
3.3 Our Factors 
 
Some of the common factors that influence stock price include the fundamental factors, technical factors 
news and market sentiment factors. Within the technical factors, we decided to specify some of those 
highly influential or major factors into a standalone economic factors category. 
 
To help us decide how we can measure our factors; we have been taking into consideration the previous 
definitions, data availability and our experience for defining them. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
20 
Below are the concepts and data to describe and calculate the descriptors we are planning to use to 
generate our first attempt to build our buy/sell factors signals: 
 
Chart 5. The First Definition of our Country ETF Trading Strategy Factors 
 
 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
3.4 Data and ETF Universe 
 
3.4.1 Raw Data 
 
As mentioned above, our initial universe consisted of 47 countries with 37 different currencies; 
therefore, the data sets we firstly considered for the descriptors are the following: 
 
i. 
Price data for the 47 Country ETFs (see appendix A for the whole list of ETFs, we downloaded 
the data using download price data.ipynb code). 
ii. 
Fundamental data which includes: Dividend Yield, P/E, P/CF & P/B of the underlying or proxy 
index for each Country ETF. 
iii. 
Economic data for each country: PMI, Expected GDP Growth, Debt/GDP & REER. 
iv. 
Sentiment data of each ETF: Put/Call Ratio, Short Interest & Fund Flow. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
21 
3.4.2 Factor Data 
 
Once we had the raw data described in our descriptors from above stored and cleaned, we generate each 
factor using the following codes: 
 
i. 
process price data into factor data.ipynb 
ii. 
process raw data into factor data.ipynb 
iii. 
process price data into forward return.ipynb 
 
Table 3. Factors Description 
 
Short Name 
Name 
Category 
mom_21 
Short-term Absolute Momentum (21-trading day) 
Technical 
mom_63 
Medium-term Absolute Momentum (63-trading day) 
mom_252 
Long-term Absolute Momentum (252-trading day) 
mr_21 
Percentage over Short-term Moving Average (21-... 
mr_63 
Percentage over Medium-term Moving Average (63... 
mr_252 
Percentage over Long-term Moving Average (252-... 
div_yield 
Dividend Yield 
Fundamental 
pb 
Price/Book Ratio 
pe 
Price/Earning Ratio 
pcf 
Price/Cash Flow Ratio 
pmi 
PMI 
Economic 
gdp_growth 
QoQ GDP Growth 
debt_gdp 
National Debt/GDP Ratio 
reer 
REER 
pc_ratio 
Put/Call Ratio 
Sentimental and 
Alternative 
short_int 
Short Interest 
short_int_ratio 
Short Interest/Market Capitalization 
f_flow 
Fund Flow 
sh_out 
Share Outstanding 
NaN 
mkt_cap 
Market Capitalization 
f_rtn 
Forward Return (one month, 21-trading day) 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
Once we processed the output from these codes, we made a data availability check in order to find 
which data we were missing to decide the final factors’ descriptors and ETF Universe; below the list 
of changes we implemented (please see appendix B to check the data availability review). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
22 
 
i. 
Dropped PMI & Fund Flow descriptors 
ii. 
Replaced Expected GDP Growth with QoQ GDP Growth 
iii. 
Countries & tickers we dropped out: 
◆ Colombia (ICOL) 
◆ Denmark (EDEN) 
◆ Egypt (EGPT) 
◆ Finland (EFNL) 
◆ India (INDA) 
◆ Ireland (EIRL) 
◆ Israel (EIS) 
◆ Norway (ENOR) 
◆ Pakistan (PAK) 
◆ Portugal (PGAL) 
◆ Qatar (QAT) 
◆ United Arab Emirates (UAE) 
 
After making all these changes, we finally reach our final definition of the factors we are going to use 
in the trading model: 
 
Chart 6. Final Factors of Quantitative Country ETF Trading Strategy 
 
 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
23 
Technical Score 
 
Momentum: 
 
i. 
Long term momentum (mom_252) = (Adj Close_t0 - Adj Close_t-252) / Adj Close_t-252 
ii. 
Medium term momentum (mom_63) = (Adj Close_t0 - Adj Close_t-63) / Adj Close_t-63 
iii. 
Short term momentum (mom_21) = (Adj Close_t0 - Adj Close_t-21) / Adj Close_t-21 
 
Mean-Reversion: 
 
i. 
Long term mean reversion (mr_252) = (Adj Close_t0 - moving average of Adj Close for last 
252 trading days) / moving average of Adj Close for last 252 trading days 
ii. 
Medium term mean reversion (mr_63) = (Adj Close_t0 - moving average of Adj Close for last 
63 trading days) / moving average of Adj Close for last 63 trading days 
iii. 
Short term mean reversion (mr_21) = (Adj Close_t0 - moving average of Adj Close for last 21 
trading days) / moving average of Adj Close for last 21 trading days 
 
Fundamental Score 
 
Dividend Yield: 
 
i. 
Index estimated dividend yield current year. Calculated as estimated dividends FY1 divided by 
the last price (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
P/E: 
 
i. 
Ratio of the price of a stock and the company's earnings per share; it is calculated as the last 
price divided by trailing 12M EPS before XO items or basic EPS Before XO if only annual 
earnings exist. 
Current Price / Earnings Ratio 
Calculated as last price divided by trailing weighted EPS (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
P/CF: 
 
i. 
The price/cash flow ratio is the ratio of a stock's price divided by the cash flow per share.  
Average shares outstanding is used when calculating cash flow per share. Cash Flow Per Share 
is calculated on a trailing 12-month basis where available. Trailing values are calculated by 
adding the most recent four quarters. 
Current Price / Cash Flow Ratio 
Calculated as the last price divided by trailing 12M cash flow per share (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
P/B: 
 
i. 
Ratio of the stock price to the book value per share. Calculated as: 
Price to Book Ratio = Last Price / Book Value Per Share 
Data from the most recent reporting period (quarterly, semi-annual or annual) 
used in the calculation (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
24 
Economic Score 
 
QoQ GDP Growth: 
 
i. 
Bloomberg Real GDP (QoQ% SAAR) (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
Debt/GDP:  
 
i. 
Bloomberg Debt as a Percentage of GDP (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
RFER: 
 
i. 
Real Effective Exchange Rate Broad Index (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
Market Sentiment & Alternative Score 
 
Put/Call Ratio: 
 
i. 
Ratio of total put open interest to total call open interest traded so far in the current trading day. 
Open interest is the total number of option contracts (all strike prices and expiration dates) that 
have not been closed, liquidated, or delivered (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
Short Interest: 
 
i. 
Total number of shares investors have sold short, however, have not yet bought back. Returns 
the total number of shares, including margin trading short and SBL. The amount is the sum of 
short balance and SBL short sell balance for ETFs. 
 
For historical values, the dates represent the end date of the period the data is for, 
not the date when the data was made publicly available. For example, if the data 
is for the two-week period ending on October 15 and that data is made publicly 
available on October 25, the date shown is October 15 (Bloomberg LP, 2020). 
 
After the data availability analysis, we dropped countries were there were too much missing data, we 
reached our final country ETF universe that represents 96.26% with 35 countries of MSCI ACWI Index 
weighting composition as of March 23rd, 2020: 
 
Table 4. Country ETF Universe 
 
Ticker 
Country 
Name 
Underlying 
or Proxy* 
Index 
Weight in 
ACWI as 
23/03/20 
ARGT 
Argentina 
Global X MSCI Argentina ETF 
MXAR* 
0.01% 
EWA 
Australia 
iShares MSCI Australia ETF 
NDDUAS 
1.69% 
EWO 
Austria 
iShares MSCI Austria ETF 
MXAT* 
0.03% 
EWK 
Belgium 
iShares MSCI Belgium ETF 
M1BE5IM 
0.26% 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
25 
EWZ 
Brazil 
iShares MSCI Brazil ETF 
MXBR* 
0.59% 
EWC 
Canada 
iShares MSCI Canada ETF 
M1CXCAS 
2.64% 
ECH 
Chile 
iShares MSCI Chile ETF 
M1CL5IM 
0.10% 
MCHI 
China 
iShares MSCI China ETF 
NDEUCHF 
4.96% 
EWQ 
France 
iShares MSCI France ETF 
NDDUFR 
3.11% 
EWG 
Germany 
iShares MSCI Germany ETF 
NDDUGR 
2.34% 
GREK 
Greece 
Global X MSCI Greece ETF 
MXGR* 
0.01% 
EWH 
Hong Kong 
iShares MSCI Hong Kong ETF 
NDDUHK 
1.10% 
EIDO 
Indonesia 
iShares MSCI Indonesia ETF 
NU724020 
0.21% 
EWI 
Italy 
iShares MSCI Italy ETF 
MXIT* 
0.64% 
EWJ 
Japan 
iShares MSCI Japan ETF 
NDDUJN 
7.18% 
EWY Korea (South) 
iShares MSCI South Korea ETF 
M1KR2550 
1.34% 
EWM 
Malaysia 
iShares MSCI Malaysia ETF 
MXMY* 
0.21% 
EWW 
Mexico 
iShares MSCI Mexico ETF 
MXMX* 
0.22% 
EWN 
Netherlands 
iShares MSCI Netherlands ETF 
MXNL* 
1.19% 
ENZL New Zealand 
iShares MSCI New Zealand ETF 
MXNZ* 
0.08% 
EPU 
Peru 
iShares MSCI Peru ETF 
M1PECAPD 
0.04% 
EPHE 
Philippines 
iShares MSCI Philippines ETF 
MIMUPHIN 
0.09% 
EPOL 
Poland 
iShares MSCI Poland ETF 
MXPL* 
0.08% 
ERUS 
Russian 
Federation 
iShares MSCI Russia ETF 
MSEURU$N 
0.40% 
KSA 
Saudi Arabia 
iShares MSCI Saudi Arabia ETF 
MXSAD* 
0.30% 
EWS 
Singapore 
iShares MSCI Singapore ETF 
M1CXBLY 
0.31% 
EZA 
South Africa 
iShares MSCI South Africa ETF 
M1CXBAC 
0.42% 
EWP 
Spain 
iShares MSCI Spain ETF 
M1CXBLRP 
0.73% 
EWD 
Sweden 
iShares MSCI Sweden ETF 
M1CXBLV 
0.76% 
EWL 
Switzerland 
iShares MSCI Switzerland ETF 
MXCH* 
3.10% 
EWT 
Taiwan 
iShares MSCI Taiwan ETF 
M1CXBLZ 
1.50% 
THD 
Thailand 
iShares MSCI Thailand ETF 
MXTH 
0.26% 
TUR 
Turkey 
iShares MSCI Turkey ETF 
NU724019 
0.04% 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
26 
EWU 
United 
Kingdom 
iShares MSCI United Kingdom ETF 
NDDUUK 
4.13% 
VOO 
United States 
Vanguard S&P 500 ETF 
SPTR 
56.19% 
Source: Own elaboration based on data from Bloomberg (Bloomberg LP, 2020) & (BlackRock Inc, 
2020) 
 
By setting 𝑤𝑖 to be each country ETF weight and 𝑤 as all of country ETF portfolio weights, let 𝑅𝑡 be 
the N by 1 return vector, 
 
𝑅𝑝,𝑡= 𝑤′𝑅𝑡= ∑𝑤𝑖𝑅𝑖𝑡 
 
We devise the return from each or all factors as well as the resultant variance of the factors, 
 
𝑅𝑡= 𝛼+ 𝐵𝑓𝑡+ 𝜖𝑡 
𝑅𝑝,𝑡= 𝑤′𝑎+ 𝑤′𝜖𝑡𝑝𝑓𝑡+ 𝜖𝑝,𝑡 
𝐷= 𝐸[𝑓𝑡] 
𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑅𝑝,𝑡) = 𝑤′𝐵𝛺𝑓𝐵′𝑤+ 𝑤′𝐷𝑤 
 
which differ from tracking portfolio by net present value, our alpha, 
 
𝐸(𝑅𝑝,𝑡) ≠𝐸(𝑅̃𝐴𝑇𝑃) 
 
3.5 Financial Machine Learning Algorithms 
 
Please find below a small description of the computational algorithms we used to develop our final 
model; both are included in scikit-learn library. 
 
Chart 7. Typical tasks and frequently used Machine Learning methods 
 
 
Source: J.P. Morgan Big Data and AI Strat QDS (Marko and Rajesh, 2017) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
27 
“The figure below shows the correlation of different Machine Learning algorithms between themselves. 
One can notice that regression-based strategies tend to be more correlated (e.g. Lasso CV is strongly 
correlated to Elastic Net, etc.); however, on average the pairwise correlation of all strategies was only 
~20%, which offers the potential to combine strategies at a portfolio level (Marko and Rajesh, 2017).” 
 
Chart 8. Correlation of Machine Learning strategies amongst themselves 
 
 
Source: J.P. Morgan Macro QDS (Marko and Rajesh, 2017) 
 
3.5.1 Random Forest Regressor 
 
A random forest is a meta estimator that fits a number of classifying decision trees on various subsamples of the dataset and uses averaging to improve the predictive accuracy and control over-fitting. 
The sub-sample size is always the same as the original input sample size, however, the samples are 
drawn with a replacement if bootstrap=True by default. (SciKit-Learn, 2020). 
 
(𝛽̂𝑙,𝑛, 𝛽̂𝑟,𝑛, 𝑑𝑛) ∈𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛 ∑[𝑌𝑖−𝛽𝑙1𝑥𝑖≤𝑑−𝛽𝑙1𝑥𝑖>𝑑]
2   
 
Pros:  1) Accuracy and Stability Improvement 2) Overfit Prevention 
Cons: 1) Time and resource requirement 
2) Low Model Interpretability 
 
3.5.2 Ridge Regression 
 
This model solves a regression model where the loss function is the linear least-squares function and 
regularization is given by the l2-norm. Also known as Ridge Regression or Tikhonov regularization. 
This estimator has built-in support for multi-variate regression, i.e., when y is a 2d-array of shape 
(n_samples, n_targets. (SciKit-Learn, 2020). 
 
𝛽̂
𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑔𝑒=𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛 {||𝑌−𝑋𝛽||2
2 + 𝜆||𝛽||2
2}   
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
28 
𝛽̂
𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑔𝑒= (𝑋𝑇𝑋+ 𝜆𝐼)−1𝑋𝑇𝑌 
 
Pro:  
1) L2 Regulation 
2) Overfit Prevention 
Con: 
1) Bias Increment 
2) Low Model Interpretability 
 
4. Results 
 
4.1 Factor Analysis 
 
After generating all our factor data, we did an analysis to understand what makes a good factor; to reach 
these result we  used a winsorization transformation to limit extreme values, for details please check 
this code factor analysis.ipynb. 
 
During the process, we applied these steps to understand the quality and find the linear trend we are 
looking across the quantile groups: 
 
➔ Winsorized Factor 
➔ Normalized Winsorized Factor 
➔ Normalized Winsorized Factor Quartile 
 
Chart 9. Factor Analysis Framework 
 
 
 
Developed Markets 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
29 
Emerging Markets 
 
 
 
Normalized Winsorized Factor Quartile Charts 
 
➔ Technical factors: 
 
Charts 9-11. Momentum 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
30 
 
 
 
Charts 12-14. Mean-Reversion 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
31 
 
 
 
➔ Fundamental factors: 
 
Chart 15. Dividend Yield 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
32 
Chart 16. P/E 
 
 
 
Chart 17. P/CF 
 
 
 
 
Chart 18. P/B 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
33 
➔ Economic factors: 
 
Chart 19. QoQ GDP Growth 
 
 
 
Chart 20. National Debt/GDP Ratio 
 
 
 
 
Chart 21. REER 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
34 
➔ Market sentimental and alternative factors: 
 
Chart 22. Put/Call ratio 
 
 
 
Chart 23. Short interest 
 
 
 
So far, we have generated all the data. We will need in our model to build our signals and implement 
our strategy with the results and proper backtesting. 
 
Presently, we are ready to test our factors and develop our final model. 
 
4.1 Modeling Data 
 
Using the process factor data into modeling data.ipynb code from our repository, we processed the 
factor data and our forward return to generate our modeling data.  
 
To do this, we grouped into quartiles and then took at the average forward return for each group and 
factor: 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
35 
Table 5. Technical factors 
 
Date 
Market Ticker f_rtn mom_252 mom_63 mom_21 mr_252 mr_63 mr_21 
4/1/2016 Developed ENZL -0.035 
0.303 
1.562 
2.005 
1.970 1.892 2.293 
4/1/2016 Developed EWA -0.072 
-0.819 
1.183 
0.878 
-0.222 1.476 2.293 
4/1/2016 Developed EWC -0.013 
-1.876 
-1.626 
-1.386 
-1.444 -1.532 -0.568 
4/1/2016 Developed EWD -0.061 
-0.193 
-0.601 
-1.026 
-0.496 -0.380 -0.578 
4/1/2016 Developed EWG -0.055 
-0.039 
0.630 
-0.673 
-0.327 -0.178 -1.153 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
30/12/2019 Emerging GREK -0.039 
2.183 
0.249 
-0.403 
1.538 0.172 0.134 
30/12/2019 Emerging KSA 
-0.021 
-0.476 
-1.026 
-0.254 
-1.019 -0.206 -0.983 
30/12/2019 Emerging MCHI -0.043 
0.553 
1.215 
0.165 
0.600 1.018 0.578 
30/12/2019 Emerging THD 
-0.083 
-0.424 
-1.501 
-1.661 
-0.934 -1.494 -1.033 
30/12/2019 Emerging TUR 
0.032 
-0.037 
-0.886 
-0.488 
0.671 0.418 -0.595 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
Table 7. Fundamental factors 
 
Date 
Market Ticker f_rtn div_yield 
pe 
pb 
pcf 
4/1/2016 Developed ENZL -0.035 
1.681 -0.177 0.284 0.597 
4/1/2016 Developed EWA -0.072 
1.546 -0.259 0.208 -0.613 
4/1/2016 Developed EWG -0.055 
-0.467 -0.250 -0.021 -0.736 
4/1/2016 Developed EWH -0.098 
-0.156 -1.124 -1.086 2.674 
4/1/2016 Developed EWI 
-0.142 
0.558 2.913 -1.279 -0.661 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
30/12/201
9 Emerging GREK -0.039 
-0.340 1.667 1.529 2.102 
30/12/201
9 Emerging KSA 
-0.021 
1.560 1.667 0.595 0.267 
30/12/201
9 Emerging MCHI -0.043 
-1.400 -0.360 0.212 -0.377 
30/12/201
9 Emerging THD 
-0.083 
-0.196 0.550 0.596 -0.300 
30/12/201
9 Emerging TUR 
0.032 
0.432 -1.574 -1.438 -1.072 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
36 
Table 8. Economic factors 
 
Date 
Market Ticker f_rtn gdp_growth debt_gdp reer 
4/1/2016 Developed ENZL -0.035 
1.820 
-1.412 0.357 
4/1/2016 Developed EWA -0.072 
0.604 
-1.119 -0.912 
4/1/2016 Developed EWC -0.013 
-1.145 
0.610 -1.828 
4/1/2016 Developed EWD -0.061 
1.820 
-1.151 -0.267 
4/1/2016 Developed EWG -0.055 
-0.385 
-0.261 -0.459 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
30/12/201
9 Emerging GREK -0.039 
0.185 
1.736 -0.263 
30/12/201
9 Emerging KSA 
-0.021 
-0.347 
-1.439 1.250 
30/12/201
9 Emerging MCHI -0.043 
1.780 
-1.421 1.446 
30/12/201
9 Emerging THD 
-0.083 
-0.028 
0.472 1.446 
30/12/201
9 Emerging TUR 
0.032 
-0.900 
-0.225 -1.785 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
Table 9. Sentimental and alternative factors 
 
Date 
Market Ticker f_rtn pc_ratio short_int_ratio 
4/1/2016 Developed EWA -0.072 
0.899 
1.801 
4/1/2016 Developed EWC -0.013 
0.889 
1.610 
4/1/2016 Developed EWD -0.061 
-0.388 
-0.343 
4/1/2016 Developed EWG -0.055 
-0.526 
-0.732 
4/1/2016 Developed EWH -0.098 
-0.172 
1.033 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
30/12/2019 Emerging GREK -0.039 
-0.902 
0.731 
30/12/2019 Emerging KSA 
-0.021 
-0.810 
1.903 
30/12/2019 Emerging MCHI -0.043 
-0.040 
0.014 
30/12/2019 Emerging THD 
-0.083 
0.024 
-1.068 
30/12/2019 Emerging TUR 
0.032 
1.122 
1.414 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
To see all the modeling data files for each factor you can download them in this link. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
37 
4.2 Multivariate Modeling and Prediction 
 
Using the modeling data from above, we applied the random forest regressor and ridge regression 
methods to each factor to train and test our signals for the developed and emerging markets; we 
developed, implemented and structured the realistic and predicted distributions with the practical 
assessments. To see all the details, please review the following code modeling.ipynb. 
 
Chart 24. Technical Random Forest Regressor – Developed Markets 
 
 
 
Chart 25. Technical Ridge Regression – Developed Markets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
38 
Chart 26. Technical Random Forest Regressor – Emerging Markets 
 
 
 
Chart 27. Technical Ridge Regression – Emerging Markets 
 
 
 
Chart 28. Fundamental Random Forest Regressor – Developed Markets 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
39 
Chart 29. Fundamental Ridge Regression – Developed Markets 
 
 
 
Chart 30. Fundamental Random Forest Regressor – Emerging Markets 
 
 
 
 
Chart 31. Fundamental Ridge Regression – Emerging Markets 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
40 
Chart 32. Economic Random Forest Regressor – Developed Markets 
 
 
Chart 33. Economic Ridge Regression – Developed Markets 
 
 
Chart 34. Economic Random Forest Regressor – Emerging Markets 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
41 
Chart 35. Economic Ridge Regression – Emerging Markets 
 
 
 
Chart 36. Sentimental and Alternative Random Forest Regressor – Developed Markets 
 
 
 
Chart 37. Sentimental and Alternative Ridge Regression – Developed Markets 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
42 
Chart 38. Sentimental and Alternative Random Forest Regressor – Emerging Markets 
 
 
 
 
Chart 39. Sentimental and Alternative Ridge Regression – Emerging Markets 
 
 
 
Final Model at Asset Manager Level 
 
Once we generated all the data sets for each signal, we analyze their correlation and combine them to 
generate our developed and emerging predication files located in this folder link.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
43 
Chart 40. Emerging Markets Factors Correlation 
 
 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
4.3 Performance Analysis: Algorithmic Backtesting 
  
For the backtesting of our strategy, we used Quantopian website to understand the performance vs its 
benchmark. Our first attempt included the 35 countries from our ETFs universe; we used the following 
code quantopian_backtest_ACWI.py to test from 01/01/2019 – 12/31/2019, USD$10mn and no trading 
costs. 
 
Screenshot 1. Quantopian Build Algorithm ($ in 10 millions) 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
44 
After building the algorithm, we run the full backtest and got the following results: 
Quantitative Country ETF Trading Strategy  
Total return: 22.40% 
Specific return: 8.53% 
Common Return: 12.77% 
Sharpe: 0.87 
Max Drawdown: -8.50% 
Volatility: 0.12 
iShares MSCI ACWI ETF benchmark return: 26.55%  
 
Screenshot 2. Quantopian Backtest ($ in 10 millions) 
 
 
 
2019 is a very strong year for equities mainly because of the U.S. market which represents more than 
50% of MSCI ACWI Index weight; our strategy underperformed by 4.15% its benchmark so that makes 
us think that maybe we can test it excluding U.S. equity and see if results improve.  
 
For our second scenario, we tried our model, however, only for 34 countries excluding VOO ETF (S&P 
500 Index) and used as a benchmark, iShares MSCI ACWI ex US ETF; you can see the following code 
for details quantopian_backtest_ACWX.py. 
 
After building the algorithm, we run the full backtest and got the following results: 
Quantitative Country ETF Trading Strategy  
Total return: 22.01% 
Specific return: 8.22% 
Common Return: 12.73% 
Sharpe: 0.84 
Max Drawdown: -8.64% 
Volatility: 0.12 
iShares MSCI ACWI ex US ETF benchmark return: 21.09%  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
45 
Screenshot 3. Quantopian Bascktest ($ in 10 millions) 
 
 
 
In our second attempt, we were able to beat the benchmark by 0.92%. It seems we are in the right 
direction for our country trading strategy and we need to understand how we can incorporate some other 
metrics that can help us track U.S. market versus the rest of the world in order to blend our strategy 
among these two groups. 
 
4.4 U.S. Subcase 
 
After reached the results from above and understanding that some markets like the U.S. are very large 
that can be played as another universe, we applied a style factor analysis as shown below, in order to 
complement our idea in case we will decide to split the universe for part of the strategy using FamaFrench, one of the best price return models. Without a loss of generality, modifying the above country 
model can also be adjusted for the studies against the book to market equity excess on the domestic, 
world and international setting.  
 
Table 10. Option to Reduce Exposure to Economic Factor 
 
 
Source: Strategic Factor Allocation (Andrew et al, 2017) 
 
The idea we are proposing is that we can combine both macro factors for country selection and for large 
equity markets we can try to generate alpha using style factors daily; please visit the following code for 
more details US Three, Four and Five Factors Models 2017-2018.ipynb.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
46 
US: VOO is a S&P 500 Index, representing 500 of the largest U.S. companies. The goal is to closely 
track the index’s return, which is considered a gauge of overall U.S. stock returns; please visit the 
following website for more details https://investor.vanguard.com/etf/profile/VOO  
 
We employed the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) unit root test to test for stationary for all of the 
used factors comprise of the return, risk free rate, adjusted rate of return, Fama French as well as the 
AQR factors. We do not find any of our factor being greater than the critical Dickey-Fuller values at 
5%.  
 
One of the major problems in the regression-based analysis is the existence of multicollinearity 
between factors. There are also a variety of tests to choose from such as the Variance Inflation Factor 
and Tolerance methods. We decomposed the correlation matrix for all the factors and found that all of 
our eigenvalues were very large.  
 
In conclusion, all the tested factors were stationary without concerns about collinearity, therefore, we 
could proceed to obtain the direct exposure by feeding our data to our empirical model. 
 
Mkt-RF, SMB & HML Daily Factors: 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
47 
 
 
MRT, SMB, BAB & QMJ Daily Factors: 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
48 
 
 
 
Mkt-RF, SMB, HML, RMW & CMA Daily Factors: 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
49 
 
 
 
 
5. Crisis, Risk and Regime Stability 
 
Despite of the high correlation, we see in episodes of the crisis among risky assets like what is happened 
in 2008; there are also wide correlations and returns among countries’ currencies and equity 
performance; that can be explored as demonstrated in the current paper, or could be appreciated in the 
table below with each country return since February 21st to March 30th , 2020 due to COVID-19 global 
risk-off and supply chain disruptions. 
 
Table 11. Country ETFs Performance During Black Swan, COVID-19 
 
Country 
Ticker 
ETF Chg Since 
21st 
Currency Chg 
Since 21st 
~Local Equity 
Return 
Brazil 
EWZ 
-43.97% 
-17.19% 
-35% 
Colombia 
ICOL 
-43.30% 
-20.38% 
-33% 
Argentina 
ARGT 
-40.57% 
-4.25% 
-43% 
Indonesia 
EIDO 
-40.13% 
-18.73% 
-26% 
Mexico 
EWW 
-40.10% 
-28.76% 
-23% 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
50 
South Africa 
EZA 
-38.24% 
-19.72% 
-28% 
Norway 
ENOR 
-38.16% 
-14.03% 
-25% 
Greece 
GREK 
-37.10% 
1.70% 
-40% 
Australia 
EWA 
-36.24% 
-7.12% 
-33% 
Russian 
Federation 
ERUS 
-35.85% 
-24.95% 
-21% 
Peru 
EPU 
-35.70% 
-1.23% 
-32% 
Pakistan 
PAK 
-34.32% 
-7.21% 
-36% 
Austria 
EWO 
-33.97% 
1.70% 
-39% 
Canada 
EWC 
-32.55% 
-6.99% 
-29% 
Chile 
ECH 
-32.10% 
-5.58% 
-28% 
India 
INDA 
-31.82% 
-5.48% 
-28% 
Philippines 
EPHE 
-30.59% 
-0.09% 
-29% 
Ireland 
EIRL 
-30.48% 
1.70% 
-30% 
Spain 
EWP 
-30.31% 
1.70% 
-31% 
Italy 
EWI 
-30.22% 
1.70% 
-32% 
Poland 
EPOL 
-30.12% 
-4.34% 
-30% 
Thailand 
THD 
-29.30% 
-3.62% 
-25% 
Turkey 
TUR 
-28.92% 
-8.07% 
-24% 
United Kingdom 
EWU 
-28.59% 
-4.38% 
-25% 
Egypt 
EGPT 
-28.33% 
-1.24% 
-29% 
Portugal 
PGAL 
-28.04% 
1.70% 
-25% 
Israel 
EIS 
-27.70% 
-4.45% 
-23% 
Germany 
EWG 
-27.52% 
1.70% 
-29% 
Belgium 
EWK 
-27.45% 
1.70% 
-29% 
Sweden 
EWD 
-26.67% 
-3.16% 
-26% 
France 
EWQ 
-26.33% 
1.70% 
-28% 
Finland 
EFNL 
-26.11% 
1.70% 
-26% 
United Arab 
Emirates 
UAE 
-24.74% 
0.00% 
-24% 
New Zealand 
ENZL 
-24.72% 
-5.43% 
-15% 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
51 
Netherlands 
EWN 
-24.43% 
1.70% 
-20% 
United States 
VOO 
-23.68% 
-0.19% 
-24% 
Singapore 
EWS 
-23.44% 
-1.88% 
-21% 
Korea (South) 
EWY 
-22.37% 
-1.28% 
-20% 
Saudi Arabia 
KSA 
-21.10% 
-0.29% 
-20% 
Denmark 
EDEN 
-19.58% 
1.70% 
-18% 
Hong Kong 
EWH 
-18.11% 
0.43% 
-16% 
Taiwan 
EWT 
-17.22% 
0.47% 
-17% 
Switzerland 
EWL 
-17.03% 
1.87% 
-18% 
Malaysia 
EWM 
-16.72% 
-3.23% 
-12% 
China 
MCHI 
-13.14% 
-1.16% 
-11% 
Japan 
EWJ 
-11.39% 
3.13% 
-14% 
Qatar 
QAT 
-10.79% 
-0.25% 
-11% 
Source: Bloomberg (Bloomberg LP, 2020) 
 
The evidence is consistent with the negative influence on the investment performance and the motive 
for investment. Despite there is no systematic risk, the economies of the U.S., U.K., Russia, Europe and 
China are expected to have steep declines and follow by negative growth rates in post-recoveries. 
Considering the above and rich countries will stabilize the markets to prevent multiple Black Swan 
events, we think there are serial ways to find the correct data sets to implement a systematic strategy 
that could generate alpha consistently; predominately, we are focused and result-driven professionals 
with communication and relation building skills, also have been able to expose some interesting steps 
to do this and how working as a team with different backgrounds and skills can complement in the 
investment process. 
 
 
6. Discussion 
 
We continuously enhance the vision for our investment processes and identify opportunities to further 
enhance our portfolio and its performances beneficially such as by systematically deferring the 
realization of capital gain and accelerating the realization of capital loss and the relations of analyzing 
the objectives and feedbacks professionally.  
 
Some analysts might believe investment decision can be manually made by relying on individual 
crowdsourcing purely across the globe. However, in this information age, we observed that such 
feedbacks or communications from this proposed individual crowdsourcing model was often not 
substantial, coherent, delayed, altruistic or useful (Oguz, 2019). Also, the fresh individual analysts 
require commitments themselves and significant efforts from the experienced senior often to identify, 
educate, coordinate or help them to remove constraints in completing a single task accordingly.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
52 
We developed our codes to create and structure the modules for achieving data-driven automation and 
business intelligence solution with machine learning capabilities for the enhancement and specification. 
Regarding machine learning models; we can also try different methods and combinations for further 
research as well as alternative datasets that help us find alpha. 
 
“Datasets and Methodologies: There are two main components of a Big Data investment approach: 
acquiring and understanding the data, and using appropriate technologies and methods to analyze those 
data. New datasets are often larger in volume, velocity and variability as compared to traditional 
datasets such as daily stock prices. Alternative datasets include data generated by individuals (social 
media posts, product reviews, search trends, etc.), data generated by business processes (company 
exhaust data, commercial transaction, credit card data, etc.) and data generated by sensors (satellite 
image data, foot and car traffic, ship locations, etc.). In most cases, these datasets need a level of analysis 
before they can be used in a trading strategy… Methods to analyze big and alternative datasets with 
traditional statistics; however, also methods of Machine Learning. Machine Learning techniques 
include Supervised Learning (regressions, classifications), Unsupervised Learning (factor analysis, 
clustering) as well as novel techniques of Deep and Reinforcement Learning that are often used to 
analyze unstructured data and show promise in identifying data patterns in structured data (Marko and 
Rajesh, 2017)”. 
 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
This paper creates and demonstrates the worldwide investment spans across the economics, 
fundamental, technical and markets in the investment industry and display significant investment 
opportunities and implications. We centralize the sporadic data into a well-structured monthly and daily 
dataset for countries that can mostly capture the global investment market. We apply and analyze crosssectional studies with innovative factors and professional realization methods better integrate into the 
ETF investment portfolio. By leveraging or relying on these strategies in hand, we rebalance portfolios 
freely and backtest quantitatively. 
 
Efficient market hypothesis states prices fully reflect all available information in any given time and 
random walk theory asserts that pattern and trend will not dictate the price movement and the 
historical cannot be used to predict future price movement. In practice, sometimes, we missed by the 
book trading ideas, because we lack a suggested model to track changes in a systematic way; taking 
us to decide with biases that sometimes are just fulfilled by emotions. Therefore, it is crucial to design 
or track a transparent set of rules to help us make decisions in our investment process.  
 
Our findings suggest we will continue to discover new ways to design factors and more training data. 
It is essential for investors to have access to these kinds of studies and codes to generate more scenarios 
using new methods to understand markets inefficiencies, exploitable systematics, and harvest alpha 
opportunities. The integrated approach combines value estimates to increase accuracy, we elaborated, 
have room for improvement with other descriptors to explain each factor and more combinations; 
likewise, as shown in this paper, we can create a set of systematic strategies to solve the country 
selection process and provide multiple options to understand and adjust the factors influence investment. 
 
Finally, given the extent of the changes highlighted in the investigation, the evolution of factors and 
how the design is crucial to capture the characteristics, it is important that we are looking to have 
exposure and that returns can vary considerably due to this aspect and the uncorrected usage will 
understate the areas, but unwarranted biases.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
53 
Acknowledgment 
 
We thank all those who made helpful comments and suggestions and also want to make a special 
recognition to those in WorldQuant for their support for the Master of Science in Financial 
Engineering. 
 
 
Conflict of Interest 
 
The authors have no conflict of interest with the companies and markets appeared on this article. 
Additionally, the authors have no position and are not under any influence in any stock, ETF, ETN and 
trading instruments mentioned on this paper. 
 
Disclaimer 
 
The views expressed are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the organizations 
affiliated; nor is it to be solely relied on for financial investment or such particular course of action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
54 
References 
 
[1] Marko Kolanovic & Zhen Wei (2013). Systematic Strategies Across Asset Classes. J.P. Morgan. 
Available at: https://www.cmegroup.com/education/files/jpm-systematic-strategies-2013-12-111277971.pdf (Accessed: February, 2020). 
 
[2] MSCI Inc (2020). MSCI ACWI Index. Available at: https://www.msci.com/acwi (Accessed: 
February, 2020). 
 
[3] Bloomberg (2020). Market Data. Available at: https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/ 
(Accessed: February, 2020). 
 
[4] Marcos Lopéz de Prado (2018). Advances in Financial Machine Learning. 
 
[5] MSCI Inc (1998). Barra GEM. Available at: 
https://www.alacra.com/alacra/help/barra_handbook_GEM.pdf (Accessed: March, 2020). 
 
[6] MSCI Inc (1998). Barra USE3. Available at: 
http://www.alacra.com/alacra/help/barra_handbook_US.pdf (Accessed: March 2020). 
 
[7] Kenneth R. French (1993). Description of Fama/French 3 Factors. Available at: 
https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/f-f_factors.html (Accessed: 
March, 2020). 
 
[8] Kenneth R. French (2014). Description of Fama/French 5 Factors (2x3). Available at: 
https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/f-f_5_factors_2x3.html 
(Accessed: March 2020). 
 
[9] Andrew Ang (2013). Factor Investing. Available at: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2277397 (Accessed: February 2020). 
 
[10] Markit Economics (2020). PMI by IHS Markit. Available at: 
https://ihsmarkit.com/products/pmi.html (Accessed: March 2020). 
  
[11] Investopedia (2020). Factor Investing. Available at: 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/factor-investing.asp (Accessed: March 2020). 
 
[12] BlackRock Inc (2020). iShares MSCI ACWI ETF. Available at: 
https://www.ishares.com/us/products/239600/ishares-msci-acwi-etf (Accessed: March 2020). 
 
[13] Wayne Eckerson (2018). The Flavors of Data Science and Engineering. Eckerson Group. 
Available at: https://www.eckerson.com/articles/diving-into-dataops-the-underbelly-of-modern-datapipelines (Accessed: March 2020). 
 
[14] Alberto Gomez (2020). Finamex: Friday's Good Read - Explaining the Recent Failure of Value 
Investing (Email: January 2020). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
55 
[15] AQR Capital Management, Betting Against Beta: Equity Factors, Daily (2020). Factor Investing. 
Available at: https://www.aqr.com/Insights/Datasets/Betting-Against-Beta-Equity-Factors-Daily 
(Accessed: March 2020). 
 
[16] AQR Capital Management, Quality Minus Junk: Factors, Daily (2020). Factor Investing. 
Available at: https://www.aqr.com/Insights/Datasets/Quality-Minus-Junk-Factors-Daily (Accessed: 
March 2020). 
  
[17] Scikit-learn (2020). sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestRegressor. Available at: https://scikitlearn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestRegressor.html (Accessed: March 
2020). 
 
[18] Scikit-learn (2020). sklearn.linear_model.Ridge. Available at: https://scikitlearn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.Ridge.html (Accessed: March 2020). 
 
[19] Marko Kolanovic & Rajesh T. Krishnamachari (2017). Big Data and AI Strategies - Machine 
Learning and Alternative Data Approach to Investing. J.P. Morgan. Available at: 
https://www.cfasociety.org/cleveland/Lists/Events%20Calendar/Attachments/1045/BIG-Data_AIJPMmay2017.pdf (Accessed: March, 2020). 
 
[20] Andrew Ang, Bob Bass, Sara Shores (2017). Strategic Factor Allocation. BlackRock. Available 
at: https://files.assettv.com/live/blk-strategic-factor-allocation-2017.pdf (Accessed: March, 2020). 
  
[21] Oguz A. Acar (2019). Why Crowdsourcing Often Leads to Bad Ideas. Harvard Business Review. 
Available at: https://hbr.org/2019/12/why-crowdsourcing-often-leads-to-bad-ideas (Accessed: March, 
2020). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
56 
Appendix 
 
Appendix A. 1st Country ETF Universe 
 
Ticker 
Country 
Name 
Inception 
ARGT 
Argentina 
Global X MSCI Argentina ETF 
03/03/2011 
EWA 
Australia 
iShares MSCI Australia ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWO 
Austria 
iShares MSCI Austria ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWK 
Belgium 
iShares MSCI Belgium ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWZ 
Brazil 
iShares MSCI Brazil ETF 
14/07/2000 
EWC 
Canada 
iShares MSCI Canada ETF 
18/03/1996 
ECH 
Chile 
iShares MSCI Chile ETF 
16/11/2007 
MCHI 
China 
iShares MSCI China ETF 
31/03/2011 
ICOL 
Colombia 
iShares MSCI Colombia ETF 
20/06/2013 
EDEN 
Denmark 
iShares MSCI Denmark ETF 
26/01/2012 
EGPT 
Egypt 
VanEck Vectors Egypt Index ETF 
18/02/2010 
EFNL 
Finland 
iShares MSCI Finland ETF 
26/01/2012 
EWQ 
France 
iShares MSCI France ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWG 
Germany 
iShares MSCI Germany ETF 
18/03/1996 
GREK 
Greece 
Global X MSCI Greece ETF 
08/12/2011 
EWH 
Hong Kong 
iShares MSCI Hong Kong ETF 
18/03/1996 
INDA 
India 
iShares MSCI India ETF 
03/02/2012 
EIDO 
Indonesia 
iShares MSCI Indonesia ETF 
07/05/2010 
EIRL 
Ireland 
iShares MSCI Ireland ETF 
07/05/2010 
EIS 
Israel 
iShares MSCI Israel ETF 
28/03/2008 
EWI 
Italy 
iShares MSCI Italy ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWJ 
Japan 
iShares MSCI Japan ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWY 
Korea (South) 
iShares MSCI South Korea ETF 
12/05/2000 
EWM 
Malaysia 
iShares MSCI Malaysia ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWW 
Mexico 
iShares MSCI Mexico ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWN 
Netherlands 
iShares MSCI Netherlands ETF 
18/03/1996 
ENZL 
New Zealand 
iShares MSCI New Zealand ETF 
02/09/2010 
ENOR 
Norway 
iShares MSCI Norway ETF 
24/01/2012 
PAK 
Pakistan 
Global X MSCI Pakistan ETF 
23/04/2015 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
57 
EPU 
Peru 
iShares MSCI Peru ETF 
22/06/2009 
EPHE 
Philippines 
iShares MSCI Philippines ETF 
29/09/2010 
EPOL 
Poland 
iShares MSCI Poland ETF 
26/05/2010 
PGAL 
Portugal 
Global X MSCI Portugal ETF 
13/11/2013 
QAT 
Qatar 
iShares MSCI Qatar ETF 
01/05/2014 
ERUS 
Russian Federation 
iShares MSCI Russia ETF 
10/11/2010 
KSA 
Saudi Arabia 
iShares MSCI Saudi Arabia ETF 
17/09/2015 
EWS 
Singapore 
iShares MSCI Singapore ETF 
18/03/1996 
EZA 
South Africa 
iShares MSCI South Africa ETF 
07/02/2003 
EWP 
Spain 
iShares MSCI Spain ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWD 
Sweden 
iShares MSCI Sweden ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWL 
Switzerland 
iShares MSCI Switzerland ETF 
18/03/1996 
EWT 
Taiwan 
iShares MSCI Taiwan ETF 
23/06/2000 
THD 
Thailand 
iShares MSCI Thailand ETF 
28/03/2008 
TUR 
Turkey 
iShares MSCI Turkey ETF 
28/03/2008 
UAE 
United Arab Emirates 
iShares MSCI UAE ETF 
01/05/2014 
EWU 
United Kingdom 
iShares MSCI United Kingdom ET 
18/03/1996 
VOO 
United States 
Vanguard S&P 500 ETF 
09/09/2010 
Source: Own elaboration based on data from Bloomberg (Bloomberg LP, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
58 
Appendix B. Data Availability Review 
 
Ticker 
Country 
Market 
debt_gdp 
div_yield 
f_flow 
gdp_growth 
ARGT 
Argentina 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWA 
Australia 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWO 
Austria 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWK 
Belgium 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWZ 
Brazil 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWC 
Canada 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ECH 
Chile 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
MCHI 
China 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ICOL 
Colombia 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
EDEN 
Denmark 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
EGPT 
Egypt 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
EFNL 
Finland 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
EWQ 
France 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWG 
Germany 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
GREK 
Greece 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWH 
Hong Kong 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
INDA 
India 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
EIDO 
Indonesia 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EIRL 
Ireland 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
EIS 
Israel 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
EWI 
Italy 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWJ 
Japan 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWY 
Korea 
(South) 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWM 
Malaysia 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWW 
Mexico 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWN 
Netherlands 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ENZL 
New Zealand Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ENOR 
Norway 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
PAK 
Pakistan 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
59 
EPU 
Peru 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EPHE 
Philippines 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EPOL 
Poland 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
PGAL 
Portugal 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
QAT 
Qatar 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
ERUS 
Russian 
Federation 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
KSA 
Saudi Arabia Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWS 
Singapore 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EZA 
South Africa Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWP 
Spain 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWD 
Sweden 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWL 
Switzerland 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWT 
Taiwan 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
THD 
Thailand 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TUR 
Turkey 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
UAE 
United Arab 
Emirates 
Emerging 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
EWU 
United 
Kingdom 
Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
VOO 
United States Developed 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
 
Ticker 
mkt_cap 
mom_21 
mom_252 
mom_63 
mr_21 
mr_252 
ARGT 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWK 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWZ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWC 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ECH 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
MCHI 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ICOL 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EDEN 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
60 
EGPT 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EFNL 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWQ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWG 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
GREK 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWH 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
INDA 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EIDO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EIRL 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EIS 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWI 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWJ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWY 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWM 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWW 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWN 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ENZL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ENOR 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
PAK 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EPU 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EPHE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EPOL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
PGAL 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
QAT 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ERUS 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
KSA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWS 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EZA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWP 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWD 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWT 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
61 
THD 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TUR 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
UAE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWU 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
VOO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
 
Ticker 
mr_63 
pb 
pcf 
pc_ratio 
pe 
pmi 
ARGT 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWK 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWZ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWC 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ECH 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
MCHI 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ICOL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EDEN 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EGPT 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EFNL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWQ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWG 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
GREK 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWH 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
INDA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EIDO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EIRL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EIS 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWI 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWJ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWY 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWM 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWW 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWN 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
62 
ENZL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
ENOR 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
PAK 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EPU 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EPHE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EPOL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
PGAL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
QAT 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
ERUS 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
KSA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWS 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EZA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWP 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWD 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWT 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
THD 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TUR 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
UAE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
EWU 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
VOO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
 
Ticker 
reer 
short_int 
short_int_ratio 
sh_out 
ARGT 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWK 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWZ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWC 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ECH 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
MCHI 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ICOL 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
EDEN 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
 
63 
EGPT 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
EFNL 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
EWQ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWG 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
GREK 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWH 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
INDA 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
EIDO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EIRL 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
EIS 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
EWI 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWJ 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWY 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWM 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWW 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWN 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ENZL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
ENOR 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
PAK 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
EPU 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EPHE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EPOL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
PGAL 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
QAT 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
ERUS 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
KSA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWS 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EZA 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWP 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWD 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWL 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
EWT 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128

 
64 
THD 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TUR 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
UAE 
TRUE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
FALSE 
EWU 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
VOO 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
TRUE 
Source: Own Elaboration 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3570128
