Algorithmic Trading and Market Efficiency around the
Introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market
DARYA YUFEROVA∗
October 29, 2023
ABSTRACT
I study the effect of algorithmic trading on market efficiency, taking into account past market
and limit order flows alike. I find that an exogenous increase in algorithmic trading around
the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market leads to a significant decrease in the predictive
power of surprises in market order imbalance and limit order book imbalances, especially at
the outer levels of the limit order book. However, the predictive power of past returns remains
largely unchanged. This suggests that algorithmic trading improves market efficiency by
facilitating the incorporation of information embedded in both market and limit order flows.
JEL classification: G12, G14.
Keywords: Market Efficiency, Limit Order Book, Algorithmic Trading.
∗Norwegian School of Economics (NHH); e-mail address: darya.yuferova@nhh.no. I am grateful to Dion
Bongaerts, Mathijs Cosemans, Sarah Draus, Thierry Foucault, Wenqian Huang, Lingtian Kong, Albert
Menkveld, Nils Friewald, Marco Pagano, Christine Parlour, Loriana Pelizzon, Dominik R¨osch, Stephen Rush,
Asani Sarkar, Elvira Sojli, Mark van Achter, Mathijs van Dijk, Wolf Wagner, Jun Uno, Marius Zoican,
participants of the FMA 2018, the FMA Europe 2018, the SGF conference 2018, the NFN 2016 Young
Scholars Finance Workshop, the FMA 2015 Doctoral Consortium, the PhD course on “Market Liquidity”
in Brussels, and seminar participants at Gothenburg University, Goethe University, Norwegian School of
Economics, Norwegian Business School, Paris Dauphine University, Erasmus University, NYU Stern, and the
Tinbergen Institute for helpful comments. I gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Vereniging
Trustfonds Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. I am also grateful to NYU Stern and Rotterdam School of
Management, Erasmus University, where some work on this paper was done. This work was carried out on
the National e-infrastructure with the support of the SURF Foundation. I thank OneMarket Data for the
use of their OneTick software.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Market efficiency is a crucial characteristic of a well-functioning financial system.
In
recent decades, several changes have taken place that have influenced the speed of information
incorporation in equity markets. In particular, (i) recent technological developments gave
rise to a new class of market participants, namely, algorithmic traders;1 and (ii) a shift
from floor trading to electronic limit order book market took place.2 There exists prominent
literature investigating the role of automation and resultant algorithmic trading activity on
market efficiency (see, e.g., Hendershott and Moulton (2011), and Boehmer, Fong, and Wu
(2021)). However, this literature tends to focus on market efficiency measures that take into
account only past returns and market order flow,3 thus neglecting the speed of information
incorporation embedded in the past limit order flow. I aim to fill this void by studying how
an exogenous shock to algorithmic trading affects market efficiency, taking into consideration
past market and limit order flows alike.
On the one hand, algorithmic traders have a natural advantage in facilitating market
efficiency in limit order book markets for the following reasons. First, algorithmic traders
can execute their trading strategies at a much higher speed than human beings. Second,
algorithmic traders are well-equipped to use limit orders, since they can monitor the market
conditions continuously, and thus efficiently manage pick-off risk (i.e., being able to adjust
their limit orders quickly to incorporate new information, and thus avoid execution under
1For example, Carrion (2013) reports that 68% of trading volume on NASDAQ (sample period: January
2008 – December 2009 and February 22, 2010 – February 26, 2010) stems from high-frequency traders (an
important subset of algorithmic traders).
2According to Swan and Westerholm (2006), around 90% of the largest equity markets are organized as
pure limit order book markets or limit order books with designated market makers as of the beginning of
2000.
3The conventional wisdom in the microstructure literature used to be that informed traders use only
market orders, while uninformed traders use both market and limit orders (see Glosten and Milgrom (1985),
Kyle (1985), Glosten (1994), and Seppi (1997)). Thus, under the traditional view, only the market order flow
contains information. However, recent theoretical studies provide a more nuanced view on the price discovery
process in limit order book markets by allowing informed traders to choose between market and limit orders
(see Kaniel and Liu (2006), Goettler, Parlour, and Rajan (2009), and Ro¸su (2020)). Recent empirical and
experimental studies confirm that informed traders actively use both order types (among others, Bloomfield,
O’Hara, and Saar (2005), Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2015), Baruch, Panayides, and Venkataraman (2017),
and Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2019)).
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

unfavorable conditions). Third, sophisticated algorithms can quickly collect and process information, both from the footprints of traders that possess private fundamental information,
and also from press releases, social media posts, and so on.
On the other hand, algorithmic trading might also hinder the speed of information incorporation in the limit order book markets for the following reasons. First, algorithmic traders
tend to slice and dice their orders and submit them across different exchanges and alternative trading venues, thus exacerbating market (and information) fragmentation. Second,
algorithmic traders might use their speed advantage to adversely select other market participants, which in turn might decrease the willingness of other market participants to trade in
the first place and thus deter information incorporation. To sum up, the resulting effect of
algorithmic trading on market efficiency in the limit order book markets is not ex-ante clear
and is worth a thorough investigation.
To establish a causal effect of algorithmic trading on market efficiency, I extend the approach of Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) and use the introduction of the NYSE
Hybrid Market as an instrumental variable (IV) for algorithmic trading in the stacked IV
regression approach.4 The introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market was a permanent technological change in market design that resulted in increased automation and trading speed
(see Hendershott and Moulton (2011)). Stocks had a staggered rollout to the NYSE Hybrid
Market from October 2006 through January 2007, which allows for a causal effect identification.
I use the quote-to-trade ratio as a proxy for algorithmic trading that can be easily computed from the U.S. consolidated tape, which spans all stocks and exchanges in the U.S.
This is important since it allows for the establishment of a causal inference in a large sample
study. I proxy for market efficiency by extending the approach of Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2005, 2008) to incorporate the role of the market and limit order flows alike. In
4Recent advances in econometrics literature question reliability of two-way fixed effects estimator using a
regular IV based on staggered events (see Baker, Larcker, and Wang (2022), and Roth, Sant’Anna, Bilinski,
and Poe (2023)).
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

particular, I use intraday return predictability arising from past returns, surprises in market
order imbalance (based on market and marketable limit orders alike) and limit order book
imbalances using tick-by-tick consolidated trade and quote data and data on the first 10
best levels of the NYSE limit order book from the Thomson Reuters Tick History (TRTH)
database.5
My main results can be summarized as follows. First, I show that the exogenous shock
to algorithmic trading improves market efficiency, which is evident from decreased R2 from
the intraday predictive regressions. To be more precise, with one within standard deviation
increase in the proxy for algorithmic trading, market efficiency improves by 17.5% relative
to the whole sample average. This finding confirms that algorithmic traders indeed facilitate
the speed of information incorporation.
Second, I show that improvement in market efficiency comes from the decreased predictive power of the surprises in both market and limit order book imbalances. In particular,
with one within standard deviation increase in the proxy for algorithmic trading activity,
the partial R2 of the surprises in market order imbalance decreases significantly, by 36.53%,
relative to the sample average. At the same time, the partial R2 of the surprises in depth imbalances at the inner, middle, and outer levels of the limit order book decreases significantly,
by 12.41%, 10.87%, and 36.36%, respectively, relative to the sample average, respectively.
Finally, the predictive power of past returns remains unchanged with an exogenous shock
to algorithmic trading.
Thus, if one uses measures of market efficiency based solely on
mid-quote returns, one might conclude that an increase in algorithmic trading due to the
introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market has no effect on market efficiency in the short-run
(which echoes the findings of Hendershott and Moulton (2011) for a 40-day event window).
In addition, I show that market efficiency improves consistently across all market capitalization terciles with the effect primarily driven by increased speed of the information
5I use surprises in market order imbalance and limit order book imbalances following, e.g., Huang and
Stoll (1997), Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans (1997), and Sadka (2006), as only unexpected changes
in the order flow contain information.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

incorporation embedded in surprises in market order imbalance and limit order imbalance
at the outer levels of the limit order book. My results are also robust to alternative proxies
for algorithmic trading and different event window sizes.
To date, there is no evidence that algorithmic traders bring new information to the
market. Rather they are able to process and act on the existing pool of information faster
than other traders.6 Thus, an increase in algorithmic trading activity could affect the speed
of price discovery through competition among algorithmic trading for the same information
(either by processing the same news releases or by analyzing past order flow patterns).
Increased competition should lead to a decrease in profits algorithmic traders could make
by, e.g., arbitraging stale limit orders away (and thus, adversely selecting other market
participants). Though I cannot directly measure the profits of such arbitrageurs, I use outof-sample R2 based on the one-step ahead forecasts from predictive regressions to provide
indirect evidence on this matter. I document that the probability of observing non-negative
out-of-sample R2 (in other words, the probability of making profits from trading strategies
based on such forecasts) decreases significantly with one within standard deviation increase
in the proxy for algorithmic trading, by 5.18%. This is economically meaningful given that
the respective average probability of the whole sample is 31.50%. These results are consistent
with Hendershott and Moulton (2011), who document that the increase in market efficiency
after the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market has come at the expense of increased
adverse selection costs – a likely result of the increased competition between algorithmic
traders.
I contribute to two streams of literature on (i) algorithmic trading and market efficiency;
and (ii) intraday return predictability. First, my paper contributes to the ongoing debate on
the effect of algorithmic trading on market efficiency.7 Hendershott and Moulton (2011) show
6In this paper, I am agnostic on whether the increased algorithmic trading is impeding or promoting the
incentives for fundamental information production in the market (see, e.g., Dugast and Foucault (2018) and
Weller (2018)).
7This debate has recently intensified with the focus on high-frequency traders (an important subset
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

that market efficiency improves after the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market in the
long-run, while in the short-run return autocorrelation and variance ratio remain unaffected.
Chaboud, Chiquoine, Hjalmarsson, and Vega (2014) show for the foreign exchange market
that algorithmic trading causes a decrease in the number of triangular arbitrage opportunities
and in the autocorrelation of returns. Boehmer, Fong, and Wu (2021) provide evidence for
the international equity markets that algorithmic trading improves market liquidity and
market efficiency, but increases short-term volatility.
All these papers focus on market
efficiency measures that neglect past limit order flow. Thus, my main contribution to this
stream of literature lies in considering both market and limit order flows while investigating
the effect of algorithmic trading on market efficiency.
Second, there is a stream of literature on intraday return predictability: from market
order flow (see Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2005, 2008)); from limit order flow (see
Kavajecz and Odders-White (2001), Harris and Panchapagesan (2005), Cao, Hansch, and
Wang (2009), and Cenesizoglu, Dionne, and Zhou (2022)). I note that papers investigating
intraday return predictability from the limit order book often focus on the limited amount
of stocks (mainly the largest and most actively traded stocks on the market). I contribute
to this literature not only by analyzing a large cross-section of stocks but, most importantly,
by developing new measures to summarize the limit order book’s informational content.
The paper is structured as follows. Section I discusses the data and methodology used
in the paper. Section II provides the main empirical results. Section III contains additional
analysis. Section IV concludes.
of algorithmic traders). I refer to Biais and Foucault (2014), O’Hara (2015), and Menkveld (2016) for a
comprehensive review of papers on high-frequency trading activity and market quality.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

I.
Data and method
In this section, I describe my data and variables (see Section I.A) and the methodology
used to identify the causal effects of algorithmic trading on market efficiency, taking into
account market and limit order flows alike (see Section I.B).
A.
Data and variables
I obtain intraday data on trades and best bid-offer quotes, as well as the 10 best levels
of the limit order book for the U.S. market from the TRTH database for the period from
June 2006 to May 2007. The TRTH database is provided by the Securities Industry Research
Centre of Asia-Pacific (SIRCA). The limit order book data provided by TRTH do not include
order-level information (e.g., they do not contain order submission, revision, or cancellation
details), only the 10 best price levels and the depth on bid and ask sides of the book that
are visible to the public. The data for the limit order book come from the NYSE. The data
for trades and best bid-offer quotes come from the consolidated tape. In other words, the
best bid-offer reported in the data is the best bid-offer for any exchange in the U.S.
TRTH data are organized by Reuters Instrumental Codes (RICs), which are identical
to TICKERs provided by the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Merging data
from CRSP and TRTH allows me to identify common shares that indicate the NYSE as their
primary exchange and to use company-specific information (e.g., market capitalization and
turnover). This study is limited to NYSE-listed stocks only due to limit order book data
availability. I require all stocks to be present in the CRSP database for the whole sample
period. I discard stocks with an average monthly price bigger than USD 1,000 and smaller
than USD 5. I winsorize all the variables at the 0.5% and 99.5% levels.8
For further analysis, I aggregate intraday data from TRTH in the following way.
I
8In the Internet Appendix IA 1, I repeat the analysis with the variables winsorized at the 2.5% and
97.5% levels. The findings are robust to alternative winsorization thresholds.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

compute one-minute mid-quote returns and market order imbalances and take snapshots
of the limit order book at the end of each one-minute interval. I filter the intraday data
following R¨osch, Subrahmanyam, and Van Dijk (2016). First, I discard trades, quotes, and
limit order book data that are not part of the continuous trading session. Continuous trading
session hours for the NYSE are 9:30-16:00 ET, and they remain unchanged during the sample
period. In addition, to attenuate a concern about the strong intraday patterns in volatility
and trading activity (e.g., Andersen and Bollerslev (1997)), I discard the first and last 30
minutes of the continuous trading session.
Second, I discard block trades (i.e., trades with a trade size greater than 10,000 shares)
because these trades are likely to receive special treatment. Third, I discard data entries that
are likely to be faulty. Faulty entries include entries with negative or zero prices or quotes;
entries with a negative bid-ask spread; entries with a proportional bid-ask spread bigger than
25%; and entries that have a trade price, bid price, or ask price that deviates from the 10
surrounding ticks by more than 10%. In addition, I require that at least five levels of the
limit order book be available at the end of each one-minute interval. For a stock-day to enter
my sample, at least 100 valid one-minute intervals with at least one trade are required. If
there are less than 200 days in my sample period for a particular stock, I exclude this stock
from the analysis. Overall, I am left with 950 NYSE-listed common stocks.9
INSERT TABLE I HERE
Table I shows the summary statistics of my sample. In particular, I report average market
capitalization in billions of USD, closing quoted spread, volatility, annualized turnover, and
price for the whole sample, as well as for market capitalization terciles as of the beginning of
June 2006. The average market capitalization in my sample is USD 10.40 billion, with small
9As a comparison, Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) use 943 NYSE-listed common stocks around
Autoquote introduction. In a closely related paper, Hendershott and Moulton (2011) use 400 NYSE-listed
common stocks randomly selected from the top eight market capitalization deciles and compare them to the
matched sample of NASDAQ-listed common stocks around the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

companies having a market capitalization slightly below USD 1 billion and large companies
having a market capitalization of more than USD 27 billion. My sample is in line with the
sample used by Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011), who have a market capitalization
ranging from USD 0.41 billion (quintile 1) to USD 28.99 billion (quintile 5) around Autoquote
introduction. It is also in line with the sample used by Hendershott and Moulton (2011),
who have a market capitalization ranging from USD 1.05 billion (quartile 1) to USD 29.94
billion (quartile 4) for NYSE-listed common stocks around the introduction of the NYSE
Hybrid Market. The average price in my sample ranges from USD 26.07 for small stocks to
USD 52.02 for large stocks as compared to a range of USD 29.59 to USD 51.41 for the NYSE
sample used by Hendershott and Moulton (2011). The average quoted spread in my sample
ranges from 6.25 bps for large stocks to 14.03 bps for small stocks as compared to a range
of 4.70 bps to 14.20 bps for the sample used by Hendershott and Moulton (2011).
A.1.
Proxies for algorithmic trading
The TRTH data do not allow for directly identifying transactions and orders coming from
algorithmic traders. Therefore, in this study, I proxy for algorithmic trading by means of
the quote-to-trade ratio. The quote-to-trade ratio can be easily computed from consolidated
tape for a large sample of U.S. stocks based on the data from all U.S. exchanges. The quoteto-trade ratio is often used by academics and regulators as either a proxy for algorithmic
trading (Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) and Boehmer, Fong, and Wu (2021)) or,
in more recent studies, as a proxy for an important subset of algorithmic trading, namely,
high-frequency trading (Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015), SEC (2010), and ASIC (2013)).
More specifically, I consider the following proxies for algorithmic trading in the spirit of
Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011), Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015), and Boehmer,
Fong, and Wu (2021): QTE/DV OL, the daily number of best bid-offer quote updates
relative to daily trading volume (in USD 10,000) and QTE/TRD, the daily number of best
bid-offer quote updates relative to the daily number of transactions. I use the QTE/DV OL
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

in a baseline analysis, while QTE/TRD is used for a robustness check. In addition, since
algorithmic traders are known to slice and dice their orders, I use the average trade size as
another alternative proxy for algorithmic trading (see Section III.C).
A.2.
Proxy for market efficiency
I follow Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2005, 2008), Wuyts (2008), and Cao, Hansch,
and Wang (2009) and estimate intraday predictive regressions to quantify predictive power
not only of the market order flow but also of the limit order flow. I construct intraday data
on returns, market order imbalances (Moib),10 and limit order book imbalances (Loib) at a
one-minute frequency. For all the variables, I discard overnight observations.
I follow Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2008) and compute one-minute log returns
(Ret) based on the prevailing mid-quotes (the average of the bid and ask prices) at the end of
the one-minute interval, rather than the transaction prices or mid-quotes matched with the
last transaction price. In this way, I avoid the bid-ask bounce and ensure that the returns
for every stock are indeed computed over a one-minute interval. I implicitly assume that
there are no stale best bid-offer quotes in the sample, and thus I consider a quote to be valid
until a new quote arrives or until a new trading day starts.
To calculate a one-minute Moib, I match trades with quotes and sign trades using the
Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm. TRTH data are stamped to the millisecond, therefore the
Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm is quite accurate. In particular, a trade is considered to be
buyer initiated (seller initiated) if it is closer to the ask price (bid price) of the prevailing
quote. For each one-minute interval, I aggregate the trading volume in USD 10,000 for buyerand seller-initiated trades separately at the stock level. Thereafter, I subtract seller-initiated
dollar volume from buyer-initiated dollar volume to obtain Moib. For stock i on date d at
one-minute interval t,
10Market order imbalance is based on both market and marketable limit orders.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Moibi,d,t = Buyer initiated volumei,d,t −Seller inititated volumei,d,t
(1)
There are multiple ways to describe the limit order book. Most of the papers that study
intraday return predictability either focus on different levels of the limit order book or on the
corresponding ratios of these levels between the ask and bid sides of the limit order book.
For instance, Wuyts (2008), Cao, Hansch, and Wang (2009), and Cenesizoglu, Dionne, and
Zhou (2022) use slopes and depth at different levels of the limit order book to summarize
its shape. However, due to variations in the shape of the limit order book as well as in the
number of available levels of the limit order book, I believe that definition of inner, middle,
and outer levels by means of a relative threshold is more suitable than definition by means
of the number of levels in the limit order book (e.g., levels from 1 to 3 are inner levels, levels
from 4 to 6 are middle levels, and levels from 7 to 10 are outer levels).
Some examples of a relative approach to limit order book description are found in Cao,
Hansch, and Wang (2009), who also use volume-weighted average price for different order
sizes to describe the limit order book, and in Kavajecz and Odders-White (2004), who use a
so-called “near-depth” measure, which is a proportion of the depth close to the best bid-offer
level relative to the cumulative depth within a certain price range.
I focus on the ratios of depth concentrated at the inner, middle, and outer levels of the
limit order book between the ask and bid sides. I use a modification of the “near-depth”
measure introduced by Kavajecz and Odders-White (2004). First, I compute a snapshot of
the ask and bid sides of the limit order book at the end of each one-minute interval. Then, I
define the inner levels as price levels between the mid-quote and one-third of the minimum
across the bid and ask sides of the total distance between the 10th available limit price and
the mid-quote. Outer levels are defined as price levels above two-thirds of the minimum
across the bid and ask sides of the total distance between the 10th available limit price and
the mid-quote. I refer to the remaining levels as the middle levels of the limit order book.
For stock i on date d at one-minute interval t,
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Heighti,d,t = min[(P Ask,10
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t), (MidQuotei,d,t −P Bid,10
i,d,t
)]
(2)
Inneri,d,t =
P10
k=1 DepthBid,k
i,d,t ∗1(|P Bid,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| <= 1
3Heighti,d,t)−
P10
k=1 DepthBid,k
i,d,t ∗1(|P Bid,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| <= 1
3Heighti,d,t)+
−DepthAsk,k
i,d,t
∗1(|P Ask,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| <= 1
3Heighti,d,t)
+DepthAsk,k
i,d,t
∗1(|P Ask,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| <= 1
3Heighti,d,t)
(3)
Middlei,d,t =
P10
k=1 DepthBid,k
i,d,t ∗1(1
3Heighti,d,t < |P Bid,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| <= 2
3Heighti,d,t)−
P10
k=1 DepthBid,k
i,d,t ∗1(1
3Heighti,d,t < |P Bid,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| <= 2
3Heighti,d,t)+
−DepthAsk,k
i,d,t
∗1(1
3Heighti,d,t) < |P Ask,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| <= 2
3Heighti,d,t)
+DepthAsk,k
i,d,t
∗1(1
3Heighti,d,t) < |P Ask,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| <= 2
3Heighti,d,t)
(4)
Outeri,d,t =
P10
k=1 DepthBid,k
i,d,t ∗1(|P Bid,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| > 2
3Heighti,d,t)−
P10
k=1 DepthBid,k
i,d,t ∗1(|P Bid,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| > 2
3Heighti,d,t)+
−DepthAsk,k
i,d,t
∗1(|P Ask,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| > 2
3Heighti,d,t)
+DepthAsk,k
i,d,t
∗1(|P Ask,k
i,d,t
−MidQuotei,d,t| > 2
3Heighti,d,t)
(5)
My relative approach allows me to define in a unified fashion the levels that are close to
the best bid-offer level, as well as the levels that are far away from the best bid-offer level
across stocks and through time.11
As a next step, I run the following regression using lagged returns, lagged total market
and limit order flows to predict returns one-minute ahead:
Reti,d,t = α + β1Reti,d,t−1 + β2Moibi,d,t−1+
+ β3Inneri,d,t−1 + β4Middlei,d,t−1 + β5Outeri,d,t−1 + ϵt
(6)
For each stock-day, I compute the partial R2 of each of the variables in the predictive
11I note that the definition of inner, middle, and outer levels is sensitive to the price of the stock. For
example, the limit price range of the outer levels could comprise, e.g., 10% of the trading price for stock
traded at USD 10 and only 1% of the trading price for stock traded at USD 100. Therefore, in all my
analyses, I control for the inverse of price, thus elevating the aforementioned concern.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

regressions averaged across all possible orderings of the variables (as in Lindeman, Merenda,
and Gold (1980))12 to proxy for market efficiency.
The predictive power stemming from market and limit order flows can be a result of
persistence in the order flow (which in turn can increase market makers’ inventory concerns)
or of slow incorporation of the new information.
Hasbrouck (1991) and Chordia, Roll,
and Subrahmanyam (2005) show that Moib is positively auto-correlated. Moreover, Biais,
Hillion, and Spatt (1995) and Ellul, Holden, Jain, and Jennings (2007) show that order flow
is also persistent for limit orders. Previous empirical studies (e.g., Huang and Stoll (1997),
Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans (1997), and Sadka (2006)) use unexpected changes in
the market order flow to isolate the information-related component. I extend this approach
one step further and apply it to both market and limit order flows. I argue that it is an
appropriate extension as both market and limit order flows are persistent. Therefore, I use
surprises in the order flow for both market and limit orders to isolate the predictive power
stemming from the slow incorporation of the new information in the prices.
I obtain the surprises in returns, Moib, and Loib by estimating stock-day V AR(k) regression (the number of lags, k, can take values from 1 to 5 and is selected by AIC criteria)
and keeping the residual values:
Xt = α +
l=k
X
l=1
βXt−l + ϵt
(7)
where Xt is a vector that includes Rett, Moibt, Innert, Middlet, and Outert measured at the
t-th one-minute interval; ϵt is a vector of residuals that includes the RetU
t , MoibU
t , InnerU
t ,
MiddleU
t , and OuterU
t .
12Decomposition of the R2 is sensitive to the order of the explanatory variables. The same variable will be
assigned higher explanatory power when it is the first variable in the decomposition than when it is the last
variable in the decomposition. In Internet Appendix IA 2, I repeat the main analysis using the partial R2
of each of the variables under the assumption that the variable is added last in the model, which represents
the conservative lower bound of its predictive power. The results remain largely unchanged.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Afterward, I run predictive regressions using one-minute mid-quote returns as the dependent variable. As explanatory variables, I use lagged surprises in market order imbalance and
lagged surprises in depth imbalances at the inner, middle, and outer levels of the limit order
book. I note that misspecification of the V AR(k) model may lead to some inventory effects
ending up in surprises. To address this issue, I also include lagged returns as an explanatory
variable in the predictive regressions to capture return reversal, which is a distinct feature
of inventory management. The regression equation for each stock i on day d is given by:
Reti,d,t = α + β1Reti,d,t−1 + β2MoibU
i,d,t−1+
+ β3InnerU
i,d,t−1 + β4MiddleU
i,d,t−1 + β5OuterU
i,d,t−1 + ϵt
(8)
For each stock-day, I compute the partial R2 of each of the variables in the predictive
regression to proxy for market efficiency in the same manner as for Eq. (6).
B.
Instrumental variable approach
In this paper, I argue that it is important to take limit order flow into account while
evaluating the effect of algorithmic trading on market efficiency since algorithmic traders
are well-equipped to actively use limit orders in their trading strategies. More sophisticated
algorithms can read information from the market and limit order flows and, thus facilitate
its incorporation into prices. Identifying the causal effect of algorithmic trading on market
efficiency is not a trivial task, as the degree of activity in each stock on each day is an
endogenous choice made by the algorithmic trader. Therefore, I adopt an IV regression
approach following Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) to establish causality.
As an instrumental variable, I use the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market (see
Hendershott and Moulton (2011)). On March 22, 2006, the SEC approved the NYSE Hybrid
Market proposal (see SEC (2006)). According to the SEC, there were three main changes:
expanding automatic execution; automating floor members’ participation, enabling them
to create liquidity electronically; and allowing specialists to use algorithms to fulfill their
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

obligations.13 Automatic execution was present at the NYSE before the introduction of the
NYSE Hybrid Market; however, orders could be executed automatically only for the quantity
available at the best bid-offer level. Best bid-offer quotes were also updated automatically
rather than manually entered by the specialist since Autoquote introduction in 2003. After
the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market, orders were not only automatically executed
for the quantity available at the best bid-offer level, but were allowed to “walk” automatically
through the limit order book, therefore consuming liquidity from the deeper levels of the limit
order book.
The Hybrid Market was introduced by the NYSE to qualify as a fast market under
Reg NMS and thus maintain its market share going forward. Put differently, before the
introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market, the NYSE was still a largely human-based and slow
market, which made it a less attractive trading venue for algorithmic traders as compared
to other U.S. trading venues. Therefore, the Hybrid Market introduction can be viewed as
an exogenous trigger that boosted algorithmic trading activity on the NYSE.
The rollout of stocks to the NYSE Hybrid Market was implemented in a staggered way
from October 2006 through January 2007 (see Figure 1).14 Though the NYSE had been
testing new systems beforehand, the actual increase in automation and speed took place after
October 2006. For example, NYSE Chief Technology Officer Steve Rubinow has commented
on the tremendous execution speed increase achieved by the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid
Market: “The Hybrid Market launch has been very successful. With trade execution times
[for Hybrid Market] decreasing from an average of nine seconds to less than 0.3 seconds, our
customers and the trading-floor community are using the system effectively throughout the
day.”15
INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE
13See SEC Approves NYSE Hybrid Market Proposal, FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 2006-41.
14I obtain data on the NYSE Hybrid Market’s rollout, which was when the actual increase in the degree
of automated execution and speed took place, from Terrence Hendershott’s website.
15See Eric Lai, “NYSE Launches New Hybrid Trading,” Computerworld, October 16, 2006.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Though the introduction of both the NYSE Hybrid Market and Autoquote led to an
increase in automation and speed, I prefer the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market to
the introduction of Autoquote used in Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) because
the effects of Autoquote’s introduction are likely to be contaminated by the recent effects of
making the NYSE limit order book publicly available as of January 24, 2002.16 I focus on
the period surrounding the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market – an exogenous change
in market design that led to increased speed and automation of the NYSE – from June 2006
until May 2007 (following Hendershott and Moulton (2011)).17 The staggered nature of the
rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market allows for causal effect identification.
I improve on the methodology used by Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) and
estimate the stacked IV regression, since recent advances in the econometrics literature
question the reliability of two-way fixed effects estimator using staggered events in regular
IV setup (see Baker, Larcker, and Wang (2022) and Roth, Sant’Anna, Bilinski, and Poe
(2023)). To address this concern, I follow the approach used by Cengiz, Dube, Lindner, and
Zipperer (2019) and create a stacked dataset for each cohort (where the cohort is defined
as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market on a particular date) for an event
window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date to the NYSE Hybrid Market. As a
control group for each cohort, I use those stocks that have not been rolled out to the NYSE
Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window.18 Afterward, I estimate the
following stacked IV regression saturated with stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects using
16It is crucial for my analysis since I examine changes in predictive power of past limit order book
imbalances, and therefore it is necessary that this information is publicly available to all market participants,
and that they are accustomed to it.
17I acknowledge that the compliance date for Reg NMS Rules 610 and 611 is included in the sample
period. According to SEC (2005), p. 307, the compliance date for the aforementioned rules was August 31,
2006: “As of that date, trading centers must begin trading all NMS stocks pursuant to the requirements of
Rules 610 and 611.” I note that the first stocks were rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market in October
2006, well after the compliance date of Reg NMS rules; thus, my results are unlikely to be contaminated
by Reg NMS implementation. In the Internet Appendix IA 3, I confirm that my results are robust to the
exclusion of the period affected by Reg NMS.
18In Section III.D, I use alternative event windows of [-10;+10] and [-15;+15] trading days. The results
remain largely unchanged.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

the constructed stacked dataset with standard errors clustered by stock-cohort.
Yc,i,d = αc,i + γc,d + β1 \
ATc,i,d + β2MCAPc,i,m−1 + β3(1/PRCc,i,m−1)+
+ β4Turnoverc,i,m−1 + β5PQSPRc,i,m−1 + β6Rangec,i,m−1 + ϵc,i,d
(9)
where Yc,i,d is the partial R2 of each of the variables in the predictive regressions (see Eq. (6)
and (8)) averaged across all possible orderings of the variables for cohort c and stock i on
day d, and αc,i and γc,d are stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects, respectively. \
ATc,i,d is
a proxy for algorithmic trading for cohort c and stock i on day d (the daily number of quotes
relative to daily trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL), which is instrumented out
using the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market. In addition, I control for the daily log of
market capitalization in billions (MCAPc,i,m−1), inverse of price (1/PRCc,i,m−1), annualized
turnover (Turnoverc,i,m−1), closing quoted spread (PQSPRc,i,m−1), and the square root of
high minus low range (Rangec,i,m−1) averaged over the previous month, m −1. As a set
of instruments, I use all explanatory variables with [
ATi,d replaced by Hybridi,d, a dummy
variable that equals one if the stock i on day d is rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market
and zero otherwise.
II.
Empirical results
In this section, I discuss my empirical results. First, I provide summary statistics of
the proxies for algorithmic trading in my sample (see Section II.A). Second, I document
intraday return predictability from past returns and market and limit order flows (see Section
II.B). Finally, I analyze the effect of an exogenous increase in algorithmic trading on market
efficiency proxied by intraday return predictability from past returns and market and limit
order flows (see Section II.C).
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

A.
Summary of proxies for algorithmic trading
I present the average proxies for algorithmic trading (averaged across stock-days) in
Table II for the whole sample of 950 stocks and for different market capitalization terciles
(based on market capitalization at the beginning of June 2006). I show that the amounts
of the best bid-offer quote updates, trades, trading volume, and trade size increase from
small-cap stocks to large-cap stocks from 6,471 to 22,467 quote updates, from 1,369 to
8,826 trades, from USD 9,260,000 to USD 138,760,000, and from 242.80 to 315.90 shares,
respectively.
On average, in my sample, for each USD 10,000 of daily trading volume,
I observe 6.79 best bid-offer quote updates, and for each trade, I observe 4.56 best bidoffer quote updates.
For instance, Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011) document
5.42 electronic messages for each USD 10,000 of daily trading volume for the largest stocks
quantile, while the corresponding statistic of the largest tercile in my data is 2.51. I note
that my measure is different from the one used in Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011)
because I do not have access to the whole order history (i.e., submission, modification, and
cancellation) and I use only updates at the best bid-offer level. In other words, the number of
electronic messages for each USD 10,000 must be by definition higher than the number of the
best bid-offer quote updates. I also note that the changes in the algorithmic trading proxies
from large-cap stocks to small-cap stocks are in line with those documented by Hendershott,
Jones, and Menkveld (2011).
INSERT TABLE II HERE
B.
Summary of proxies for market efficiency
To proxy for market efficiency, I estimate predictive regressions from total order flow
(see Eq. (6)) and surprises in the order flow (see Eq. (8)). Table III presents the average
coefficients together with the proportion of the regressions that have significant individual tstatistics of the predictive stock-day regressions from total order flow (Panel A) and surprises
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

in the order flow (Panel B). I focus my discussion on Panel A only, since the results reported
in Panel B are qualitatively similar. I discuss results for the whole sample only as the results
for different market capitalization terciles are in line with the results of the whole sample.
INSERT TABLE III HERE
Panel A of Table III shows that Moib is positively related to future stock returns (in
line with, e.g., Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2005, 2008)). In particular, the Moib
coefficient is 0.21 and is positive and significant in 29.6% of the stock-day regressions.19
Depth imbalances at the inner and middle levels of the limit order book (Inner and Middle,
respectively) are positively and significantly related to the future price movements in 54.8%
and 12.8%, respectively, while depth imbalances at the outer levels of the limit order book
(Outer) have, on average, negative effects; however, the proportion of positive and negative
significant stock-days is almost the same. The latter could be due to the fact that outer
levels are used for informed trading if and only if an informed trader receives a relatively
strong signal, which is unlikely to happen regularly on the market.
Table IV presents the proxy for market efficiency used in this paper. In particular, Panel
A of Table IV presents the partial R2 of each of the variables (averaged across all possible
orderings of the variables as in Lindeman, Merenda, and Gold (1980)) in the predictive stockday regressions from total order flow as defined by Eq. (6) for the whole sample and market
capitalization terciles. The partial R2 of Moib is 0.84%, while the partial R2 of limit order
book imbalances, Loib, is 2.49%. The largest predictive power comes from depth imbalances
at the inner levels of the limit order book (1.57%). As a comparison, Chordia, Roll, and
Subrahmanyam (2008) document an adjusted R2 of 0.51% for predictive regressions using
only the lagged dollar market order imbalance as a predictive variable for the 1993 – 2002
period. My results are also consistent with Cao, Hansch, and Wang (2009), who document
19As a comparison, R¨osch, Subrahmanyam, and Van Dijk (2016) document that the coefficient of Moib
is positive and significant in 30.07% of the predictive regressions, using only lagged dollar market order
imbalance as a predictive variable over the period between 1996 and 2010 for NYSE common stocks.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

an increase in adjusted R2 after the inclusion of additional levels of the limit order book
with a monotonic decrease of the added value for each additional level.
INSERT TABLE IV HERE
Panel B of Table IV presents the partial R2 of each of the variables (averaged across
all possible orderings of the variables as in Lindeman, Merenda, and Gold (1980)) in the
predictive stock-day regressions from the surprises in the order flow as defined by Eq. (8) for
the whole sample and market capitalization terciles. Using surprises instead of total market
and limit order flows allows me to remove the effect stemming from order flow persistence
and isolate the pure effect of the slow incorporation of information. The results show that
the majority of predictive power comes from the surprises in the order flow and thus is
attributable to slow information incorporation rather than inventory concerns due to the
persistence of market and limit order flows. In particular, overall R2 decreases only slightly
from 4.33% (Panel A) to 4.15% (Panel B); the partial R2 of MoibU is 0.78% (as compared
to the partial R2 of Moib of 0.84%); the partial R2 of LoibU is 2.35% (as compared to the
partial R2 of Loib of 2.49%).
C.
Algorithmic trading and market efficiency
In this section, I examine the causal effect of algorithmic trading on the predictive power
of past returns, market and limit order flows. Table V reports the results of the first-stage
of stacked IV regression (see Eq. (9)) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around
the rollout date to the NYSE Hybrid Market, with the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid
Market used as an instrument for algorithmic trading.20
INSERT TABLE V HERE
20In the Internet Appendix IA 4, I visualize the first stage of the stacked IV regression for an event
window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date to the NYSE Hybrid Market.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

I document that algorithmic trading, as proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote
updates relative to daily trading volume in USD 10,000 (QTE/DV OL) increases significantly
for the whole sample as well as for different market capitalization terciles. In particular,
algorithmic trading increases by 1.07 best bid-offer quote updates per USD 10,000 trading
volume or 15.76% (1.07
6.79) relative to its average value for the whole sample period or by 41.31%
(1.07
2.59) of its within standard deviation.21 Interestingly, I observe a monotonic decrease in the
changes in algorithmic trading activity due to the NYSE Hybrid Market’s introduction,
moving from small to large stocks.
INSERT TABLE VI HERE
The results for the second-stage of stacked IV regression for the whole sample are presented in Table VI. In particular, I report the effect of algorithmic trading, instrumented
out using the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market, on the partial R2 of each of the
variables in the predictive regressions using total order flow (see Eq. (6)) and surprises in
the order flow (see Eq. (8)) in Panels A and B, respectively.
Panel A of Table VI shows that one within standard deviation increase in the proxy for
algorithmic trading decreases the partial R2 of market order imbalance (Moib) and limit
order imbalance at the outer levels of the limit order book (Outer) by 0.29% (2.59 × -0.11)
and 0.16% (2.59 × -0.06), respectively. These effects remain of the same magnitude and
maintain their statistical significance at the 1% level if I use surprises in the order flow
instead of the total order flow (see Panel B of Table VI).
Panel A of Table VI also shows that the partial R2 of limit order imbalances at the inner
and middle levels of the limit order book (Inner and Middle) decreases slightly; however,
this decrease is not statistically significant. Panel B of Table VI shows that the predictive
power of the surprises in depth imbalances at the inner and middle levels of the limit order
21In the stacked dataset, one within standard deviation of QTE/DV OL is equal to 2.59.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

book decreases significantly with an increase in algorithmic trading.22,23
I note that it is important to distinguish between predictability from total order flow
and surprises in the order flow.
In this paper, I would like to estimate a causal effect
of algorithmic trading on the speed of the incorporation of new information, rather than
capture the effects resulting from order flow persistence. For the remainder of the paper, I
focus on the predictive power of surprises in the order flow.
In a closely related paper, Hendershott and Moulton (2011) show, for an 8-month event
window, that various measures of market efficiency (based on mid-quotes and/or market
order flow) increase after the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market, while for a 40-day
event window return autocorrelation and variance ratio remained largely unchanged and
only pricing error decreases by 7% relative to the pre-Hybrid average. I add to their findings
by showing that, though in the short-run, the predictive power of past mid-quote returns
indeed remains unchanged (I observe an insignificant decrease in the predictive power of
lagged returns), the predictive power of the surprises in the market order imbalance and
depth imbalances at various levels of the limit order book decreases significantly due to an
exogenous increase in algorithmic trading. In particular, Panel B of Table VI shows that one
within standard deviation increase in the proxy for algorithmic trading leads to a decrease
in the predictive power of the surprises in depth imbalances at the inner (InnerU), middle
(MiddleU), and outer (OuterU) levels of the limit order book: by 0.18% (2.59 × -0.07),
0.05% (2.59 × -0.02), and 0.16% (2.59 × -0.06), respectively. It is equivalent to a respective
decrease of 12.41% (0.18
1.45), 10.87% (0.05
0.46), and 36.36% (0.16
0.44) relative to the sample average.
Total R2 decreases by 0.73% (2.59 × -0.28) with one within standard deviation increase in
the proxy for algorithmic trading. This is equivalent to an improvement of overall market
22Naturally, market makers manage their inventory positions by adjusting best bid-offer quotes (which
are part of depth imbalance at the inner levels of the limit order book, Inner) in response to persistent
buying or selling pressure captured by market order imbalance, Moib.
23In the Internet Appendix IA 4, I visualize the second stage of the stacked IV regression for an event
window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date to the NYSE Hybrid Market.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

efficiency of 17.5% (0.73
4.15) relative to the whole sample average.
To sum up, an exogenous shock to algorithmic trading leads to an overall improvement in
market efficiency via faster incorporation of information embedded in the market and limit
order flows alike.
III.
Additional analysis
In this section, I provide additional results to support the baseline analysis discussed
in Section II.C. First, I repeat the main analysis for market capitalization terciles (Section
III.A). Second, I analyze the out-of-sample performance of intraday predictive regressions
(Section III.B). Third, I show that my results are robust to using alternative proxies of
algorithmic trading (Section III.C). Finally, I show that my results are robust for alternative
event windows (Section III.D).
A.
Algorithmic trading and market efficiency: Market capitalization terciles
In this section, I repeat the main analysis for different market capitalization terciles.24
Table VII presents the second-stage of stacked IV regression for different market capitalization terciles based on the partial R2 of each of the variables in the predictive regressions
using surprises in the order flow (see Eq. (8)).
INSERT TABLE VII HERE
Improvements in market efficiency due to the decreased predictive power of surprises
in market order imbalance (MoibU) and depth imbalance at the outer levels of the limit
order book (OuterU) are persistent across all three terciles.
Namely, an increase of one
within standard deviation in the proxy for algorithmic trading leads to a decrease in the
24I refer to Table V for the results of the first-stage of stacked IV regression for market capitalization
terciles.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

partial R2 of MoibU by 0.28% (3.98×-0.07), 0.23% (1.76×-0.13), and 0.12% (0.62×-0.20) for
small stocks, medium-sized stocks, and large stocks, respectively. An increase of one within
standard deviation in the proxy for algorithmic trading leads to a decrease in the partial
R2 of OuterU by 0.16% (3.98×-0.04), 0.09% (1.76×-0.05), and 0.07% (0.62×-0.12) for small
stocks, medium-sized stocks, and large stocks, respectively.25 The partial R2 of the surprises
in depth imbalance at the inner levels of the limit order book, InnerU, decreases significantly
for medium-sized stocks only. Overall, market efficiency improves consistently across terciles
as a result of an exogenous shock to algorithmic trading.
B.
Algorithmic trading and out-of-sample performance
In this section, I provide evidence on one channel through which market efficiency might
improve due to increased algorithmic trading activity. In particular, the introduction of
the NYSE Hybrid Market allowed market orders to automatically “walk” through the limit
order book, thus making it easier for algorithmic trading to arbitrage stale limit orders away.
Given that algorithmic traders are likely to compete for the same information, the resulting
profits from trading strategies based on the signals derived from the past order flow should
decrease with an exogenous increase in algorithmic trading activity. In the absence of trader
identification, I cannot directly measure the profits of algorithmic arbitrageurs, however, I
can evaluate the out-of-sample performance of the intraday predictive regressions. I build on
Campbell and Thompson (2008) and adapt their methodology to predict returns one minute
ahead using past surprises in the market and limit order flows using an expanding window to
ensure there is no look-ahead bias. An important difference is that my predictive regressions
are contained within a single stock-day. Given that I have five predictive variables, I require
100 one-minute intervals before I make a first forecast. In particular, I construct out-ofsample R2 (OOSR2) as follows:
25In the stacked dataset, one within standard deviation of QTE/DV OL is equal to 0.62, 1.76, and 3.98
for the large stocks, medium-sized stocks, and small stocks, respectively.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

OOSR2
i,d = 1 −ΣT
t=101(Reti,d,t −
\
Reti,d,t|1:t−1)
ΣT
t=101(Reti,d,t −Reti,d,1:t−1)
(10)
where Reti,d,t is a one-minute return for stock i, day d, and one-minute interval t,
\
Reti,d,t|1:t−1 is a one-minute ahead forecast based on the expanding window until interval
t −1 from the predictive regression using surprises in market and limit order flows (see Eq.
(8)) for stock i and day d,26 Reti,d,1:t−1 is the historical average return based on the expanding
window until interval t −1 for stock i and day d.
INSERT TABLE VIII HERE
I report summary statistics for OOSR2
i,d for the 950 NYSE-listed common stocks from
June 2006 to May 2007 in Table VIII. The results show that it is extremely hard to predict
intraday returns out-of-sample. The average OOSR2 is -1.75%, meaning that the historical
average of intraday returns is a better predictor than the forecast based on the expanding
window estimation of Eq. (8). I also note that large stocks exhibit a lower average OOSR2
(-2.01%) than small stocks (-1.67%) consistent with the intuition of large stocks benefiting
from more efficient prices. In the 75th percentile of the distribution, OOSR2 becomes slightly
positive, reaching 5.00% in the 95th percentile of the distribution for all stock-days.
INSERT TABLE IX HERE
As a next step, Campbell and Thompson (2008) consider a framework with a singleperiod horizon and mean-variance preferences to quantify investors’ profits, provided they
use the forecast from the predictive regressions as a trade signal.
They show that the
proportional increase in the expected returns of such a strategy is close to the ratio of
OOSR2 and Sharpe ratio. However, this method is well defined only if OOSR2 is positive,
which is not the case for my analysis. Though I cannot quantify the profits of arbitrageurs,
26Note that surprises in market and limit order flows are also obtained from the V AR(k) model (see Eq.
7) using information until interval t −1 only.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

I can check whether OOSR2 and the probability of observing a non-negative OOSR2 are
affected by the increased algorithmic trading activity due to the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid
market via stacked IV regression. In Table IX, I show that OOSR2 decreases significantly
with an increase in algorithmic trading activity for the whole sample, as well as for every
market capitalization tercile. The probability of observing a non-negative OOSR2 decreases
significantly for the whole sample.27 In particular, one within standard deviation increase in
the proxy for algorithmic trading decreases the likelihood of observing non-negative OOSR2
by 5.18% (2.59 × -0.02). This is economically meaningful given that the respective average
probability of the whole sample is 31.50%.
Overall, I provide indirect evidence that market efficiency improves via competition between algorithmic arbitrageurs, which is evident from the decreased probability of making
profits from a trading strategy based on the return forecasts from past market and limit
order flows.
C.
Algorithmic trading and market efficiency: Alternative proxies
In this section, instead of using QTE/DV OL, the daily number of best bid-offer quote
updates relative to daily trading volume (in USD 10,000), as a proxy for algorithmic trading,
I use QTE/TRD, the daily number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to the daily
number of transactions, and TRD SIZE, the trade size in 10,000 of shares. An increase in
algorithmic trading should result in larger QTE/TRD and smaller TRD SIZE.
The results of the first-stage of stacked IV regression are reported in Table X for QTE/TRD
(Panel A) and TRD SIZE (Panel B), respectively. I show that following the NYSE Hybrid
introduction QTE/TRD (TRD SIZE) has significantly increased (decreased) in line with
expectations.
INSERT TABLES X – XI HERE
27The respective coefficient remains negative though not significant for market capitalization terciles.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

The results for the second-stage of stacked IV regression (see Eq. (9)) for the whole
sample are presented in Table XI. Overall, the results are consistent with my findings in the
main analysis. In particular, the predictive power of the surprises in market order imbalance
and depth imbalances at the various levels of the limit order book decreases significantly
with exogenous shock to algorithmic trading, while the predictive power of lagged returns
remains unchanged.
Panel A of Table XI shows that one within standard deviation increase in QTE/TRD
decreases overall R2 by 0.84% (1.05×-0.80). Panel B of Table XI shows that one within
standard deviation decrease in TRD SIZE decreases overall R2 by 0.55% (-0.005×109.16).28
D.
Algorithmic trading and market efficiency: Alternative event windows
In this section, I repeat the main analysis using alternative event windows of [-10;+10]
and [-15;+15] trading days instead of an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the
rollout date to the NYSE Hybrid Market to construct the stacked dataset. Table XII reports
the first-stage of stacked IV regression. The results are in line with the main analysis.
INSERT TABLES XII – XIII HERE
Table XIII shows that results are robust to alternative window length, with surprises in
market order imbalance and depth imbalances at the middle and outer levels of the limit order
book consistently decreasing their predictive power due to an exogenous shock to algorithmic
trading. For the event window of [-15;+15], I observe an increase in the predictive power
for the lagged returns and no significant effect of the surprises in the limit order imbalance
at the inner levels of the limit order book. However, I note that the stacked IV approach
requires to use as a control group only those stocks that have not been treated before or
during the event window. This implies that by increasing the length of the event window, one
28In the stacked dataset, one within standard deviation of QTE/TRD (TRD SIZE) is equal to 1.05
(0.005).
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

inevitably decreases the number of cohorts to be used in the analysis (especially if staggered
events occur close to each other). To be more specific, my sample includes 950 NYSE-listed
common stocks. Using the baseline event window of [-5;+5] trading days, I can use 875 stocks
as treated stocks in one of the cohorts. Using an event window of [-10;+10] trading days
leaves me with 715 stocks as treated stocks in one of the cohorts. Using an event window
of [-15;+15] trading days leaves me with 598 stocks as treated stocks in one of the cohorts.
Stocks that were rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market first might experience different
patterns in market efficiency as compared to stocks that were rolled out last. To that extent,
longer event windows seem to be less reliable for drawing generalized conclusions.
IV.
Conclusion
The recent changes in the equity markets’ landscape, namely, the emergence of algorithmic traders and the shift from floor trading to open electronic limit order book markets,
call for examining potential resultant changes in the speed of information incorporation.
Motivated by this, I investigate the intraday return predictability from past returns, market
and limit order flows (used as a proxy for market efficiency) around the introduction of the
NYSE Hybrid Market – a change in market design that I use as an instrumental variable for
algorithmic trading activity.
To the best of my knowledge, I am the first to establish a large sample causal relation
between algorithmic trading and market efficiency, taking into consideration past market
and limit order flows alike. In the short run, an exogenous shock to algorithmic trading
leads to a significant decrease in the predictive power of surprises in both market imbalance
and depth imbalances incorporated at the various levels of the limit order book, while the
predictive power of past returns remains unchanged. This suggests that algorithmic trading
facilitates the speed of information incorporation embedded in the market and limit order
flows alike.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

One important implication of my analysis concerns measures of market efficiency solely
based on mid-quote returns and/or market order flow (e.g., return autocorrelation, pricing
error based on mid-quote returns and trade direction, etc.), that have been widely used in
studies evaluating market efficiency. These measures neglect information embedded in the
past limit order flow, which in turn can lead to erroneous conclusions with regard to market
efficiency.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

References
Andersen, T. G. and T. Bollerslev (1997). Intraday periodicity and volatility persistence in
financial markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 4(2), 115–158.
ASIC (2013). Dark liquidity and high-frequency trading. Report 331.
Baker, A. C., D. F. Larcker, and C. C. Wang (2022). How much should we trust staggered
differences-in-differences estimates? Journal of Financial Economics 144(2), 370–395.
Baruch, S., M. Panayides, and K. Venkataraman (2017). Informed trading before corporate
events: Theory and evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 125(3), 561–588.
Biais, B. and T. Foucault (2014).
HFT and market quality.
Bankers, Markets and Investors 128, 5–19.
Biais, B., P. Hillion, and C. Spatt (1995). An empirical analysis of the limit order book and
the order flow in the Paris Bourse. Journal of Finance 50(5), 1655–1689.
Bloomfield, R., M. O’Hara, and G. Saar (2005). The “make or take” decision in an electronic
market: Evidence on the evolution of liquidity. Journal of Financial Economics 75(1),
165–199.
Boehmer, E., K. Fong, and J. J. Wu (2021).
Algorithmic trading and market quality:
International evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 56(8), 2659–2688.
Brogaard, J., T. Hendershott, and R. Riordan (2019).
Price discovery without trading:
Evidence from limit orders. Journal of Finance 74(4), 1621–1658.
Campbell, J. Y. and S. B. Thompson (2008). Predicting excess stock returns out of sample:
Can anything beat the historical average? Review of Financial Studies 21(4), 1509–1531.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Cao, C., O. Hansch, and X. Wang (2009). The information content of an open limit-order
book. Journal of Futures Markets 29(1), 16–41.
Carrion, A. (2013). Very fast money: High-frequency trading on the NASDAQ. Journal of
Financial Markets 16(4), 680–711.
Cenesizoglu, T., G. Dionne, and X. Zhou (2022). Asymmetric effects of the limit order book
on price dynamics. Journal of Empirical Finance 65, 77–98.
Cengiz, D., A. Dube, A. Lindner, and B. Zipperer (2019). The effect of minimum wages on
low-wage jobs. Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(3), 1405–1454.
Chaboud, A. P., B. Chiquoine, E. Hjalmarsson, and C. Vega (2014). Rise of the machines:
Algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange market. Journal of Finance 69(5), 2045–2084.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam (2005). Evidence on the speed of convergence
to market efficiency. Journal of Financial Economics 76(2), 271–292.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam (2008). Liquidity and market efficiency. Journal
of Financial Economics 87(2), 249–268.
Collin-Dufresne, P. and V. Fos (2015). Do prices reveal the presence of informed trading?
Journal of Finance 70(4), 1555–1582.
Conrad, J., S. Wahal, and J. Xiang (2015). High-frequency quoting, trading, and the efficiency of prices. Journal of Financial Economics 116(2), 271–291.
Dugast, J. and T. Foucault (2018). Data abundance and asset price informativeness. Journal
of Financial Economics 130(2), 367–391.
Ellul, A., C. W. Holden, P. Jain, and R. Jennings (2007). Order dynamics: Recent evidence
from the NYSE. Journal of Empirical Finance 14(5), 636–661.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Glosten, L. R. (1994).
Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable?
Journal of
Finance 49(4), 1127–1161.
Glosten, L. R. and P. R. Milgrom (1985). Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics 14(1),
71–100.
Goettler, R. L., C. A. Parlour, and U. Rajan (2009).
Informed traders and limit order
markets. Journal of Financial Economics 93(1), 67–87.
Harris, L. E. and V. Panchapagesan (2005). The information content of the limit order book:
Evidence from NYSE specialist trading decisions. Journal of Financial Markets 8(1), 25–
67.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991). Measuring the information content of stock trades. Journal of Finance 46(1), 179–207.
Hendershott, T., C. M. Jones, and A. J. Menkveld (2011). Does algorithmic trading improve
liquidity? Journal of Finance 66(1), 1–33.
Hendershott, T. and P. C. Moulton (2011). Automation, speed, and stock market quality:
The NYSE’s Hybrid. Journal of Financial Markets 14(4), 568–604.
Huang, R. D. and H. R. Stoll (1997). The components of the bid-ask spread: A general
approach. Review of Financial Studies 10(4), 995–1034.
Kaniel, R. and H. Liu (2006). So what orders do informed traders use?
Journal of Business 79(4), 1867–1913.
Kavajecz, K. A. and E. R. Odders-White (2001). An examination of changes in specialists’
posted price schedules. Review of Financial Studies 14(3), 681–704.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Kavajecz, K. A. and E. R. Odders-White (2004). Technical analysis and liquidity provision.
Review of Financial Studies 17(4), 1043–1071.
Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53(6), 1315–1335.
Lee, C. and M. J. Ready (1991). Inferring trade direction from intraday data. Journal of
Finance 46(2), 733–746.
Lindeman, R. H., P. F. Merenda, and R. Z. Gold (1980).
Introduction to bivariate and
multivariate analysis. Scott, Foresman, Glenview.
Madhavan, A., M. Richardson, and M. Roomans (1997). Why do security prices change? A
transaction-level analysis of NYSE stocks. Review of Financial Studies 10(4), 1035–1064.
Menkveld, A. J. (2016). The economics of high-frequency trading: Taking stock. Annual
Review of Financial Economics 8, 1–24.
O’Hara, M. (2015).
High frequency market microstructure.
Journal of Financial Economics 116(2), 257–270.
R¨osch, D. M., A. Subrahmanyam, and M. A. Van Dijk (2016). The dynamics of market
efficiency. Review of Financial Studies 30(4), 1151–1187.
Ro¸su, I. (2020). Liquidity and information in limit order markets. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 55(6), 1792–1839.
Roth, J., P. H. C. Sant’Anna, A. Bilinski, and J. Poe (2023). What’s trending in differencein-differences? A synthesis of the recent econometrics literature. Journal of Econometrics 235(2), 2218–2244.
Sadka, R. (2006). Momentum and post-earnings-announcement drift anomalies: The role of
liquidity risk. Journal of Financial Economics 80(2), 309–349.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

SEC (2005). Regulation NMS. Release No. 34-51808, File No. S7-10-04.
SEC (2006). Release No. 34-53539. File No. SR-NYSE-2004-05.
SEC (2010). Concept release on equity market structure. Release No. 34-61358, File No.
S7-02-10.
Seppi, D. J. (1997). Liquidity provision with limit orders and a strategic specialist. Review
of Financial Studies 10(1), 103–150.
Swan, P. and P. J. Westerholm (2006). Market architecture and global exchange efficiency:
One design need not fit all stock sizes. Working paper.
Weller, B. M. (2018). Does algorithmic trading reduce information acquisition? Review of
Financial Studies 31(6), 2184–2226.
Wuyts, G. (2008). The impact of liquidity shocks through the limit order book. Working
paper.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table I Summary statistics
This table provides summary statistics for the 950 NYSE-listed common stocks from June
2006 to May 2007. This period covers the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as
an instrument in the instrumental variable analysis. The results are reported for all stocks
and for three terciles based on market capitalization as of the beginning of June 2006.
The data on the average of market capitalization, MCAP (in billions of USD), the quoted
closing spread, PQSPR (in basis points), volatility, Range (high minus low range), turnover,
Turnover (annualized), and price (in USD) come from CRSP. All variables are 0.5% and
99.5% winsorized.
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
MCAP
10.40
0.93
2.89
27.52
PQSPR
9.87
14.03
9.33
6.25
Range
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
Turnover
2.29
2.39
2.45
2.03
PRC
38.73
26.07
38.17
52.02
# of stocks
950
317
317
316
Observations
234,255
77,968
78,662
77,625
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table II Proxies for algorithmic trading
This table provides summary statistics for algorithmic trading for the 950 NYSE-listed common stocks from June 2006 to May 2007. This period covers the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid
Market used as an instrument in the instrumental variable analysis. The results are reported
for all stocks and for three terciles based on market capitalization as of the beginning of June
2006. The data on the daily number of best bid-offer quote updates (QTE), the daily number of trades (TRD), the daily trading volume in USD 10,000 (DV OL), and the average
trade size in the number of shares (TRD SIZE) come from TRTH. All variables are 0.5%
and 99.5% winsorized.
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
QTE/DV OL
6.79
12.03
5.82
2.51
QTE/TRD
4.56
5.73
4.67
3.28
TRD SIZE
274.40
242.80
264.80
315.90
TRD
4,259
1,369
2,616
8,826
QTE
13,039
6,471
10,247
22,467
DV OL
5,760
926
2,542
13,876
# of stocks
950
317
317
316
Observations
234,255
77,968
78,662
77,625
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table III Intraday return predictability: coefficients
This table provides the average coefficients together with the proportion of the regressions that have significant individual tstatistics of the predictive stock-day regressions from total order flow (Panel A) and from surprises in the order flow (Panel
B) for the 950 NYSE-listed common stocks from June 2006 to May 2007. This period covers the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid
Market used as an instrument in the instrumental variable analysis. The results are reported for all stocks and for three terciles
based on market capitalization as of the beginning of June 2006. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order
book snapshots come from TRTH. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
All
% significant
Small Cap
% significant
Mid Cap
% significant
Large Cap
% significant
Pos
Neg
Pos
Neg
Pos
Neg
Pos
Neg
Panel A: Coefficients (total order flow)
Ret
-0.01
14.7%
18.8%
-0.03
10.6%
24.9%
0.00
15.6%
17.4%
0.01
17.9%
14.1%
Moib
0.21
29.6%
1.9%
0.49
32.8%
1.8%
0.12
29.5%
1.9%
0.03
26.5%
2.0%
Inner
1.71
54.8%
0.6%
2.45
61.1%
0.5%
1.67
59.4%
0.6%
1.01
43.9%
0.8%
Middle
0.27
12.8%
5.9%
0.38
14.0%
4.8%
0.24
12.9%
6.0%
0.18
11.5%
6.9%
Outer
-0.14
6.3%
9.1%
-0.15
6.4%
8.7%
-0.18
5.7%
9.6%
-0.09
6.7%
9.0%
Panel B: Coefficients (surprises in the order flow)
Ret
0.01
18.6%
15.5%
-0.01
14.2%
20.4%
0.01
20.0%
14.1%
0.02
21.5%
11.9%
MoibU
0.20
25.9%
2.1%
0.46
28.5%
2.0%
0.11
25.9%
2.1%
0.02
23.4%
2.1%
InnerU
2.03
51.9%
0.7%
2.97
55.1%
0.6%
1.94
56.5%
0.6%
1.18
44.1%
0.9%
MiddleU
0.42
13.8%
5.0%
0.54
14.3%
4.1%
0.39
13.9%
5.0%
0.32
13.3%
5.8%
OuterU
-0.11
6.4%
8.3%
-0.14
6.3%
8.2%
-0.16
5.9%
8.7%
-0.05
7.0%
8.1%
# of stocks
950
317
317
316
Observations
234,255
77,968
78,662
77,625
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table IV Intraday return predictability: the partial R2
This table shows the average partial R2 of each of the variables in the predictive stock-day regressions from total order flow
(Panel A) and from surprises in the order flow (Panel B) for the 950 NYSE-listed common stocks from June 2006 to May 2007.
This period covers the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument in the instrumental variable analysis. The
results are reported for all stocks and for three terciles based on market capitalization as of the beginning of June 2006. Data
on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5%
winsorized.
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
Panel A: R2 decomposition (total order flow)
R2
4.33%
4.54%
4.56%
3.90%
Ret
0.97%
0.98%
0.96%
0.96%
Moib
0.84%
0.87%
0.85%
0.81%
LOIB
2.49%
2.65%
2.71%
2.10%
Inner
1.57%
1.76%
1.77%
1.17%
Middle
0.46%
0.45%
0.47%
0.47%
Outer
0.45%
0.45%
0.46%
0.45%
Panel B: R2 decomposition (surprises in the order flow)
R2
4.15%
4.23%
4.35%
3.86%
Ret
0.99%
0.98%
1.00%
1.00%
MoibU
0.78%
0.80%
0.78%
0.75%
LOIBU
2.35%
2.43%
2.53%
2.08%
InnerU
1.45%
1.55%
1.64%
1.17%
Middle
U
0.46%
0.44%
0.46%
0.47%
OuterU
0.44%
0.43%
0.44%
0.44%
# of stocks
950
317
317
316
Observations
234,255
77,968
78,662
77,625
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table V First-stage of stacked IV regression
This table provides the results of the first-stage of stacked IV regression with a proxy for
algorithmic trading activity as dependent variable and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid
Market used as an instrument (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for each cohort
(where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid market on a
particular date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As a
control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid
Market before and during the respective event window are used. Algorithmic trading is
proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to trading volume in USD
10,000, QTE/DV OL. The results are reported for all stocks and for three terciles based on
market capitalization as of the beginning of June 2006. All regressions include stock-cohort
and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer
quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables
come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence
Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
Hybrid
1.07***
1.68***
1.04***
0.57***
(11.30)
(6.95)
(7.82)
(15.29)
ln(MCAP)
1.29***
2.42*
0.54
0.05
(2.83)
(1.80)
(1.29)
(0.21)
1/PRICE
10.72
23.81
-20.67
-21.37
(0.74)
(1.03)
(-1.21)
(-1.59)
Turnover
0.17***
0.24***
0.10***
0.09***
(4.99)
(3.81)
(3.17)
(4.95)
PQSPR
0.00
-0.02
0.02***
0.01**
(0.55)
(-1.13)
(2.60)
(2.54)
Range
7.24
-0.41
29.57**
2.49
(0.48)
(-0.02)
(2.07)
(0.34)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
F-stat
127.8
48.35
61.13
233.7
# of stock-cohort
26,629
9,278
9,185
8,166
Observations
274,726
95,478
95,449
83,799
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table VI Second-stage of stacked IV regression
This table provides the results of the second-stage of stacked IV regression with the partial R2 of each of the variables in the
predictive regressions using total order flow (Panel A) and surprises in the order flow (Panel B) as dependent variables and the
rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument for algorithmic trading activity (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset
is created for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid market on a particular
date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that
have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window are used. Algorithmic
trading is proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. All
regressions include stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order
book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid
Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
Panel A: R2 decomposition (total order flow)
Panel B: R2 decomposition (surprises in the order flow)
R2
Ret
Moib
Inner
Middle
Outer
R2
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
\
QTE
DV OL
-0.27***
-0.03
-0.11***
-0.05
-0.02
-0.06***
-0.28***
-0.02
-0.11***
-0.07**
-0.02*
-0.06***
(-4.21)
(-0.99)
(-4.36)
(-1.29)
(-1.32)
(-4.48)
(-4.58)
(-0.70)
(-4.64)
(-2.15)
(-1.79)
(-4.43)
ln(MCAP)
-0.19
0.30
-0.35**
-0.40*
0.12
0.29***
-0.32
0.29
-0.18
-0.55***
-0.04
0.18
(-0.49)
(1.54)
(-2.33)
(-1.91)
(1.18)
(2.66)
(-0.89)
(1.50)
(-1.30)
(-2.65)
(-0.43)
(1.62)
1/PRICE
-4.60
7.89
-16.81***
0.51
2.96
5.62***
-5.72
7.55
-13.73***
-5.00
1.17
5.96***
(-0.49)
(1.46)
(-4.38)
(0.11)
(1.36)
(2.65)
(-0.66)
(1.46)
(-3.93)
(-1.05)
(0.61)
(3.09)
Turnover
0.13***
0.01
0.05***
0.04**
0.01
0.03***
0.12***
0.00
0.05***
0.04**
0.01
0.02***
(4.56)
(0.43)
(4.13)
(2.40)
(1.29)
(3.65)
(4.28)
(0.25)
(4.32)
(2.35)
(1.56)
(3.36)
PQSPR
0.00
0.00*
0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00***
-0.00
(0.02)
(1.68)
(0.83)
(-1.01)
(-1.35)
(-1.23)
(0.23)
(1.40)
(0.87)
(-0.18)
(-2.85)
(-0.68)
Range
12.03
1.23
-2.10
9.30*
6.80***
-2.46
5.64
3.81
-1.89
2.75
5.25***
-4.31**
(1.24)
(0.26)
(-0.53)
(1.74)
(3.29)
(-1.09)
(0.62)
(0.79)
(-0.51)
(0.55)
(2.68)
(-2.07)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
[-5;+5]
# of stock-cohort
26,629
26,629
Observations
274,726
274,726
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table VII Second-stage of stacked IV regression: Market capitalization terciles
This table provides the results of the second-stage of stacked IV regression with the partial R2 of each of the variables in the
predictive regressions using surprises in the order flow as dependent variables and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market
used as an instrument for algorithmic trading activity (see Eq. (9)) for three terciles based on market capitalization as of the
beginning of June 2006. The stacked dataset is created for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out
to the NYSE Hybrid market on a particular date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As
a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the
respective event window are used. Algorithmic trading is proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to
trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. For brevity, I report only the coefficients in front of the algorithmic trading
proxy. All regressions include stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **,
and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit
order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE
Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
R2 decomposition
# of stock-cohort
Observations
R2
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
Small Cap
-0.17***
0.01
-0.07**
-0.06
-0.01
-0.04***
9,278
95,478
(-2.75)
(0.27)
(-2.37)
(-1.58)
(-0.83)
(-2.76)
Mid Cap
-0.33***
-0.03
-0.13***
-0.14**
-0.01
-0.05**
9,185
95,449
(-2.88)
(-0.50)
(-3.00)
(-2.24)
(-0.34)
(-2.47)
Large cap
-0.48***
-0.09
-0.20***
-0.00
-0.07
-0.12***
8,166
83,799
(-2.65)
(-0.90)
(-2.95)
(-0.03)
(-1.61)
(-2.80)
Controls
Yes
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table VIII Summary statistics for out-of-sample R2
This table provides summary statistics for out-of-sample R2 as defined in Eq. (10) for the
950 NYSE-listed common stocks from June 2006 to May 2007. This period covers the rollout
to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument in the instrumental variable analysis.
The results are reported for all stocks and for three terciles based on market capitalization
as of the beginning of June 2006. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit
order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP. All
variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
Observations
Mean
P5
P25
P50
P75
P95
All
234,251
-1.75
-8.75
-4.02
-1.68
0.73
5.00
Small Cap
77,964
-1.67
-8.64
-3.90
-1.56
0.80
4.98
Mid Cap
78,662
-1.57
-8.81
-3.93
-1.51
1.02
5.40
Large Cap
77,625
-2.01
-8.79
-4.20
-1.97
0.35
4.58
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table IX Second-stage of stacked IV regression for out-of-sample R2
This table provides the results of the second-stage of stacked IV regression with out-of-sample R2 as defined in Eq. (10) (Panel
A) and the probability of observing non-negative out-of-sample R2 (Panel B) as dependent variables and the rollout to the
NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument for algorithmic trading activity (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for
each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market on a particular date) for an
event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been
rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window are used. Algorithmic trading is proxied
by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. All regressions include
stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and * denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from
TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence
Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
Panel A: OOSR2
Panel B: Prob(OOSR2 ≥0)
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
\
QTE
DV OL
-0.31***
-0.19*
-0.35*
-0.57*
-0.02*
-0.01
-0.01
-0.04
(-3.05)
(-1.74)
(-1.85)
(-1.77)
(-1.79)
(-1.13)
(-0.61)
(-1.36)
ln(MCAP)
1.67**
5.95***
0.37
0.03
-0.02
0.58***
-0.24*
-0.16
(2.43)
(4.15)
(0.41)
(0.02)
(-0.31)
(3.40)
(-1.75)
(-0.95)
1/PRICE
8.12
67.58***
-86.61**
138.76**
-2.98**
3.50
-9.01***
6.57
(0.49)
(3.11)
(-2.34)
(2.07)
(-1.97)
(1.48)
(-2.77)
(0.87)
Turnover
0.13***
0.17**
0.05
-0.04
0.02***
0.02**
0.01
0.00
(2.61)
(2.42)
(0.56)
(-0.41)
(2.86)
(2.36)
(0.78)
(0.25)
PQSPR
-0.00
-0.03**
0.04*
0.03
-0.00*
-0.00**
0.00
0.00
(-0.43)
(-2.40)
(1.90)
(1.36)
(-1.67)
(-2.41)
(0.13)
(1.10)
Range
-6.22
-38.10*
25.93
68.65**
-1.71
-4.49**
2.35
2.48
(-0.40)
(-1.89)
(0.83)
(1.96)
(-1.03)
(-2.00)
(0.74)
(0.66)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
[-5;+5]
# of stock-cohort
274,722
95,474
95,449
83,799
274,722
95,474
95,449
83,799
Observations
26,629
9,278
9,185
8,166
26,629
9,278
9,185
8,166
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table X First-stage of stacked IV regression: Alternative proxies for AT
This table provides the results of the first-stage of stacked IV regression with proxies for algorithmic trading activity as dependent
variable and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for
each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market on a particular date) for an
event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet
been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window are used. Algorithmic trading is
proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to the number of transactions, QTE/TRD (Panel A), and by the
average trade size in 10,000 shares, TRD SIZE (Panel B). The results are reported for all stocks and for three terciles based
on market capitalization as of the beginning of June 2006. All regressions include stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables come
from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All variables are
0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
Panel A: QTE/TRD
Panel B: TRD SIZE
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
Hybrid
0.37***
0.46***
0.37***
0.29***
-26.91***
-21.65***
-21.03***
-36.51***
(9.02)
(5.09)
(4.76)
(9.31)
(-16.87)
(-6.99)
(-7.66)
(-15.17)
ln(MCAP)
0.88***
1.60***
0.50
0.08
17.94
76.35***
13.46
41.02
(4.30)
(3.41)
(1.19)
(0.41)
(1.41)
(2.93)
(0.78)
(1.39)
1/PRICE
9.65**
15.49***
-2.52
-21.87**
623.83**
1,114.60***
1,177.51**
4,768.11***
(2.57)
(2.61)
(-0.30)
(-2.57)
(2.11)
(2.67)
(2.04)
(3.84)
Turnover
0.07***
0.07***
0.06***
0.08***
-6.75***
-7.41***
-6.09***
-7.15***
(4.93)
(2.92)
(3.14)
(4.70)
(-8.79)
(-6.18)
(-5.26)
(-4.35)
PQSPR
0.00
-0.01
0.01*
0.01
-0.07
0.11
0.07
-0.70**
(0.95)
(-1.07)
(1.94)
(1.32)
(-0.48)
(0.61)
(0.26)
(-2.19)
Range
15.67***
16.16*
17.01**
8.21
503.33**
1,161.09***
-23.42
-311.92
(3.09)
(1.90)
(2.29)
(1.52)
(2.00)
(3.14)
(-0.05)
(-0.64)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
[-5;+5]
F-stat
81.35
25.91
22.69
86.66
284.5
48.92
58.61
230.00
# of stock-cohort
26,629
9,278
9,185
8,166
26,629
9,278
9,185
8,166
Observations
274,726
95,478
95,449
83,799
274,726
95,478
95,449
83,799
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table XI Second-stage of stacked IV regression: Alternative proxies for AT
This table provides the results of the second-stage of stacked IV regression with the partial R2 of each of the variables in the
predictive regressions using surprises in the order flow as dependent variables and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used
as an instrument for algorithmic trading activity (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for each cohort (where the cohort
is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market on a particular date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading
days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid
Market before and during the respective event window are used. Algorithmic trading is proxied by the number of best bid-offer
quote updates relative to the number of transactions, QTE/TRD (Panel A), and by the average trade size in 10,000 shares,
TRD SIZE (Panel B). All regressions include stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by stockcohort. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and
NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of
the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
Panel A: QTE/TRD
Panel B: TRD SIZE
R2 decomposition
R2 decomposition
R2
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
R2
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
d
QTE
TRD
-0.80***
-0.06
-0.33***
-0.20**
-0.07*
-0.18***
\
TRD SIZE
109.16***
8.13
44.54***
27.53**
9.36*
23.77***
(-4.38)
(-0.70)
(-4.41)
(-2.12)
(-1.78)
(-4.24)
(4.71)
(0.70)
(4.86)
(2.15)
(1.80)
(4.55)
ln(MCAP)
0.03
0.32
-0.03
-0.46**
-0.01
0.25**
ln(MCAP)
-0.87**
0.25
-0.40***
-0.69***
-0.09
0.06
(0.08)
(1.55)
(-0.20)
(-2.12)
(-0.09)
(2.18)
(-2.44)
(1.30)
(-2.79)
(-3.53)
(-0.93)
(0.54)
1/PRICE
-0.92
7.91
-11.77***
-3.79
1.58
7.00***
1/PRICE
-15.49*
6.82
-17.71***
-7.46
0.33
3.83**
(-0.11)
(1.52)
(-3.36)
(-0.80)
(0.81)
(3.62)
(-1.74)
(1.31)
(-4.95)
(-1.60)
(0.17)
(2.03)
Turnover
0.13***
0.00
0.05***
0.04**
0.01
0.03***
Turnover
0.14***
0.01
0.06***
0.04**
0.01*
0.03***
(4.25)
(0.29)
(4.33)
(2.42)
(1.63)
(3.46)
(4.73)
(0.35)
(4.93)
(2.53)
(1.75)
(3.92)
PQSPR
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00***
-0.00
PQSPR
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00***
-0.00
(0.44)
(1.42)
(1.07)
(-0.08)
(-2.70)
(-0.43)
(0.13)
(1.38)
(0.83)
(-0.24)
(-2.95)
(-0.85)
Range
16.25*
4.60
2.43
5.42
6.16***
-2.00
Range
-1.84
3.25
-4.95
0.86
4.60**
-5.94***
(1.68)
(0.92)
(0.63)
(1.04)
(2.99)
(-0.90)
(-0.21)
(0.67)
(-1.40)
(0.17)
(2.34)
(-2.93)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
[-5;+5]
# of stock-cohort
26,629
26,629
Observations
274,726
274,726
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table XII First-stage of stacked IV regression: Alternative event windows
This table provides the results of the first-stage of stacked IV regression with proxy for algorithmic trading activity as dependent
variable and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for
each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market on a particular date) for event
windows of [-5;+5], [-10,+10], and [-15,+15] trading days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that
have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window are used. Algorithmic
trading is proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. All
regressions include stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order
book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid
Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
[-5;+5]
[-10;+10]
[-15;+15]
Hybrid
1.07***
1.13***
1.17***
(11.30)
(12.11)
(12.60)
ln(MCAP)
1.29***
2.07***
2.25***
(2.83)
(5.79)
(7.71)
1/PRICE
10.72
20.43**
37.70***
(0.74)
(2.24)
(5.08)
Turnover
0.17***
0.27***
0.29***
(4.99)
(13.31)
(18.12)
PQSPR
0.00
0.01*
0.01**
(0.55)
(1.75)
(2.46)
Range
7.24
-10.43
-16.28**
(0.48)
(-1.19)
(-2.35)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
F-stat
127.8
146.7
158.7
# of stock-cohort
26,629
24,623
22,170
Observations
274,726
483,892
643,432
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table XIII Second-stage of stacked IV regression: Alternative event windows
This table provides the results of the stacked second-stage regression with the partial R2 of each of the variables in the predictive
regressions using surprises in the order flow as dependent variables and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an
instrument for algorithmic trading activity (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for each cohort (where the cohort is
defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market on a particular date) for event windows of [-5;+5], [-10,+10],
and [-15,+15] trading days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled
out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window are used. Algorithmic trading is proxied by the
number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. For brevity, I report only the
coefficients in front of the algorithmic trading proxy for the different event windows. All regressions include stock-cohort and
day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data
on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s
website. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
R2 decomposition
# of stock-cohort
Observations
R2
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
[-5;+5]
-0.28***
-0.02
-0.11***
-0.07**
-0.02*
-0.06***
26,629
274,726
(-4.58)
(-0.70)
(-4.64)
(-2.15)
(-1.79)
(-4.43)
[-10;+10]
-0.15***
0.03
-0.07***
-0.05**
-0.03**
-0.04***
24,623
483,892
(-3.13)
(1.31)
(-4.01)
(-2.09)
(-2.36)
(-3.67)
[-15;+15]
-0.11***
0.04**
-0.08***
-0.03
-0.02*
-0.03***
22,170
643,432
(-2.73)
(1.99)
(-5.35)
(-1.23)
(-1.84)
(-3.19)
Controls
Yes
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Figure 1.
Introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market
This figure shows the staggered introduction to the NYSE Hybrid Market for the 950 NYSElisted common stocks in my sample from June 2006 to May 2007. Data on the introduction
of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website.
47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Internet Appendix for
“Algorithmic Trading and Market Efficiency around
the Introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market”
Darya Yuferova, Norwegian School of Economics - NHH
This supplemental internet appendix presents additional results for the partial R2 of each
of the variables in the predictive regressions using surprises in the order flow with 2.5% and
97.5% winsorization (see Section IA 1), results for the partial R2 of each of the variables in
the predictive regressions using surprises in the order flow under the assumption that each
variable is added last in the model (see Section IA 2), results for the partial R2 of each of the
variables in the predictive regressions using surprises in the order flow excluding the period
affected by the compliance with Reg NMS (see Section IA 3), and graphical representation
of the first-stage and second-stage of the stacked IV regression (see Section IA 4).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

IA 1. Alternative winsorization thresholds
In this section, I repeat the main analysis with all the variables winsorized at 2.5% and
97.5% levels, while I use 0.5% and 99.5% winsorization thresholds in the main paper. Tables
IA.1 and IA.2 (the equivalent of Tables V and VI) report the results of the first-stage and
second-stage of stacked IV regression using 2.5% and 97.5% winsorization. The results remain
largely unchanged.
IA 2. Alternative R2 decomposition
In the main analysis, I use the partial R2 of each of the variables in the the predictive
regressions averaged across all possible orderings of the variables (as in Lindeman, Merenda,
and Gold (1980)). However, the decomposition of the R2, as well as variance decomposition for vector-autoregressions, is sensitive to the order of the explanatory variables. The
same variable will be assigned higher explanatory power when it is the first variable in the
decomposition than when it is the last variable in the decomposition. In this section, I repeat the analysis using the partial R2 of each of the variables under the assumption that
the variable is added last in the model, which represents the conservative lower bound of its
predictive power. Table IA.3 (the equivalent of Table VI) reports the second-stage of stacked
IV regression. The results remain largely unchanged.
IA 3. Exclusion of the the period affected by compliance with Reg NMS
According to SEC (2005), p. 307, the compliance date for the Reg NMS Rules 610 and
611 was August 31, 2006: “As of that date, trading centers must begin trading all NMS stocks
pursuant to the requirements of Rules 610 and 611.”
Therefore, I skip one month after the
compliance date and change my sample period to October 2006 till May 2007 (while I use
June 2006 till May 2007 in the baseline analysis). In addition, I exclude those stocks whose
rollout date to the NYSE Hybrid Market is before October 15, 2006 (8 stocks).
Table IA.4 (the equivalent of Table V) presents the results of the first-stage of stacked IV
regression, while Table IA.5 (the equivalent of Table VI) report the results of the second-stage
of stacked IV regression, excluding the period affected by the compliance with Reg NMS.
The results remain largely unchanged.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

IA 4. Graphical representation of the first and second stages of the stacked IV
regression
In this section, I visualize the first-stage and second-stage of the stacked IV regression
by plotting various proxies of algorithmic trading (see Figure IA.1) and the partial R2 (see
Figure IA.2) for treated and control stocks from the stacked dataset. The stacked dataset is
created for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE
Hybrid market on a particular date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the
rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled out to
the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window are used.
References
References
Lindeman, R. H., P. F. Merenda, and R. Z. Gold (1980).
Introduction to bivariate and
multivariate analysis. Scott, Foresman, Glenview.
SEC (2005). Regulation NMS. Release No. 34-51808, File No. S7-10-04.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table IA.1 First-stage of stacked IV regression: 2.5% and 97.5% winsorization
This table provides the results of the first-stage of stacked IV regression with the proxy
for algorithmic trading activity as dependent variable and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid
Market used as an instrument (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for each cohort
(where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid market on a
particular date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As a
control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid
Market before and during the respective event window are used.
Algorithmic trading is
proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to trading volume in USD
10,000, QTE/DV OL. The results are reported for all stocks and for three terciles based on
market capitalization as of the beginning of June 2006. All regressions include stock-cohort
and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer
quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables
come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence
Hendershott’s website. All variables are 2.5% and 97.5% winsorized.
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
Hybrid
0.98***
1.45***
1.02***
0.55***
(11.96)
(7.20)
(7.79)
(14.81)
ln(MCAP)
0.86**
1.14
0.48
0.11
(2.15)
(1.04)
(1.18)
(0.52)
1/PRICE
-0.12
1.59
-24.00
-17.63
(-0.01)
(0.08)
(-1.19)
(-1.43)
Turnover
0.17***
0.24***
0.10***
0.09***
(4.91)
(3.68)
(2.90)
(4.69)
PQSPR
0.00
-0.02
0.02**
0.01**
(0.42)
(-1.49)
(2.16)
(2.56)
Range
15.32
9.19
36.23**
4.87
(1.22)
(0.41)
(2.46)
(0.66)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
F-stat
143.1
51.77
60.69
219.3
# of stock-cohort
26,629
9,278
9,185
8,166
Observations
274,726
95,478
95,449
83,799
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table IA.2 Second-stage of stacked IV regression: 2.5% and 97.5% winsorization
This table provides the results of the second-stage of stacked IV regression with the partial
R2 of each of the variables in the predictive regressions using surprises in the order flow
as dependent variables and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument
for algorithmic trading activity (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid market
on a particular date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date.
As a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE
Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window are used. Algorithmic trading is proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to trading volume in
USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. All regressions include stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order
book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the
introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All
variables are 2.5% and 97.5% winsorized.
R2 decomposition
R2
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
\
QTE
DV OL
-0.28***
-0.01
-0.11***
-0.07**
-0.02
-0.06***
(-4.61)
(-0.53)
(-4.82)
(-2.05)
(-1.61)
(-4.56)
ln(MCAP)
-0.58*
0.00
-0.10
-0.59***
0.00
0.16*
(-1.70)
(0.00)
(-0.81)
(-2.97)
(0.01)
(1.78)
1/PRICE
-9.39
-0.36
-11.72***
-5.10
1.46
4.87**
(-0.99)
(-0.07)
(-3.38)
(-1.01)
(0.77)
(2.42)
Turnover
0.10***
-0.01
0.04***
0.04**
0.01
0.03***
(3.65)
(-0.44)
(3.27)
(2.36)
(1.01)
(4.27)
PQSPR
-0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00***
-0.00
(-0.33)
(0.97)
(0.60)
(-0.47)
(-3.32)
(-0.43)
Range
11.40
2.50
1.06
5.89
5.29***
-5.77***
(1.30)
(0.56)
(0.31)
(1.19)
(2.85)
(-3.00)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
# of stock-cohort
26,629
Observations
274,726
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table IA.3 Second-stage of stacked IV regression: LMG vs. LAST
This table provides the results of the second-stage of stacked IV regression with the partial R2 of each of the variables using
Lindeman, Merenda, and Gold (1980) methodology, LMG (Panel A) and the partial R2 of each of the variables under the
assumption that each variable is added last in the model, LAST (Panel B) in the predictive regressions using surprises in the
order flow as dependent variables and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument for algorithmic trading
activity (see Eq. (9)). The stacked dataset is created for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out
to the NYSE Hybrid market on a particular date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As
a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the
respective event window are used. Algorithmic trading is proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to
trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. All regressions include stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data on trades,
best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP.
Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5% and
99.5% winsorized.
Panel A:R2 decomposition (LMG)
Panel A:R2 decomposition (LAST)
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
\
QTE
DV OL
-0.02
-0.11***
-0.07**
-0.02*
-0.06***
-0.00
-0.10***
-0.05
-0.00
-0.04***
(-0.70)
(-4.64)
(-2.15)
(-1.79)
(-4.43)
(-0.10)
(-4.65)
(-1.46)
(-0.16)
(-2.95)
ln(MCAP)
0.29
-0.18
-0.55***
-0.04
0.18
0.11
-0.20
-0.60***
-0.11
0.02
(1.50)
(-1.30)
(-2.65)
(-0.43)
(1.62)
(0.59)
(-1.54)
(-3.05)
(-1.20)
(0.28)
1/PRICE
7.55
-13.73***
-5.00
1.17
5.96***
6.28
-13.41***
-5.36
-2.88
2.91*
(1.46)
(-3.93)
(-1.05)
(0.61)
(3.09)
(1.19)
(-4.00)
(-1.19)
(-1.39)
(1.75)
Turnover
0.00
0.05***
0.04**
0.01
0.02***
-0.01
0.04***
0.04**
0.00
0.02***
(0.25)
(4.32)
(2.35)
(1.56)
(3.36)
(-0.82)
(3.81)
(2.30)
(0.13)
(2.69)
PQSPR
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00***
-0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00**
-0.00
(1.40)
(0.87)
(-0.18)
(-2.85)
(-0.68)
(1.15)
(1.16)
(-0.00)
(-2.08)
(-0.04)
Range
3.81
-1.89
2.75
5.25***
-4.31**
5.94
0.35
3.52
4.69**
-2.79
(0.79)
(-0.51)
(0.55)
(2.68)
(-2.07)
(1.25)
(0.10)
(0.72)
(2.19)
(-1.48)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
[-5;+5]
# of stock-cohort
26,629
26,629
Observations
274,726
274,726
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table IA.4 First-stage of stacked IV regression: Exclusion of the period affected by Reg NMS
This table provides the results of the first-stage of stacked IV regression with the proxy
for algorithmic trading activity as dependent variable and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid
Market used as an instrument (see Eq. (9)). The sample excludes the period affected by Reg
NMS. The stacked dataset is created for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks
being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid market on a particular date) for an event window of
[-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that
have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective
event window are used. Algorithmic trading is proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote
updates relative to trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. The results are reported
for all stocks and for three terciles based on market capitalization as of the beginning of June
2006. All regressions include stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by stock-cohort. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots
come from TRTH. Data on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of
the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5%
and 99.5% winsorized.
All
Small Cap
Mid Cap
Large Cap
Hybrid
1.06***
1.53***
1.17***
0.59***
(10.99)
(5.89)
(9.31)
(13.84)
ln(MCAP)
1.45***
3.07*
0.66
0.34
(2.66)
(1.95)
(1.60)
(1.29)
1/PRICE
14.71
26.28
-12.73
9.13
(0.86)
(0.94)
(-0.70)
(0.62)
Turnover
0.20***
0.26***
0.19***
0.04**
(5.28)
(3.74)
(5.76)
(2.16)
PQSPR
0.00
-0.01
0.02**
0.01**
(0.27)
(-0.77)
(1.97)
(2.02)
Range
11.26
5.95
0.62
23.14***
(0.70)
(0.21)
(0.04)
(2.66)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
F-stat
120.9
34.68
86.60
191.5
# of stock-cohort
24,384
8,510
8,300
7,574
Observations
247,857
85,211
85,697
76,949
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Table IA.5 Second-stage of stacked IV regression: Exclusion of the period affected by Reg
NMS
This table provides the results of the second-stage of stacked IV regression with the partial
R2 of each of the variables in the predictive regressions using surprises in the order flow as
dependent variables and the rollout to the NYSE Hybrid Market used as an instrument for
algorithmic trading activity (see Eq. (9)). The sample excludes the period affected by Reg
NMS. The stacked dataset is created for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks
being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid market on a particular date) for an event window of
[-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that
have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective
event window are used. Algorithmic trading is proxied by the number of best bid-offer quote
updates relative to trading volume in USD 10,000, QTE/DV OL. All regressions include
stock-cohort and day-cohort fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered by stock-cohort.
***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Data on
trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data
on control variables come from CRSP. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market
come from Terrence Hendershott’s website. All variables are 0.5% and 99.5% winsorized.
R2 decomposition
R2
Ret
MoibU
InnerU
MiddleU
OuterU
\
QTE
DV OL
-0.27***
-0.01
-0.12***
-0.07**
-0.03*
-0.06***
(-4.52)
(-0.46)
(-4.78)
(-2.08)
(-1.93)
(-4.39)
ln(MCAP)
-0.48
0.24
-0.29*
-0.65***
0.03
0.19*
(-1.29)
(1.20)
(-1.95)
(-3.12)
(0.33)
(1.73)
1/PRICE
-12.99
6.81
-16.52***
-9.22**
1.64
5.94***
(-1.44)
(1.30)
(-4.34)
(-1.98)
(0.86)
(2.88)
Turnover
0.14***
0.01
0.06***
0.04***
0.01
0.02***
(4.98)
(0.67)
(4.63)
(2.72)
(1.19)
(3.48)
PQSPR
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00***
-0.00
(0.11)
(1.18)
(1.24)
(-0.26)
(-2.68)
(-0.84)
Range
5.94
-0.73
-1.14
5.01
6.77***
-3.66*
(0.64)
(-0.15)
(-0.30)
(1.00)
(3.40)
(-1.75)
Stock-Cohort FE
Yes
Day-Cohort FE
Yes
Clustered SE
By Stock-Cohort
Window
[-5;+5]
# of stock-cohort
24,368
Observations
247,841
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Figure IA.1. Algorithmic trading around the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market
This figure shows average proxies for algorithmic trading activity for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout
date to the NYSE Hybrid Market for for treated and control stocks from the stacked dataset. The stacked dataset is created
for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid market on a particular date) for
an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet
been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market before and during the respective event window are used. In particular, I plot the
number of best bid-offer quote updates relative to trading volume in USD 10,000 (QTE/DV OL), the number of best bid-offer
quote updates relative to the number of transactions (QTE/TRD), and the trade size in the number of shares (TRD SIZE).
To facilitate readability, I use three-day moving averages and normalize variables at the start of the event window. The sample
includes 875 NYSE-listed common stocks. Data on trades, best bid-offer quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come
from TRTH. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come from Terrence Hendershott’s website.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082

Figure IA.2. The partial R2 around the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market
This figure shows the average partial R2 of each of the variable included in the predictive regressions using surprises in the order
flow (see Eq. (8)) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around the rollout date to the NYSE Hybrid Market for treated
and control stocks from the stacked dataset. The stacked dataset is created for each cohort (where the cohort is defined as
stocks being rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid market on a particular date) for an event window of [-5;+5] trading days around
the rollout date. As a control group for each cohort, stocks that have not yet been rolled out to the NYSE Hybrid Market
before and during the respective event window are used. To facilitate readability, I use three-day moving averages and normalize
variables at the start of the event window. The sample includes 875 NYSE-listed common stocks. Data on trades, best bid-offer
quotes, and NYSE limit order book snapshots come from TRTH. Data on the introduction of the NYSE Hybrid Market come
from Terrence Hendershott’s website.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2686082
