LSTM-Augmented DQN for Quantitative Trading in 
Partially Observable Markets
Hanyue Yu 1, Jiyang Dong 2, *, and Yaqian Jiang 3, 
1 School of Management Science and Engineering, Dongbei University of 
Finance and Economics, Dalian 116025, Liaoning, China
2 School of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Dongbei University of 
Finance and Economics, Dalian 116025, Liaoning, China
3 School of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Dongbei University of 
Finance and Economics, Dalian 116025, Liaoning, China
ABSTRACT
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has demonstrated tremendous potential in 
quantitative trading research in recent years. However, its performance still faces 
significant challenges in financial market environments characterized by high noise, 
low signal-to-noise ratios, and partial observability. Traditional approaches often rely 
on single supervised learning or reinforcement learning architectures. Still, these 
methods frequently struggle to adequately capture temporal dependencies and may 
exhibit convergence instability or overfitting in complex trading scenarios. To address 
these challenges, this paper proposes an LSTM–DQN-based quantitative trading 
framework. This framework first employs LSTM to extract latent dynamic features 
from stock price sequences, then constructs a discrete state space using dual moving 
averages to achieve efficient encoding of market trends. Subsequently, it performs 
policy optimization via DQN within the built environment, effectively mitigating 
partial observability issues while achieving breakthroughs in learning efficiency and 
policy stability. This paper comprehensively considers returns, transaction costs, 
position constraints, and risk exposure in reward function design, ensuring the strategy's 
robustness in high-volatility environments. We conducted experiments using three 
representative stocks from China's A-share market and performed ablation analysis to 
validate the contribution of key features to model performance. Empirical results 
* Corresponding author;
E-mail Address: dong_ji_yang@126.com
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

indicate that our proposed method outperforms the comparative strategy in terms of 
cumulative return, annualized return, and Sharpe ratio, with the cumulative return and 
annualized return increasing by a maximum of 16.41% and 14.87%, respectively. 
KEYWORDS
Long Short-term Memory, Deep reinforcement learning, Partially Observable Markov 
Decision Process, Quantitative trading 
1. Introduction
In financial market research, constructing quantitative trading systems capable of 
autonomous adaptation and effective decision-making represents a long-standing and 
highly challenging frontier. The essence of this task lies in learning and executing 
strategies that consistently generate excess returns within highly dynamic, nonstationary, and noisy financial time series. However, traditional models relying on 
statistical analysis or supervised learning often perform poorly when confronting 
rapidly changing market structures and extreme events due to their inherent limitations 
in generalization and robustness, leading to fundamental doubts about their 
effectiveness. For example, although the early factor model (Fama & French, 1993) 
effectively captures the relationship between risk and return under steady-state 
conditions, its performance is constrained when confronted with rapidly changing 
market environments. In recent years, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has 
emerged as a hot topic in financial trading research due to its unique decision 
optimization approach. Unlike supervised learning, which relies on historical labels, 
DRL directly optimizes long-term cumulative rewards through interactions with the 
environment, demonstrating its potential to capture complex decision-making logic in 
nonlinear dynamic settings. Early work in this field began with Moody et al. (1998), 
who pioneered the application of reinforcement learning to asset allocation problems, 
laying the foundation for subsequent research. With the advancement of deep learning, 
DRL has achieved significant progress in financial modeling. Deng et al. (2016) 
introduced the DRQN model, leveraging recurrent neural networks to capture partial 
observability and achieving breakthroughs in high-dimensional noisy environments. 
Subsequently, Zhang et al. (2020) proposed an Actor-Critic-based trading framework, 
validating the cross-market effectiveness of DRL in both the U.S. and Hong Kong stock 
markets. Meanwhile, Liang et al. (2018) introduced adversarial Deep Reinforcement 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Learning methods, significantly enhancing the stability of asset allocation. 
Although these studies demonstrate that DRL holds significant advantages in 
optimizing dynamic trading strategies, it still faces several challenges in temporal 
modeling, stability control, and cross-market adaptability, primarily manifested in the 
following three aspects: (i) At the state representation level, financial market 
environments often manifest as partially observable Markov decision processes 
(POMDPs). Traditional DRL struggles to capture long-term dependencies in latent 
information, while directly incorporating LSTM may introduce redundant features in 
high-noise settings; (ii) Regarding state discretization and trading signal mapping, 
relying solely on price or technical indicators causes the state space to grow 
exponentially, severely slowing learning efficiency and hindering the agent's 
convergence to optimal strategies; (iii) The reinforcement learning training process is 
particularly sensitive to the high volatility and non-stationarity of financial markets. 
Existing algorithms are highly prone to overfitting or over-exploration during training.
To address these challenges, this paper proposes an LSTM–DQN–based 
quantitative trading framework. The framework first utilizes LSTM to extract latent 
information from stock price sequences and combines the predictions with a dual 
moving average to construct a discrete state space, thereby effectively encoding market 
trends. Subsequently, DQN performs policy optimization within the constructed trading 
environment, effectively addressing challenges arising from partial observability. 
Unlike existing approaches, our method emphasizes using LSTM to mitigate the 
problem of incomplete market observability and designs a dual moving average 
discretization mechanism to enhance agent stability and learning efficiency. 
Furthermore, comprehensively considering transaction costs, position constraints, and 
risk exposure in strategy optimization it demonstrates robust performance across 
multiple stocks.
Our main contributions can be summarized in three points: (i) To address the 
challenges of strong partial observability and high noise in financial markets, we 
adopted an LSTM-based state feature extraction method, bringing the POMDP closer 
to an MDP representation and resolving the robustness issues faced by existing methods 
when processing financial data; (ii) To address the challenges of an overly large state 
space and ambiguous trend signals, we introduced a dual moving average discretization 
mechanism. This effectively mitigates the “curse of dimensionality” inherent in highdimensional state spaces while significantly enhancing the model's learning 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

convergence speed and noise resilience; (iii) To address the challenge of balancing 
returns and risk in highly volatile markets, we designed a composite reward 
incorporating transaction costs, risk exposure, and position constraints, achieving 
equilibrium between return enhancement and risk exposure control.
The subsequent sections of the paper are structured as follows: The review of 
related work is presented in Section 2. Section 3 gives a description of LSTM–DQN–
based quantitative trading framework. Section 4 presents the experimental design and 
Section 5 shows the experimental results and analysis. Section 6 includes the conclusion 
of the paper. 
2. Related work 
2.1 Traditional Statistical Models in Quantitative Trading
For a long time, quantitative trading has relied on statistical time series models to 
capture the temporal dependence of asset prices. Classical methods such as the 
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) model (Box & Jenkins, 1976) 
and the Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model 
(Bollerslev, 1986; Engle, 1982) have been widely applied to modeling returns and 
volatility (Engle, 1982; Tsay, 2005). Vector autoregression (VAR) (Sims, 1980) has 
been extended to joint dynamic modeling of multiple assets (Lütkepohl, 2005).
These statistical models exhibit strong interpretability and can generate parametric 
forecasts under assumptions of stationarity and linearity. However, financial markets 
often display nonlinearity, non-stationarity, and regime switching characteristics 
(Hamilton, 1989; Diebold & Rudebusch, 1994), making it difficult for traditional 
methods to capture such complex dynamics. Furthermore, these models inherently 
possess limited feature learning capabilities, requiring manually designed exogenous 
variables and lacking automated feature learning. This has driven a shift toward more 
flexible data-driven approaches capable of capturing intricate temporal patterns without 
stringent parametric assumptions.
Although statistical models provide a foundation for modeling market dynamics, 
their limitations in representing nonlinear dependencies and long-term time structures 
have driven the adoption of machine learning approaches, particularly in predictive 
modeling for trading signal generation.
2.2 Forecast Modeling for Financial Time Series
To overcome the limitations of traditional statistical methods, researchers began 
exploring machine learning approaches. From Support Vector Regression (SVR) 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

(Drucker et al., 2001) to ensemble models such as Random Forests (Breiman, 2001) 
and Gradient Boosting Trees (Chen & Guestrin, 2016), these approaches enable 
nonlinear modeling of high-dimensional data under weak distribution assumptions and 
demonstrate strong predictive performance in markets such as stocks and futures 
(Atsalakis & Valavanis, 2009). With the rise of deep learning, time series forecasting 
capabilities have significantly improved. In particular, Long Short-Term Memory 
(LSTM) networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) have been widely adopted in 
financial forecasting (Fischer & Krauss, 2018) due to their ability to model long-term 
dependencies and mitigate the vanishing gradient problem. Convolutional neural 
networks (CNN) (Zhang et al., 2017) excel at capturing local temporal patterns, while 
hybrid models combining attention mechanisms with LSTM (Qin et al., 2017) further 
enhance the ability to characterize global dependencies.
Some studies indicate that prediction signals from deep learning models can 
enhance trading strategies. For instance, Nelson et al. (2017) employed LSTM-based 
stock trend forecasts directly as trading signals, while Tsantekidis et al. (2017) explored 
their application in high-frequency order prediction. Nevertheless, such “predictiondriven” approaches still face challenges: First, multi-step forecasting can lead to error 
accumulation, undermining model stability (Goodfellow et al., 2016); Second, 
improvements in prediction accuracy do not necessarily translate directly into 
profitability (De Prado, 2018); Third, models may overfit to historical market 
conditions (Makridakis et al., 2018).
These limitations indicate that relying solely on predictive signals often falls short 
of achieving optimal trading outcomes. In contrast, reinforcement learning directly 
targets long-term cumulative returns through policy optimization, tightly integrating 
predictive capabilities with the decision-making process. This approach naturally 
generates trading strategies that are more adaptable to market dynamics.
2.3 Reinforcement Learning in Quantitative Trading
Reinforcement learning (RL), as a core method for handling sequential decisionmaking in uncertain environments, has increasingly become a significant research 
direction in intelligent trading in recent years. Early work, such as Moody & Saffell 
(2001), explored neural network-based RL trading frameworks; subsequently, Deng et 
al. (2016) applied Deep Reinforcement Learning to stock trading, achieving end-to-end 
strategy learning. With the introduction of Deep Q-Network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015) 
and policy gradient methods (Silver et al., 2014), RL has demonstrated potential in 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

scenarios such as portfolio management (Jiang et al., 2017) and option hedging.
However, due to the influence of latent factors and unobserved variables on asset 
prices, financial markets are inherently partially observable Markov decision processes 
(POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998). This partial observability makes it challenging to 
directly apply standard reinforcement learning algorithms to obtain optimal strategies 
in financial transactions. In recent years, researchers have proposed utilizing recurrent 
neural networks (RNN) to approximate belief states. For instance, the hidden state of 
an LSTM can serve as a compressed representation of historical observations 
(Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Chen & Wei, 2021). This approach integrates RNN into 
the DQN architecture, enabling the agent to construct a “belief state” based on past 
observation sequences. This method effectively approximates the POMDP problem as 
an observable MDP problem, thereby allowing the agent to make more informed 
decisions.
Our work draws inspiration from this concept. We employ an LSTM model as a 
forward-looking feature extractor to predict future trends and convert them into discrete 
trend labels, thereby constructing an “enhanced belief” about the market state. This 
belief state is then incorporated into the observation space of the DQN to mitigate 
information incompleteness caused by partial observability, thereby enhancing the 
agent's trading decision-making capabilities in complex stock market environments.
3. LSTM–DQN–based Quantitative Trading Framework
3.1 Stock Market Environment
3.1.1 State Space
During the interaction between an agent and its environment, the environment 
provides a series of information that constitutes the agent's state. Typically, the state is 
represented as a vector or matrix, encompassing the key information required for 
decision-making. At each discrete time step t, the agent observes a multidimensional 
state vector 𝑠𝑡, which serves as the basis for policy optimization.
Stock prices are influenced by various macroeconomic and microeconomic factors. 
Technical analysis indicators, as commonly used analytical tools for investors, reflect 
market trends and to some extent mitigate the noise and randomness inherent in 
historical data. To measure stock price movements across short-term, medium-term, 
and long-term time horizons, this paper selects three categories of stock trading 
indicators: current trading conditions, technical indicators, and discrete forecasts of 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

closing price predictions.
We define the state space 𝑠𝑡 as follows:
𝑏𝑡∈ℝ+: Available cash balance at time t
ℎ𝑡∈ℤ+: Number of shares held at time t
VPT(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
∈{0,1,2,3}: Discretized Volume-Price Trend
𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
∈{0,1,2,3}: Discretized volume index moving average
𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡∈{0,1,2}: Trend category derived from LSTM price prediction (0=bearish 
trend, 1=sideways, 2=bullish trend).
3.1.2 Action Space
The action space refers to the set of actions an agent can perform when interacting 
with its environment. The configuration of the action space directly influences the 
agent's impact on the environment, thereby affecting the model's performance.
This paper considers only single-stock trading, involving strategies for adding 
positions, holding positions, and closing positions. To simulate trading behaviors of 
varying intensity levels, we define a discrete and symmetric action space enabling the 
agent to hold, purchase, or sell the target asset at a fixed proportion of its available 
funds or holdings. Each action is encoded as an integer within the range A = {-2, -1, 0, 
1, 2}.
Therefore, the action vector at time step t is specifically defined as:
Specifically, an agent may only perform one of the following actions within a 
single trading day:

Action -2: Sell 30% of holdings

Action -1: Sell 15% of holdings

Action 0: Holding (No Trading)

Action +1: Allocate 15% of available funds to stock purchases.
𝑠𝑡= [𝑏𝑡,ℎ𝑡,VPT(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
,𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
,LTP𝑡]
(1.)
𝑠𝑡∈ℝ+ × ℤ+ × {0,1,2,3}2 × {0,1,2}
(2.)
𝑎𝑡∈{−2,−1,0,1,2}⇒{
 Sell 15% or 30%
 if 𝑎𝑡< 0
 Hold 
 if 𝑎𝑡= 0
 Buy 15% or 30%
 if 𝑎𝑡> 0
(3.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed


Action +2: Allocate 30% of available funds to stock purchases.
When the model determines that purchasing the stock at the current price will yield 
positive long-term holding returns, the agent will execute a buy order. When it predicts 
that the stock's long-term holding returns will decline, or that selling the stock will 
generate higher long-term returns, the agent will execute a sell order. In all other 
scenarios, the agent will refrain from any trading activity.
3.1.3 Reward Function
The reward is a core component of algorithmic trading systems. In reinforcement 
learning, the objective of learning the value function is to estimate the reward values 
corresponding to different actions and select behaviors that maximize rewards during 
policy optimization, thereby achieving optimal cumulative returns. The reward 
typically depends on the current state, the executed action, and the next state. Most 
previous machine learning-based studies have employed instantaneous rewards. 
However, such momentary rewards often exhibit high noise levels, failing to provide 
reliable supervision for model training while also conflicting with maximizing longterm profits. After experimenting with multiple reward functions and their 
corresponding fine-tuning approaches, this paper designs a composite reward function 
to balance short-term profitability with long-term risk control.
The total reward at each time step t is defined as:
Here, CR denotes cumulative return, TP represents transaction penalty, DD 
signifies drawdown, and δ is an adjustable hyperparameter. The specific calculations 
for each component are as follows:
(1) Cumulative Return
This metric measures the gains or losses generated by the agent over a period of 
time. We employ a composite indicator combining single-day directional returns and 
cumulative returns over the past n days to characterize performance, defined as:
Here, 𝑝𝑡 denotes the closing price at time step t, 𝑎𝑡 represents the action taken by 
the agent at time step t, and n=5 signifies the cumulative return over the past five trading 
𝑟𝑡= 𝐶𝑅𝑡−𝑇𝑃𝑡−𝛿⋅𝐷𝐷𝑡
(4.)
𝐶𝑅𝑡= (1 + 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛(𝑎𝑡) ⋅
𝑝𝑡−𝑝𝑡−1
𝑝𝑡−1
) ⋅
𝑝𝑡
𝑝𝑡−𝑛
(5.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

days.
(2) Transaction Penalty
To curb unnecessary losses caused by frequent trading, we have introduced a 
penalty term related to trading behavior. This term is defined as:
 𝑐 represents the fixed cost per transaction. When the action changes (e.g., 
switching from buying to selling), this penalty term is activated.
(3) Drawdown Penalty
To enhance the model's risk sensitivity and suppress extreme drawdowns in the 
portfolio, we introduce a penalty mechanism based on net value drawdowns, whose 
intensity is controlled by the hyperparameter δ. δ reflects the agent's aversion to 
drawdowns, typically taking values between [0, 1]. In this study, we set δ=0.5 to 
achieve a balance between returns and risk.
(4) Reward Normalization
To enhance training efficiency and algorithmic robustness, we dynamically 
normalized the reward signal by tracking its mean and standard deviation for Z-score 
normalization. The results were then clipped to the interval [-5, 5], thereby suppressing 
the interference of transient noise and anomalous rewards on the learning process and 
ensuring training stability.
3.1.4 Other parameters

Initial capital：10, 000 CNY 

Minimum purchase quantity: 100 shares

Leverage is not permitted.

The environment resets at the end of the testing cycle or upon reaching the stoploss threshold.
3.2 Stock Trading Agent
We propose a DRL-based stock trading system whose core approach mitigates the 
challenges posed by partial observability in financial markets through the synergistic 
interaction between an LSTM feature extraction and a DQN decision network.
3.2.1 Framework
𝑇𝑃𝑡= 𝑐⋅∣𝑎𝑡−𝑎𝑡−1∣
(6.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Fig. 1. Flowchart of the proposed DRL-based trading framework
As shown in Fig. 1, LSTM-extracted temporal features are discretized via Dual 
Moving Averages and fed into a DQN to generate trading actions. The trading 
environment provides the current observed state 𝑠𝑡 at time step t, which is input into the 
feature extraction module 𝐿𝑆𝑇𝑀𝑓𝑒𝑎 of the LSTM. This module constructs a state 
sequence by maintaining memory units that integrate market states from the previous 
T−1 time steps. 
Subsequently, 𝐿𝑆𝑇𝑀𝑓𝑒𝑎 analyzes the time series to extract latent temporal 
dependencies and hidden market patterns, outputting a compact encoded feature vector 
ℎ𝑡. This vector provides a more representative input representation for subsequent 
decision networks, effectively capturing nonlinear dynamics and long-term temporal 
information.
During the decision phase, the encoded feature vector ℎ𝑡 is fed into the DQN 
network. Its action-value function is defined as 𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡;𝜃).
Here, 𝜃 denotes the network parameters. The objective of DQN is to approximate 
𝐹𝑡= [𝑆𝑡−𝑇+1,…,𝑆𝑡]
(7.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

the optimal action-value function by minimizing the Bellman error:
Here, 𝜃− denotes the target network parameters, 𝛾 represents the discount factor, 
and 𝒟 refers to the experience replay buffer.
At each time step, the agent selects an action 𝑎𝑡∈𝐴 according to a 𝜖-greedy policy, 
executes this action in the environment, and receives a reward 𝑟𝑡, next state 𝑠𝑡+1, and 
termination indicator 𝑑𝑡∈ {0,1} indicating whether the round has ended. Through this 
process, the agent progressively forms interaction quintets:
 And store it in the experience replay buffer for subsequent sampling training. 
3.2.2 Problem Formulation under POMDP
In the real world, financial markets are inherently partially observable, as the agent 
cannot ascertain the true market state due to underlying factors such as noise, 
macroeconomic shifts, or insider trading, coupled with complex time-dependent 
properties. Therefore, modeling the stock trading environment as a partially observable 
Markov decision process (POMDP) is more appropriate than using a fully observable 
Markov decision process (MDP).
A POMDP is typically defined by the tuple (𝒮,𝒜,𝒪,𝑇,𝑅,Ω,𝛾), where: 

𝒮: Potential environmental states (e.g., true asset values, market 
mechanisms)

𝒜: Discrete or continuous actions (e.g., buy, sell, hold)

𝒪: Observed signals (e.g., technical indicators, price snapshots)

Ω(𝑜|𝑠): Observation model describing the distribution of 𝑜 given the 
hidden state 𝑠

𝑇(𝑠′|𝑠,𝑎): State transition function

𝑅(𝑠,𝑎): reward

𝛾: Discount factor
Under these circumstances, relying solely on the current observation 𝑜𝑡 clearly 
fails to satisfy the Markov assumption. Directly applying value-based standard 
reinforcement learning algorithms (e.g., DQN) to 𝑜𝑡 often leads to unstable learning or 
𝐿(𝜃) = 𝔼(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡,𝑟𝑡,𝑠𝑡+1)∼𝐷[(𝑟𝑡+ 𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑎′  𝑄(𝑠𝑡+1,𝑎′;𝜃−)−𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡;𝜃))2]
(8.)
𝐿(𝜃) = 𝔼(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡,𝑟𝑡,𝑠𝑡+1)∼𝐷[(𝑟𝑡+ 𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑎′  𝑄(𝑠𝑡+1,𝑎′;𝜃−)−𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡;𝜃))2]
(9.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

convergence to suboptimal solutions.
To mitigate this issue, existing research has demonstrated that recurrent neural 
networks, particularly LSTM, can accumulate and filter historical observations through 
memory units and gating mechanisms. This enables them to alleviate uncertainty 
caused by missing information and noise across the temporal dimension (Lample and 
Chaplot, 2017; Jia et al., 2019). This capability enables LSTM to approximate belief 
states, capture long-term dependencies, and infer underlying market dynamics, making 
it widely regarded as an effective approach for handling POMDP scenarios. Based on 
this theoretical foundation, we introduce LSTM as state augmenters to capture temporal 
dependencies and latent market dynamics.
3.2.3 LSTM as Predictive Feature Extractor and State Enhancer
We employ a multi-layer LSTM as the state encoder and utilize historical price 
windows to predict the next stock price. Although this module functions as a regressor 
during training via supervised learning, its core role within the RL pipeline is to serve 
as both a temporal feature extractor and belief approximator within the POMDP.
(1) Architecture & Training Objective
The constructed LSTM network consists of three stacked layers, each containing 
50 hidden nodes, followed by a fully connected layer. Its output is a single continuous 
variable 𝑃𝑡+1 ∈ℝ, which characterizes the predicted closing price at the next time step:
Where 𝑃𝑡 denotes the historical closing price. The model is trained by minimizing 
the mean squared error (MSE):
(2) From Prediction to Trend Abstraction
During the input processing stage, instead of directly using the raw prediction 
values obtained from the LSTM, we employ a double moving average crossover 
strategy to transform 𝑃𝑡+1 into a discrete trend signal suitable for DQN learning. 
Specifically, we compute the 5-day moving average MA5 and the 20-day moving 
average MA20. Based on the positional relationship between the predicted price 𝑃𝑡+1 
and these moving averages, we abstract the market trend into three discrete states:
𝑃𝑡+1 = LSTM(𝑥𝑡),  𝑥𝑡= [𝑃𝑡−𝑇+1,...,𝑃𝑡]
(10.)
ℒLSTM = MSE(𝑃𝑡+1,𝑃𝑡+1)
(11.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Here, MA5(𝑡) and MA20(𝑡) represent the 5-day and 20-day moving averages at 
time t, respectively. 𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡= 2 indicates an upward trend for the asset; 𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡= 1  
indicates a downward trend; 𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡= 0 indicates the asset is in a fluctuating or uncertain 
trend. The results are fed as additional features into the DQN.
To clearly illustrate the LSTM-based stock price trend discretization process, we 
organize the module's execution flow into algorithmic pseudocode, as shown in 
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: LSTM-Based Trend Discretization via Dual-MA
Input:
Historical closing prices 𝑃= [𝑝1,…,𝑝𝑇];
pretrained LSTM predictor 𝑓LSTM;
look-back length 𝑇𝐿;
short and long MA windows: 𝑀𝐴5 = 5,𝑀𝐴20 = 20.
Output: 
Discrete trend label LTP𝑡∈{0:Neutral,1:Downtrend,2:Uptrend}.
1: For 𝑡= 𝑇𝐿 to T:
2:           Form input sequence 𝑥𝑡= [𝑝𝑡−𝑇𝐿+1,…,𝑝𝑡];
3:           Predict next-step close: 𝑝𝑡+1←𝑓LSTM(𝑥𝑡);
4:           Compute moving averages 𝑀𝐴5(𝑡),𝑀𝐴20(𝑡) on historical prices up to t;
5:           If 𝑝𝑡+1 > 𝑀𝐴5(𝑡) and 𝑝𝑡+1 > 𝑀𝐴20(𝑡):
6:                   LTP𝑡←2   // Uptrend
7:           Else if 𝑝𝑡+1 < 𝑀𝐴5(𝑡) and 𝑝𝑡+1 < 𝑀𝐴20(𝑡):
8:                   LTP𝑡←1   // Downtrend
9:           Else:
10:                 LTP𝑡←0   // Neutral
11: End For
In Algorithm 1, the input consists of the historical closing price sequence 𝑃= [𝑝1,
𝑝2,...,𝑝𝑇]and the pre-trained LSTM model 𝐿𝑆𝑇𝑀𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡. First, the algorithm performs Zscore normalization on the price sequence of length 𝑇𝐿 to eliminate scale differences 
between data points. Subsequently, 𝐿𝑆𝑇𝑀𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡 predicts the current time step price 𝑝𝑡 and 
stores the prediction in a sliding buffer PredBuffer. Next, the algorithm calculates shortterm and long-term moving averages 𝑀𝐴5 and 𝑀𝐴20 based on the predicted prices in 
PredBuffer. Finally, it generates discrete trend labels 𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡∈{0,1,2} using a double 
moving average crossover strategy, corresponding to decline, sideways movement, and 
𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡={
2       if 𝑃𝑡+1 > MA5(𝑡) 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑃𝑡+1 > MA20(𝑡)
1       if 𝑃𝑡+1 < MA5(𝑡) 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑃𝑡+1 < MA20(𝑡)
0       otherwise
(12.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

rise, respectively. This trend signal serves as one of the enhanced state features for the 
reinforcement learning agent and is subsequently fed into the DQN network.
(3) Enhancing Markovianity in POMDP
Consistent with prior research (Lample & Chaplot, 2017; Jia et al., 2019), this 
paper employs LSTM as a state augmenter to transform raw, noisy, and non-Markovian 
price sequences into compact representations that reflect underlying temporal structures. 
This mechanism not only captures long-term dependencies within price trajectories but 
also effectively filters out high-frequency noise through sequence smoothing. It 
simultaneously encodes latent market mechanisms not directly revealed by indicators 
and provides forward-looking information to guide the agent's action.
This design aligns with the function of belief state approximators in classical 
POMDP theory (Cassandra, 1998; Pineau et al., 2003), whose core idea is to infer 
hidden dynamics through memory-based models. Our approach resonates with recent 
related research, such as Recurrent World Models (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018), which 
leverage recurrent structures to model environmental dynamics, thereby enhancing the 
effectiveness of internal policy learning.
To provide a more intuitive illustration of the training process for the agent based 
on LSTM-enhanced states, we summarize the overall training workflow as Algorithm 
2.
Algorithm 2: Training Procedure of LSTM-Augmented DQN Trading Agent
Input:
Stock trading environment env;
pretrained LSTM trend predictor 𝑓LSTM;
Q-network 𝑄( ⋅;𝜃), target network 𝑄′( ⋅;𝜃−);
experience replay buffer 𝒟;
hyperparameters: exploration rate 𝜖, discount 𝛾, learning rate 𝛼, batch size B, 
target update frequency C;
episode count E, max steps per episode T;
drawdown penalty weight 𝛿= 0.5;
transaction cost constant 𝑐.
Output: 
Trained parameters 𝜃.
1: Initialize network parameters 𝜃; set target 𝜃−←𝜃.
2: Initialize replay buffer 𝒟.
3: For episode 𝑒= 1,…,𝐸:
4:           𝑟𝑎𝑤𝑜𝑏𝑠←𝑒𝑛𝑣.𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡();
5:           Augment initial state 𝑠0←GetAugmentedState(𝑟𝑎𝑤_𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝑓LSTM).
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

6:           For 𝑡= 1,…,𝑇:
7:                 With prob. 𝜖: select 𝑎𝑡∼Uniform(𝒜); else 𝑎𝑡= arg 𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑎 𝑄(𝑠𝑡−1,𝑎;𝜃).
8:                 Execute 𝑎𝑡 in env → observe 𝑟𝑎𝑤_𝑜𝑏𝑠_𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡, price 𝑝𝑡, done flag.
Reward calculation:
9:                 Compute cumulative return: CR𝑡= (1 + sign(𝑎𝑡) ⋅
𝑝𝑡−𝑝𝑡−1
𝑝𝑡−1 ) ⋅
𝑝𝑡
𝑝𝑡−5 .
10:               Compute trade penalty: TP𝑡= 𝑐⋅|𝑎𝑡−𝑎𝑡−1|.
11:               Compute drawdown penalty: 𝐷𝐷𝑡= 𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝜏≤𝑡 
𝑝𝜏−𝑝𝑡
𝑝𝜏 .
12:               Total reward: 𝑟𝑡= CR𝑡−TP𝑡−𝛿⋅DD𝑡.
Reward normalization:
13:                Update running mean 𝜇𝑟, std 𝜎𝑟;
14:                𝑟𝑡= clip((𝑟𝑡−𝜇𝑟)/(𝜎𝑟+ 𝜖𝑛𝑢𝑚),−5,5).
15:                𝑠𝑡←GetAugmentedState(𝑟𝑎𝑤_𝑜𝑏𝑠_𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡,𝑓LSTM).
16:                Store transition (𝑠𝑡−1,𝑎𝑡,𝑟𝑡,𝑠𝑡,done) into 𝒟.
Learning step:
17:                If |𝒟| ≥𝐵:
18:                        Sample minibatch from 𝒟.
19:                        For each transition:
20:                              If done: 𝑦= 𝑟.
21:                              Else: 𝑦= 𝑟+𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑎′  𝑄′(𝑠′,𝑎′;𝜃−).
22:                        Update 𝜃 by minimizing (𝑦−𝑄(𝑠,𝑎;𝜃))2.
23:                Every C steps: 𝜃−←𝜃.
24:                If done: break.
25:         End For
26:         Decay 𝜖 if applicable.
27: End For
28: Save trained 𝜃.
Auxiliary: State Augmentation
GetAugmentedState(𝑟𝑎𝑤𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝑓LSTM):
1: Extract (𝑏𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑉𝑃𝑇(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
,𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
) from 𝑟𝑎𝑤−𝑜𝑏𝑠.
2: Compute trend label 𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡 using Algorithm 1.
3: Return 𝑠𝑡= [𝑏𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑉𝑃𝑇(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
,𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
,𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡].
In Algorithm 2, the Q-network, target Q-network, and experience replay buffer 𝒟 
are first initialized. At the start of each training round, the agent receives a raw 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

observation 𝑟𝑎𝑤−𝑜𝑏𝑠 from the trading environment. This observation is then 
transformed into an augmented state vector 𝑠𝑡 via the GetAugmentedState function. 
This state includes the cash balance 𝑏𝑡, position size ℎ𝑡, discretized technical indicators, 
and the LSTM trend indicator 𝐿𝑇𝑃𝑡.
During interactions, the agent selects an action 𝑎𝑡 using “𝜖 -greedy” strategy and 
receives the next observation 𝑟𝑎𝑤_𝑜𝑏𝑠_𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 and reward 𝑟𝑡 from the environment. 
When the sample size in the buffer reaches the preset batch size, the agent randomly 
samples a batch from it. It then calculates the target value y using the Bellman equation 
and updates the parameters θ of the main Q-network via mean squared error (MSE) 
loss.
Additionally, the reward incorporates three components: cumulative return, 
Transaction Penalty, and drawdown penalty, normalized to enhance training stability. 
Ultimately, through iterative interaction and updates, the agent learns a trading strategy 
that balances returns and risks.
4. Experimental Design
In this section, we introduce the dataset used in the experiments and its partitioning 
scheme, and provide the training parameter settings for LSTM and DQN. Next, we 
describe each of the selected baseline models in turn. Finally, we present the evaluation 
method for the experimental results.
4.1 Description of Datasets
This paper first obtained daily transaction data for 300 A-shares and constructed a 
factor library encompassing over 200 dimensions, including financial and technical 
aspects. Subsequently, three representative A-share market stocks were selected as 
research subjects: China Merchants Securities (600999.SH), GF Securities 
(000776.SZ), and Wuliangye (000858.SZ). This approach aims to validate the model's 
universality across different industries and market characteristics within a single market. 
The back-testing period for China Merchants Securities data spans from November 
2023 to January 2025. For GF Securities data, the back-testing period covers September 
2023 to January 2025. The back-testing period of Wuliangye data  runs from January 
2024 to January 2025.
Each trading day record contains standard OHLCV attributes (Open, High, Low, 
Close, and Volume). Based on this raw data, we calculated additional technical 
indicators, including: Discretized 6-day Volume Price Trend (VPT(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
), and a 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

discretized 5-day volume-weighted moving average (𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
), to enrich the input 
features.
To ensure the fairness of evaluation and the generalization capability of the model, 
all data were strictly partitioned in chronological order. We adopted the industrystandard 9:1 ratio to split the dataset into training and back-testing sets. The first 90% 
of the data were used for agent training and parameter optimization, while the 
remaining 10% were employed to assess the trained model's performance on unseen 
samples.
During data processing, we did not apply any weighting to the data, meaning all 
historical data points were assigned equal weight. This approach was primarily chosen 
to explicitly evaluate the actual contribution of the LSTM module within the LSTMDQN model to policy performance. Maintaining consistent data weighting eliminates 
the influence of other potential factors on experimental results, thereby enabling a more 
accurate assessment of the model's inherent effectiveness. 
4.2 Training Parameters of DQN
The training parameter settings for DQN are shown in Table 1. To prevent random 
noise in the environment from interfering with DQN training and subsequent parameter 
tuning, we set a random seed to ensure consistent random perturbations in the 
environment during each model run.
Table 1 Training parameters of DQN.
Parameter
Value
Discount Factor (γ)
0.99
Learning Rate (α)
0.001
Optimizer
Adam
Loss Function
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
Batch Size (B)
64
Replay Buffer Size (D)
10
Target Network Update Frequency (C)
Every 1,000 steps
Initial Exploration Rate (𝜀₀)
1.0
Final Exploration Rate (𝜀𝑚𝑖𝑛)
0.01
Random Seed
42
4.3 Compared Models
Our model is compared with baseline models, including: 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Buy-and-Hold Strategy: A typical passive investment benchmark involves 
traders purchasing assets at the start of the evaluation period and holding them until the 
end without further transactions. This benchmark reflects the performance of a pure 
long position with no trading volume.
Random Strategy: At each decision point, the agent uniformly randomly selects 
an action from the discrete action set {-2, -1, 0, +1, +2}.
DQN Model: Deep-Q network trading agents without LSTM feature prediction 
training. The state space contains only raw technical indicators and portfolio 
information.
4.4 Evaluation measures
Cumulative Return (CR): It is calculated by subtracting the portfolio's final value 
from its initial value, then dividing by the initial value. This reflects the portfolio's total 
return at the end of the trading period.
Annualized Return (AR): This figure is derived by annualizing the cumulative 
return over the back-testing period. Its purpose is to eliminate biases arising from 
differences in investment horizons, thereby providing a unified benchmark for 
comparing different strategies.
Here, CR denotes the cumulative return rate, 𝑁period represents the total number of 
trading periods during the back-testing period, and 𝑁annual indicates the number of 
trading periods within a single year.
Maximum Drawdown (MDD): The maximum drawdown experienced by a 
portfolio during its operation—that is, the largest percentage loss from its peak to its 
trough—reveals the downside risk of a trading strategy under the most adverse market 
conditions.
Among these, Val𝑡 denotes the portfolio value at time t, while Peak𝑡 represents the 
𝐶𝑅=
𝑃𝑒𝑛𝑑−𝑃0
𝑃0
(13.)
𝐴𝑅=((1 + 𝐶𝑅)
𝑁annual
𝑁period−1) × 100%
(14.)
𝑀𝐷𝐷= 𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑡∈[0,𝑇] (
Peak𝑡−Val𝑡
Peak𝑡) × 100%
(15.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

historical maximum portfolio value up to time t.
Volatility: The core calculation method for stock volatility is historical volatility, 
which is based on historical asset price data. It is obtained by calculating the standard 
deviation 𝜎𝑃 of the return rate and multiplying it by an annualized coefficient (such as 
252). It is widely used in risk quantification and investment decision-making.
Sharpe Ratio (SR) ：The annualized return minus the annualized risk-free rate, 
divided by the annualized volatility. This metric comprehensively considers both 
returns and risk, reflecting the excess return per unit of systematic risk.
5. Numerical Evaluation
In this section, we first performed appropriate adjustments to the model parameters. 
We then selected three Chinese A-share stocks to evaluate our model and conducted a 
sensitivity analysis on China Merchants Securities to examine the impact of different 
features on model performance.
5.1 Performance on China Merchants Securities data 
We conducted a systematic evaluation of the LSTM-DQN model's performance on 
China Merchants Securities, comparing it against the DQN model, the Buy-and-Hold 
strategy, and the Random strategy. Fig. 2 illustrates the cumulative return curves of our 
model versus other benchmark strategies during the back-testing period. We can 
conclude that the LSTM-DQN achieves higher cumulative returns (%) than the other 
strategies.
𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑃= 𝜎𝑃×
252
(16.)
𝑆𝑅=
𝐸(𝑅𝑃)−𝑅𝑓
𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑃
 
(17.)
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Fig. 1. Performance of the LSTM-DQN model on China Merchants Securities Data.
Table 2 details key trading metrics for each strategy on China Merchants Securities.
Table 2 Details of the trading results on China Merchants Securities Data.
Metrics
LSTM-DQN
Buy-and-Hold 
DQN
Random
CR
35.39%
26.52%
18.98%
25.17%
AR
32.27%
24.25%
17.40%
23.03%
MDD
15.84%
9.85%
7.79%
9.59%
SR
1.25
1.38
1.27
1.33
Volatility
25.35%
15.11%
11.68%
14.95%
The results show that the LSTM-DQN strategy achieved the highest cumulative 
return throughout the back-testing period. LSTM-DQN model exhibited relatively 
stable performance in the early stages, with its cumulative returns experiencing a 
significant surge in the fourth quarter of 2024. The cumulative return of 35.39% and 
the annualized return of 32.27% both outperformed the other strategies. This indicates 
that the introduction of LSTM features played a positive role in capturing market 
dynamics and guiding trading decisions. Buy-and-Hold strategy also achieved a good 
cumulative return which reflected the sustained upward trend in China Merchants 
Securities' stock price during specific phases. 
In terms of risk control, our LSTM-DQN model demonstrates certain risks. As 
shown in Table 2, the model's maximum drawdown is 15.84%, which is higher than 
7.79% of DQN. Its volatility stands at 25.35%, exceeding the 11.68% of the DQN 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

model. This elevated volatility primarily stems from substantial short-term increases in 
the model's net value during rapid uptrends, which amplify overall volatility levels—
not solely due to heightened downside risk. Thus, while LSTM-DQN exhibits 
statistically more aggressive behavior, its risk exposure largely parallels its enhanced 
returns. Notably, the LSTM-DQN model achieves a Sharpe ratio of 1.25, closely 
matching the 1.27 of the DQN strategy. This indicates that although the proposed 
LSTM-DQN carries certain risks, its risk-adjusted performance is acceptable. The key 
distinction lies in the Buy-and-Hold strategy's reliance on unidirectional market 
uptrends, whereas our model generates returns through active trading across diverse 
market conditions.
To further analyze the model's adaptability, we divided the back-testing period 
into two phases. The first phase was a stable volatility period (November 2023 to 
August 2024), during which the return curves of all strategies fluctuated slightly around 
the zero axis with insignificant differences, indicating a market lacking clear 
directionality. The second phase was a rapid uptrend period (after September 2024), 
marked by a sustained rise in China Merchants Securities' stock price. The LSTM-DQN 
model swiftly captured the trend during this phase, with its cumulative return curve 
rising sharply to generate substantial short-term profits. In contrast, the DQN model 
underperformed during this period, failing to effectively capitalize on market 
opportunities. Overall, the LSTM-DQN model demonstrated strong profit potential and 
trend adaptation capabilities.
5.2 Performance on GF Securities data
Next, to further evaluate our model's performance in real-market conditions, we 
selected GF Securities for trading simulations. Fig. 3 illustrates the trading performance 
of our model and other benchmark models on GF Securities within the test dataset. The 
results demonstrate that our model outperforms the DQN, Buy-and-Hold, and Random 
strategies in terms of cumulative return (%) during the test phase.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Fig. 2. Performance of the LSTM-DQN model in GF Securities Data.
 
Table 3 Details of the trading results in GF Securities Data.
Metrics
LSTM-DQN
Buy-and-Hold 
DQN
Random
CR
12.45%
10.98%
10.03%
10.46%
AR
10.10%
8.90%
8.14%
8.48%
MDD
17.66%
14.33%
16.90%
9.80%
SR
0.49
0.58
0.42
0.66
Volatility
19.33%
12.69%
17.85%
10.19%
As shown in Table 3, our model demonstrates a significant overall performance 
advantage. The cumulative return of the LSTM-DQN strategy reached 12.45%, 
significantly higher than the 10.98% achieved by the Buy-and-Hold strategy, 10.03% 
of DQN strategy, and 10.46% of Random strategy. The annualized return of 10.10% is 
also the highest among the strategies. It also carried substantially higher risk, with a 
maximum drawdown of 17.66% and volatility of 19.33%. This indicates compared to 
the benchmark strategies, the LSTM-DQN model demonstrates a clear advantage in 
returns at the cost of considerable risk exposure. It achieved maximum drawdown of 
17.66% and volatility of 19.33% among all strategies, indicating the risk cost of 
obtaining high returns. In risk-adjusted performance evaluation, the LSTM-DQN 
model achieved a Sharpe ratio of 0.49, which is acceptable among 0.58 of Buy-andThis preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Hold strategy, 0.42 of DQN strategy, and 0.66 of Random strategy. This demonstrates 
the model's ability to generate excess returns with greater efficiency in GF Securities' 
testing.
Further analysis of the cumulative return curve in Fig. 3 reveals that all strategies 
experienced varying degrees of drawdown prior to September 2024. However, starting 
from September 2024, the market staged a rapid rebound. The LSTM-DQN model not 
only successfully captured the upward trend but also achieved a rate of return growth 
comparable to the Buy-and-Hold strategy. This further indicates that the LSTM-DQN 
model can effectively identify trading opportunities and manage downside risk in 
volatile markets.
5.3 Performance on Wuliangye data
We applied the same model to back-test transactions for Wuliangye and compared 
its performance against the benchmark DQN, Buy-and-Hold, and Random strategies, 
presenting the cumulative returns at the end of the trading period as shown in Fig. 4. 
Fig. 4. Performance of the LSTM-DQN model in Wuliangye Data.
Table 4 Details of the trading results on Wuliangye Data.
Metrics
LSTM-DQN
Buy-and-Hold 
DQN
Random
CR
14.37%
3.13%
2.47%
-7.46%
AR
15.85%
3.43%
2.71%
-8.14%
MDD
25.49%
15.19%
2.28%
16.27%
SR
0.57
0.17
0.27
-0.68
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Volatility
30.39%
15.19%
2.71%
13.96%
Table 4 compares the trading performance of our model and the benchmark 
strategies on Wuliangye data, detailing key trading metrics including cumulative return 
(CR), annualized return (AR), maximum drawdown (MDD), Sharpe ratio (SR), and 
volatility.
Overall, the cumulative return of LSTM-DQN reached 14.37%, with an 
annualized return of 15.85%, both surpassing 2.47% and 2.71% of DQN and 3.13% 
and 3.43% of Buy-and-Hold strategy. This indicates that after incorporating LSTM for 
feature extraction, the model can capture price dynamics. LSTM-DQN's maximum 
drawdown was 25.49%, bigger than 15.19% of Buy-and-Hold strategy, 16.27% of 
Random strategy, and 2.28% of DQN. Volatility reached 30.39%, which was also the 
biggest among the strategies. This also indicates that, similar to the conclusions 
obtained in the first two stocks, the proposed algorithm has significant advantages in 
terms of returns, but at the cost of bearing certain risks and fluctuations in returns.
The dynamic performance of the cumulative return curve reveals that between 
February and April 2024, while LSTM-DQN's return growth remained relatively stable, 
its rate of return growth significantly lagged the Buy-and-Hold strategy due to the 
market's short-term upward phase. Subsequently, from May to July 2024, the 
cumulative returns of LSTM-DQN accelerated rapidly, surpassing the overall 
performance of DQN within a short period and peaking in mid-June. From September 
to October 2024, market volatility intensified significantly. The Buy-and-Hold strategy 
experienced a substantial drawdown, while the LSTM-DQN curve maintained a 
gradual upward trajectory, demonstrating robust risk resilience. During this phase, the 
model effectively mitigated the systemic risks inherent in one-sided holding strategies. 
Finally, as the market stabilized overall from December 2024 to January 2025, LSTMDQN maintained positive returns while the DQN strategy's performance curve largely 
stagnated, further highlighting our model's advantages.
5.4 Performance Summary
In this section, we conduct a further analysis of the experimental performance of 
the three stocks.
First, the introduction of LSTM features significantly enhances the model's 
profitability. In back-tests for China Merchants Securities, GF Securities, and 
Wuliangye Securities, the LSTM-DQN model outperformed all of the other strategies 
including pure DQN strategy, Buy-and-Hold strategy and Random strategy in terms of 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

cumulative and annualized returns. This result indicates that the LSTM module 
effectively captures nonlinear dependencies and latent dynamic features within 
financial time series, thereby strengthening the decision-making capabilities of the 
trading agent (Fischer & Krauss, 2018).
Secondly, the experimental results also reveal the limitations of our model under 
extreme market conditions. In the back-test, the LSTM-DQN model's maximum 
drawdown and volatility are the biggest among the strategies. This phenomenon reflects 
reinforcement learning's inherent challenges in strongly trending bull markets. In such 
environments, active trading often has a tendency towards aggressiveness. Although 
our model excels at capturing trends, its potential trading risk may be magnified by the 
market's overarching direction under extreme conditions.
Comprehensive performance of benefits and risks exhibited more complex 
characteristics. While LSTM-DQN demonstrated superior return performance 
compared to all baseline strategies, it has the highest potential risk. LSTM-DQN has 
the lowest Sharp ratios on China Merchants Securities data, the second lowest Sharp 
ratios on GF Securities data, and the biggest Sharp ratios on Wuliangye data. This 
indicates that the model's risk control ability is not fixed but closely tied to the specific 
market volatility characteristics of individual stocks. Nevertheless, despite risks in 
trading, LSTM-DQN consistently achieves Sharpe ratios comparable to or even 
superior to other strategies across most stocks. This validates its robustness in 
delivering risk-adjusted returns.
5.5 Ablation Study
To assess the marginal contribution of individual features to agent trading 
performance, this paper conducted ablation experiments using China Merchants 
Securities as the research subject. In the experimental design, we constructed two model 
configurations by removing the technical indicators VPT(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
 and 𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
 from the 
DQN model to examine their impact on model performance.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

Fig.5. Cumulative return (%) comparison of ablation models.
Table 5 Results of Ablation Study
Without_VPT(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
Without_𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
All Features
CR
15.55%
12.51%
18.98%
AR
14.27%
11.49%
17.40%
MDD
7.69%
8.65%
7.79%
SR
0.97
0.75
1.27
Volatility
12.48%
13.02%
11.68%
As shown in Fig. 5 and Table 5, the features VPT(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
 and 𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
 play a 
crucial role in model performance, with the full model significantly outperforming its 
ablation versions across multiple core metrics. In terms of returns, the DQN model with 
all features ultimately achieved a cumulative return rate of 18.98%, substantially higher 
than models after removing either feature. Particularly after September 2024, the 
complete model's return curve exhibited a distinct inflection point and steep upward 
trajectory, whereas the ablation model's return growth remained more gradual. In terms 
of annualized returns, the DQN model with all features achieved 17.40%, significantly 
higher than the performance of models that removed either the VPT(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
 or 𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
 
features. This disparity fully demonstrates the effective supplementation of market 
information provided by these two features.
In terms of risk-adjusted performance, the model with all features also 
demonstrates superiority, with a Sharpe ratio of 1.27, significantly outperforming the 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

0.97 and 0.75 ratios of the ablation versions. This indicates that at the same risk level, 
the full model achieves higher excess returns while striking a better balance between 
risk control and return generation. Although the model with all features has a  maximum 
drawdown of 7.79%, which is not the lowest among the two ablation versions, this 
increased risk is entirely justified as a reasonable trade-off for pursuing higher returns, 
given its significantly higher return levels and superior Sharpe ratio. Additionally, the 
model with all features has a volatility of 11.68%, which is the lowest among the 
feature-excluded versions. This result further confirms that incorporating the two key 
features enables the model to more aggressively capture market opportunities, thereby 
driving the overall strategy's return levels.
From a mechanism perspective, VPT(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
 likely enhances the model's sensitivity 
to short-term price fluctuations and volume changes, while 𝑉𝐸𝑀𝐴(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐)
𝑡
 plays a crucial 
role in identifying short-term trends. The combined use of both provides richer input 
information and enables the agent to gain more comprehensive market dynamics 
support during policy optimization, thereby significantly improving the model's overall 
performance.
6. Conclusion
This paper addresses the partial observability challenges in financial market 
decision-making by proposing a stock trading strategy based on the LSTM-DQN Deep 
Reinforcement Learning framework. This framework tackles challenges under POMDP 
through two key innovations. First, we construct a state augmenter based on multi-layer 
LSTM to effectively extract and encode latent temporal dependencies and market 
dynamics from historical stock price and technical indicator sequences. Second, we 
introduce an innovative trend discretization strategy that transforms continuous market 
information into discrete states with strong Markov properties, significantly enhancing 
the agent's policy learning efficiency and decision stability.
In the empirical study, we systematically compared the proposed LSTM-DQN 
model with multiple benchmark strategies using three typical stocks in the A-share 
market as our research subject. Results demonstrate the superior performance of our 
model across key metrics including cumulative return, annualized return and Sharpe 
ratio. Compared to the baseline DQN model, our approach achieved at most a 16.41% 
increase in cumulative return and a 14.87% increase in annualized return and 
significantly improving the Sharpe ratio, indicating enhanced risk control alongside 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

higher returns. Furthermore, we conducted systematic ablation experiments to analyze 
the marginal contributions of key technical features to model performance. Results 
reveal that single-day volume-related indicators and technical moving average features 
are crucial for model effectiveness. This further validates that feature extraction and 
state augmentation are key to constructing robust trading strategies in partially 
observable environments.
7. Data Availability
The datasets analysed during the current study are available from the 
corresponding author on reasonable request. 
References
[1] Fama E F, French K R. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds[J]. Journal of 
financial economics, 1993, 33(1): 3-56.
[2] Moody J, Wu L, Liao Y, et al. Performance functions and reinforcement learning for trading 
systems and portfolios[J]. Journal of forecasting, 1998, 17(5‐6): 441-470.
[3] Deng Y, Bao F, Kong Y, et al. Deep direct reinforcement learning for financial signal representation 
and trading[J]. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 2016, 28(3): 653-664.
[4] Zhang Z, Zohren S, Roberts S. Deep reinforcement learning for trading[J]. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1911.10107, 2019.
[5] Liang Z, Chen H, Zhu J, et al. Adversarial deep reinforcement learning in portfolio management[J]. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09940, 2018.
[6] Box G E P, Jenkins G M, Reinsel G C, et al. Time series analysis: forecasting and control[M]. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2015.
[7] Bollerslev T. Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity[J]. Journal of econometrics, 
1986, 31(3): 307-327.
[8] Engle R F. Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of United 
Kingdom inflation[J]. Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society, 1982: 987-1007.
[9] Sims C A. Macroeconomics and reality[J]. Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society, 1980: 
1-48. 
[10]Tsay R S. Analysis of financial time series[M]. John wiley & sons, 2005.
[11]Kilian L. NEW INTRODUCTION TO MULTIPLE TIME SERIES ANALYSIS, by Helmut 
Lütkepohl, Springer, 2005[J]. Econometric theory, 2006, 22(5): 961-967.
[12]Hamilton J D. A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and the 
business cycle[J]. Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society, 1989: 357-384.
[13]Diebold F X, Rudebusch G D. Measuring business cycles: A modern perspective[M]. Cambridge, 
Mass., USA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1994.
[14]Drucker H, Burges C J, Kaufman L, et al. Support vector regression machines[J]. Advances in 
neural information processing systems, 1996, 9.
[15]Breiman L. Random forests[J]. Machine learning, 2001, 45(1): 5-32.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed

[16]Atsalakis G S, Valavanis K P. Surveying stock market forecasting techniques–Part II: Soft 
computing methods[J]. Expert Systems with applications, 2009, 36(3): 5932-5941.
[17]Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory[J]. Neural computation, 1997, 9(8): 17351780.
[18]Qin Y, Song D, Chen H, et al. A dual-stage attention-based recurrent neural network for time series 
prediction[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.02971, 2017.
[19]Nelson D M Q, Pereira A C M, De Oliveira R A. Stock market's price movement prediction with 
LSTM neural networks[C]//2017 International joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN). Ieee, 
2017: 1419-1426.
[20]Tsantekidis A, Passalis N, Tefas A, et al. Forecasting stock prices from the limit order book using 
convolutional neural networks[C]//2017 IEEE 19th conference on business informatics (CBI). 
IEEE, 2017, 1: 7-12.
[21]LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, et al. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition[J]. 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 2002, 86(11): 2278-2324.
[22]Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A, et al. Deep learning[M]. Cambridge: MIT press, 2016.
[23]De Prado M L. Advances in financial machine learning[M]. John Wiley & Sons, 2018.
[24]Makridakis S, Spiliotis E, Assimakopoulos V. Statistical and Machine Learning forecasting 
methods: Concerns and ways forward[J]. PloS one, 2018, 13(3): e0194889.
[25]Moody J, Saffell M. Learning to trade via direct reinforcement[J]. IEEE transactions on neural 
Networks, 2001, 12(4): 875-889.
[26]Yang H, Liu X Y, Zhong S, et al. Deep reinforcement learning for automated stock trading: An 
ensemble strategy[C]//Proceedings of the first ACM international conference on AI in finance. 
2020: 1-8.
[27]Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement 
learning[J]. nature, 2015, 518(7540): 529-533.
[28]Jiang Z, Xu D, Liang J. A deep reinforcement learning framework for the financial portfolio 
management problem[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.10059, 2017.
[29]Silver D, Lever G, Heess N, et al. Deterministic policy gradient algorithms [C]//International 
conference on machine learning. Pmlr, 2014: 387-395.
[30]Kaelbling L P, Littman M L, Cassandra A R. Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic 
domains[J]. Artificial intelligence, 1998, 101(1-2): 99-134.
[31]Hausknecht M J, Stone P. Deep Recurrent Q-Learning for Partially Observable MDPs[C]//AAAI 
fall symposia. 2015, 45: 141.
[32]Lample G, Chaplot D S. Playing FPS games with deep reinforcement learning[C]//Proceedings of 
the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. 2017, 31(1).
[33]Cassandra A R. A survey of POMDP applications[C]//Working notes of AAAI 1998 fall 
symposium on planning with partially observable Markov decision processes. 1998, 1724.
[34]Pineau J, Gordon G, Thrun S. Point-based value iteration: An anytime algorithm for 
POMDPs[C]//Ijcai. 2003, 3: 1025-1032.
[35]Fischer T, Krauss C. Deep learning with long short-term memory networks for financial market 
predictions[J]. European journal of operational research, 2018, 270(2): 654-669.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5822221
Preprint not peer reviewed
