1 
 
Make-take decisions under  
high-frequency trading competition 
 
 
Alejandro Bernales*  
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
The make-take preferences of investors depend on high-frequency trading (HFT) competition, 
under which HFT firms endogenously acquire speed and informational advantages. In the case 
where there are many HFT firms in the market, they compete more through limit orders; 
meanwhile, in the case with few HFT firms, they compete more through market orders that "pickoff" limit orders coming from the big crowd of slow traders. In the former (latter) case, additional 
HFT competition improves (damage) liquidity. In both cases, HFT competition improves 
informational efficiency and reduces microstructure noise. Finally, I use the model to analyze 
potential regulations under HFT competition.  
 
 
 
Keywords: make-take decisions; high-frequency trading competition; limit order market; market 
quality; welfare. 
JEL classification: C63, C73, G11, G14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
* Alejandro Bernales is at the Universidad de Chile (Center of Applied Economics and Center of Finance, DII) 
and Banque de France (Research Department), email: abernales@dii.uchile.cl, phone/fax: +56 2 29784912. I 
am indebted to Ron Goettler, Christine Parlour, and Uday Rajan for kindly providing the C code for their 
papers (Goettler et al., 2005 and 2009) for use as a starting point for the model proposed in the current study. 
An earlier version of this work was circulated under the title “Algorithmic and high frequency trading in 
dynamic limit order markets." I am grateful to an anonymous referee and participants in the seminars and 
sessions at the Toulouse School of Economics, Collège de France, the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission, Schulich School of Business, the 9th Annual Central Bank Workshop on the Microstructure of 
Financial Markets (ECB), the European Economic Association (Gothenburg), the Financial Management 
Association (Chicago), and Recent Advances in Algo and HF Trading (UCL-Math Department). I would also 
like to thank colleagues and all researchers who have provided invaluable comments during the research 
process. I am grateful to Joseph Daoud for his research assistance. Alejandro Bernales acknowledges financial 
support from Fondecyt project #1190162, and the Institute for Research in Market Imperfections and Public 
Policy (ICM IS130002, Ministerio de Economía de Chile).  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

2 
 
Make-take decisions under  
high-frequency trading competition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
The make-take preferences of investors depend on high-frequency trading (HFT) competition, 
under which HFT firms endogenously acquire speed and informational advantages. In the case 
where there are many HFT firms in the market, they compete more through limit orders; 
meanwhile, in the case with few HFT firms, they compete more through market orders that "pickoff" limit orders coming from the big crowd of slow traders. In the former (latter) case, additional 
HFT competition improves (damage) liquidity. In both cases, HFT competition improves 
informational efficiency and reduces microstructure noise. Finally, I use the model to analyze 
potential regulations under HFT competition.  
 
 
 
Keywords: make-take decisions; high-frequency trading competition; limit order market; market 
quality; welfare. 
JEL classification: C63, C73, G11, G14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

1 
 
1  
Introduction 
Competition is a part of any industry and is intrinsically related to technological 
transformation, which is essential for market performance, allocation of capital, and 
welfare. Competition and technological changes are observed in all economic sectors, and 
financial markets are no exception. For instance, financial markets have undergone a major 
technological transformation during the past decade, from human-led transactions to highfrequency trading (HFT), in which sophisticated computers quickly process information, 
and algorithms automatically submit and modify orders utilizing superfast connections to 
the exchanges. Nowadays, several trading companies use HFT technology, which has 
generated a new form of competition: HFT firms have to compete with each other, and they 
also have to compete with "traditional" slow investors.  
 
The exchanges in which we can find competition among HFT firms are fully, or at 
least partially, organized as limit order markets (e.g., BATS U.S. stock exchange, NYSE, 
NASDAQ, London Stock Exchange, NYSE Euronext, and BATS Chi-X Europe).1 In a limit 
order market, HFT firms can compete in at least two dimensions. They can compete by 
submitting limit orders (they may act as liquidity providers by following a market-making 
strategy), thereby capturing the "immediacy cost" paid by other agents who want to trade 
as soon as possible through market orders. They can also compete to capture profits by 
submitting market orders (i.e., they may act as liquidity takers). For example, HFT firms 
can search for unexecuted limit orders waiting in the limit order book, which are 
susceptible to being "picked off" when the fundamental value of the asset moves against 
                                                 
1 In fact, 85% of the leading stock exchanges around the world are now entirely electronic limit order markets 
with no floor trading (Jain, 2005). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

2 
 
them unexpectedly. Thus, HFT firms can exploit their trading skills by submitting market 
orders, which pick off other agents’ limit orders that are in unfavorable positions 
(especially those submitted by "traditional" slow traders).  
 
In this paper, I examine the effect on market quality of make-take decisions under 
HFT competition. This analysis is important for two main reasons. Firstly, one might expect 
such competition to be associated with an improvement in market quality, because HFT 
firms may reduce market frictions related to both the analysis of information and the 
reaction times to changes in market conditions. However, the empirical evidence of the 
effect on market quality of HFT competition is mixed. For instance, Brogaard and Garriott 
(2018) report that HFT competition induces improvements in market liquidity measures. 
Conversely, Breckenfelder (2013) shows empirical evidence of a deterioration in liquidity 
after new HFT firms enter the market.  
 
Secondly, HFT competition in which traders can endogenously decide to compete 
through limit orders and market orders has not been theoretically examined. In general, in 
previous theoretical models analyzing HFT competition, it has been assumed that agents 
(i.e., fast and slow traders) can only compete using market orders (e.g., Biais et al., 2015; 
Foucault et al., 2016; Rosu, 2016; Huang and Yueshen, 2017) or can only compete using 
limit orders (e.g., Bongaerts and Achter, 2016; Ait-Sahalia and Sağlam, 2017). Meanwhile, 
in the case of those theoretical models in which HFT firms can submit both limit and 
market orders (see, e.g., Hoffmann, 2014), there is no competition since there is only one 
agent per period in the market.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

3 
 
 
Thus, in this paper I want to answer the following questions: When is additional 
HFT competition good or bad for market quality? How does the competition of HFT firms 
interact with the competition of traditional slow investors? Does HFT competition over 
liquidity provision have the same impact on market quality as HFT competition over 
liquidity taking? Can the level of HFT competition affect the preferences of HFT firms and 
slow traders regarding being liquidity providers or liquidity takers? Is it possible to 
implement policy measures for HFT to improve market welfare under a competitive 
environment? 
 
I contribute to the literature by presenting a dynamic equilibrium model in 
continuous time for a limit order market in which there are endogenous trading decisions 
under a competitive landscape. The model is a stochastic sequential game, in which there is 
a financial asset with a fundamental value,   , that stochastically evolves over time. There 
are two types of agents: fast traders and slow traders (also called HFT firms and less skilled 
traditional investors, respectively), who compete for liquidity provision and liquidity 
demand (i.e., they can submit either limit orders or market orders). 
Agents arrive in the market stochastically, and have to decide whether to be fast 
traders at a cost  . Fast traders have an informational advantage and a trading speed 
advantage in relation to slow traders. In terms of the informational advantage, fast traders 
can observe    contemporaneously, while slow traders observe the fundamental value of 
the asset with a time lag (i.e., at any instant  , slow traders only know      ).2 Nevertheless, 
                                                 
2 This assumption is supported by previous empirical studies on HFT, which show that fast traders are better 
informed than other market participants (see Hendershott and Riordan, 2010; Brogaard, 2010; Kirilenko et 
al., 2011; Brogaard et al., 2014). In addition, similar assumptions have already been used in HFT theoretical 
models by Biais et al. (2015), Foucault et al. (2016), and Roşu (2016). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

4 
 
despite the fact that slow traders can observe the fundamental value of the asset with a 
time lag   , I allow them to capture and learn the information revealed by fast traders 
through their trading strategies. The learning process followed by slow traders helps them 
to make more precise estimations of the contemporaneous fundamental value of the asset, 
and thus to make better trading decisions. 
In terms of the trading speed advantage, traders can re-enter the market multiple 
times to revise previous trading strategies. However, agents cannot instantaneously modify 
trading decisions (i) because limited cognition prevents them from monitoring the market 
continuously (see, e.g., Biais et al., 2012) and/or (ii) due to random latency that is observed 
when multiple agents submit messages to the exchange simultaneously, which can take 
different amounts of time to arrive at the exchange's server (see, e.g., Yueshen, 2014). Thus, 
trading plans are "sticky." Nevertheless, HFT firms have the possibility of evaluating 
market changes and modifying previous trading strategies much faster than slow traders.  
The model provides new results, which explain why the empirical literature has 
produced mixed findings on the impact HFT competition has on market quality. Overall, the 
findings include the following: 
I find that the bid-ask spread has a humped shape as a function of HFT competition. 
Thus, the bid-ask spread increases (decreases) with additional HFT competition when 
there are few (many) HFT firms. This is because, when the market participation of HFT 
firms is low, they exhibit "predatory" behavior by competing more through market orders, 
which pick off limit orders coming from the big crowd of traditional slow agents in the 
market, instead of utilizing their advantage for liquidity provision. This induces a reduction 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

5 
 
in market depth and an increase in the bid-ask spread. Moreover, in this scenario, slow 
traders are the main ones responsible for liquidity provision, submitting unaggressive limit 
orders to reduce their risk of being picked off, which increases the bid-ask spread even 
more. In this environment, additional HFT competition reduces liquidity, as in 
Breckenfelder (2013).  
Conversely, I show that, when there are many HFT firms, they compete more in 
terms of liquidity provision. HFT firms compete more by using limit orders, since there is 
no large market participation of slow traders whose unexecuted limit orders can be picked 
off. This is reinforced by the fact that slow traders can learn from the information revealed 
by HFT firms in their trading strategies (especially when there are many HFT firms in the 
market). The learning process followed by slow traders makes it even more difficult for 
HFT firms to find limit orders in unfavorable positions to be 'picked off'. In this case, 
additional HFT competition improves liquidity, as in Brogaard and Garriott (2018).  
I also show that fast traders have higher profits than slow traders, but the difference 
in the gross expected payoff between agent types is reduced when there are more fast 
traders in the market. This means that the gross expected payoff is reduced more for fast 
traders than for slow traders when the amount of fast traders increases. This is because 
slow traders can "free ride" on the improvements in informational efficiency and 
reductions in market frictions, since there are more fast traders in the market. In terms of 
improvements in informational efficiency, when there are more fast traders who act on 
their informational advantage, prices become more informative. Thus, slow traders can 
learn simply by observing the information revealed, which reduces the informational 
advantage that fast traders have over slow traders, as in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). For 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

6 
 
instance, I show that the mean of the absolute value of the belief error of slow traders 
(about the fundamental value of the asset) is reduced when there are more fast traders in 
the market.3 Furthermore, as more HFT firms are part of the market, there are more agents 
with the trading speed advantage, which reduces market frictions in the system. For 
example, I show that the mean of the absolute value of microstructure noise is reduced 
when there are more HFT firms in the market. Thus, slow traders can also free ride on this 
improvement in market quality. 
Agents maximize their utility in the model, which allows to examine equilibrium 
investment in HFT technology (i.e., the proportion of fast traders in the market is 
endogenously determined) and to perform a welfare analysis. I analyze equilibrium 
investment in the case where fast traders have both an informational advantage and a 
trading speed advantage. Afterwards, I independently analyze information acquisition and 
speed acquisition. I show that there is a synergy between the informational advantage and 
the trading speed advantage. This means that, if an HFT firm only has the informational 
(trading speed) skill, it is valuable for this HFT firm to additionally acquire the trading 
speed (informational) advantage. This is expected, since HFT firms can use either of these 
advantages more efficiently when they also have the other one. Moreover, I show that, if a 
fast trader only has either the informational or the trading speed technology, her 
willingness to pay for the other skill is reduced as the proportion of fast traders increases. 
This is because the trading opportunities that fast traders have, in terms of extracting 
                                                 
3 Following Goettler et al. (2009), the belief error of slow traders is defined as their expected value of    given 
market conditions at time  ,      , which incorporates the learning process followed by slow traders, minus 
the current value of   . 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

7 
 
benefits from slow traders, decrease as more fast traders enter the market, due to the freeriding behavior of slow traders explained above.  
Finally, I show that there is overinvestment in HFT technology, as there are 
incentives to be a fast trader even in scenarios in which fast trading is socially wasteful. 
Thus, I examine three potential policy responses designed to move the equilibrium 
investment closer to the socially optimal level: a Pigovian tax, a cancellation fee and a 
latency constraint. I show that all policy measures improve social welfare but reduce 
market quality. Despite the Pigovian tax providing better outcomes than the other policy 
measures analyzed, its implementation faces the problem that it is difficult to clearly 
identify agents with HFT technology. While the identification of fast traders with a trading 
"speed" advantage is relatively easy, as their trading ratio is directly observable by a 
regulator, it is much more complex to identify those who have an "informational" 
advantage. In addition, the calibrations of the optimal Pigovian tax and the optimal 
cancellation fee are difficult since they should be asset-specific. Instead, a latency 
constraint, in which there is a "fair" trading speed for all market participants, has the 
strength that the value of this speed is constant over time and across assets. 4  
The paper is methodologically associated with the state-of-the-art microstructure 
theoretical studies for limit order markets developed by Goettler et al. (2005, 2009), who 
introduce dynamic models in which investors have to make asynchronous trading 
decisions, depending on their information set. Their models represent a step forward in 
                                                 
4 A fair trading speed can be estimated by using the reaction times of human beings to receiving new 
information. See Kosinski (2012) for an overview of the literature on the reaction times of human beings. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

8 
 
terms of realism in relation to previous multi-period models of limit order markets.5 Even 
though there is a methodological connection between this paper and the microstructure 
studies conducted by Goettler et al. (2005, 2009), the focus of my research differs in that I 
explore make-take preferences under HFT competition; thus, my objective is to answer a 
different set of questions. In addition, and in contrast to Goettler et al. (2005, 2009), I 
consider a more developed model that includes traders with different trading speeds, and I 
independently analyze information acquisition and speed acquisition. Moreover, I use the 
model to perform a policy analysis and evaluate the implementation of regulations aimed 
at reducing potential welfare damage induced by HFT technology. 
 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, I present a literature review. I 
introduce the model in Section 3 and describe the equilibrium investment in HFT 
technology in Section 4. Section 5 shows the empirical implications of HFT technology on 
market quality measures. In Section 6, I analyze social welfare and potential policy 
interventions. Finally, I conclude in Section 7. 
 
2 
Literature review  
 
This paper joins a rapidly growing empirical and theoretical literature on HFT in 
financial markets. In terms of the empirical literature, this paper is particularly related to 
studies in which the effect of HFT competition is examined, although these studies report 
mixed findings. For instance, Brogaard and Garriott (2018) examine the effect on market 
                                                 
5 Early work on multi-period equilibrium models for limit order markets imposed some restrictive 
assumptions in order to make the models analytically tractable (see Parlour, 1998; Foucault, 1999; Foucault 
et al., 2005; Roşu, 2009). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

9 
 
quality when new HFT firms participate in an alternative trading system in Canada. They 
show that bid-ask spreads are reduced after entries of new HFT firms, suggesting that HFT 
competition improves market quality. Conversely, Breckenfelder (2013) finds the opposite 
result based on data from the Stockholm Stock Exchange; he shows that liquidity is 
damaged after new HFT firms enter the market. My study contributes to the literature by 
providing an explanation of these opposing empirical results, since I show that additional 
HFT competition can induce either an increase or a reduction in liquidity, depending on the 
market participation of HFT firms. 
 
The paper is related to Boehmer et al. (2018), who analyze competition among HFT 
firms that use different trading strategies. They present evidence, based on regulatory data 
from Canada, suggesting that HFT competition in market making improves informational 
efficiency by reducing the price impact of trades. Moreover, they show that there are three 
categories in which HFT firms compete: liquidity provision (mainly involving limit orders), 
short-horizon directional speculation (involving market orders), and cross-venue 
arbitrage. My modeling setup does not reflect the third category since I do not consider 
multiple exchanges, but agents in my model do have to endogenously decide between limit 
and market orders, the first two categories identified by Boehmer et al. (2018). 
 
This paper also provides some explanation for the mixed findings in the empirical 
literature regarding the make-take preferences of HFT firms. For instance, Hagströmer and 
Norden (2013), Malinova et al. (2013) ,and Menkveld (2013) show that HFT firms mainly 
prefer to use limit orders, based on Swedish, Canadian, and Dutch stocks, respectively. 
Chaboud et al. (2013) show mixed results based on three different FX pairs. They show that 
HFT firms prefer to provide liquidity in the pairs EUR/USD and JPY/USD, while preferring 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

10 
 
to consume liquidity in the pair JPY/EUR. In addition, Hendershott et al. (2014) document 
that HFTs prefer to submit market orders, based on a sample of NASDAQ stocks. In this 
paper, I show the conditions under which HFT firms prefer liquidity provision and liquidity 
taking, and how these preferences affect market quality.  
 
The paper is also connected to theoretical studies on HFT. However, these studies 
have not examined make-take decisions under HFT competition. This is mainly due to the 
fact that previous studies either do not consider competition or do not allow agents to 
select limit and market orders endogenously. For instance, Hoffmann (2014) presents a 
model in which agents can endogenously decide to submit market or limit orders. 
However, in his modeling setup there is no competition since there is only one agent per 
period in the market. In other models that analyze the effect of HFT competition on market 
quality, agents can only compete using market orders (e.g., Biais, 2015; Foucault et al., 
2016; Rosu, 2016) or only using limit orders (e.g., Bongaerts and Achter, 2016; Ait-Sahalia 
and Sağlam, 2017). In contrast to these theoretical studies, I present a model in which 
agents can endogenously decide between submitting limit orders and market orders under 
an HFT competition landscape.  
 
The closest theoretical study to my paper is that of Menkveld and Zoican (2017), 
who present a model to analyze the effect of the speed of exchanges on market quality. 
They show that a faster exchange could either reduce or increase the bid-ask spread, 
depending on the news-per-liquidity-trader ratio. Although they focus their attention on 
the speed of exchanges rather than HFT competition, they present a model in which HFT 
firms can submit market and limit orders. However, in their model, slow traders can only 
submit market orders; thus, there is no adverse selection acting on the liquidity provision 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

11 
 
by traditional slow investors, which in my model is one of the main drivers of HFT firms’ 
preferences for either liquidity provision or liquidity taking. In addition, they do not 
analyze equilibrium investment in HFT technology, and they do not explore potential policy 
measures designed to move the equilibrium investment closer to the socially optimal level. 
 
The paper also contributes to the literature in which speed acquisition is examined 
alongside information acquisition. For instance, Bongaerts and Van Achter (2015) find that 
an increase in the trading speed advantage of HFT firms benefits liquidity. However, if HFT 
firms also have an informational advantage, then liquidity may be reduced, due to an 
increased adverse selection risk. Huang and Yueshen (2017) show that the information 
acquisition from HFT firms increases price informativeness. Nevertheless, if HFT firms also 
have a trading speed advantage, this may reduce price informativeness in the long term 
due to a temporal fragmentation. My model provides different results. For instance, I show 
that, in the case of many HFT firms having both an informational and a trading speed 
advantage, an increase in HFT competition improves liquidity. In addition, I show that 
global informational efficiency increases when there are more firms with informational and 
trading speed skills.  
 
The results in my paper are probably different to those of Bongaerts and Van Achter 
(2015) and Huang and Yueshen (2017), since my model reflects a limit order market where 
agents can submit market or limit orders. For instance, as I explained before, in my setup, 
HFT firms can choose endogenously to be liquidity providers or liquidity takers. However, 
in Bongaerts and Van Achter (2015), HFT firms can only submit limit orders, and in Huang 
and Yueshen (2017), they can only submit market orders. Moreover, Huang and Yueshen 
(2017) show that price informativeness can be improved (reduced) due to a temporal 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

12 
 
fragmentation in the long (short) term. In contrast to this study, I evaluate the global 
informational efficiency, including the short-term and long-term informativeness of the 
price and the information revealed by HFT firms in the shape of the limit order book, which 
is learned by the uninformed slow traders in the market.  
 
Finally, the paper is related to the empirical and theoretical literature that explores 
regulations on HFT, which reports findings that are consistent with my theoretical results. 
For instance, in terms of the empirical studies of regulations on HFT, Malinova et al. (2018) 
find a decrease in liquidity after the introduction of a cancellation fee in the Toronto Stock 
Exchange. Colliard and Hoffmann (2017), and references therein, show that a financial 
transaction tax implemented in 2012 in France reduced the trading volume, which 
negatively affected market liquidity, where HFT firms ere the trader type most affected. In 
terms of theoretical papers, Ait-Sahalia and Sağlam (2016) show that policies aimed at 
regulating HFT (e.g., transaction taxes, latency constraints, and cancellation fees) are 
ineffective at inducing liquidity provision by HFT firms, which would be beneficial for 
market quality. Biais (2015) analyzes a Pigovian tax, a "slow-friendly" market and an "onlyfast" market. Similarly to us, they argue that calibrating the optimal tax is difficult and 
should be asset-specific. In addition, they show that the only-fast market dominates the 
slow-friendly one, in which a tax and its redistribution among traders enables them to 
share the social gains of HFT technology.  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

13 
 
3 
The model  
3.1  
Market characteristics 
I consider a dynamic continuous-time model in a limit order market with a single 
financial asset. The model is an asynchronous dynamic trading game, in which there are 
two types of risk-neutral traders: fast traders (i.e., HFT firms) and slow traders (i.e., less 
skilled 'traditional' traders). Let         be a trader indicator, where     if an agent is a 
fast trader and     if an agent is a slow trader.  
Traders can submit limit orders and market orders. A limit order is a commitment 
made by an agent at time t to trade the asset in the future at a pre-specified price  , while a 
market order is a request to trade immediately at the best price available (i.e., at the bid or 
ask price depending on the direction of the order). A limit order is always executed through 
the submission of a market order. 
The limit order book    is described by a discrete set of prices, denoted as         
 
, 
where         and   is a finite number. The tick size,  , is the distance between any two 
consecutive prices. In   , there is a backlog of unexecuted limit orders (submitted 
previously),   
 , which is associated with each price   . A positive (negative) number in   
  
denotes buy (sell) limit orders in the book, and represents the depth at price   . Therefore, 
the bid price is                
    , while the ask price is                
    , and 
if the order book is empty on the bid side or on the ask side,          or        , 
respectively. 
The limit order book respects the time and price priorities for the execution of limit 
orders. Buy (sell) orders at higher (lower) prices are executed first, and limit orders 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

14 
 
submitted earlier have priority in the queue over others of the same price. In addition, 
when a trader submits an order, the order price identifies whether the order is a market 
order or a limit order. This means that an order to buy (sell) at a price above (below) the 
ask (bid) price is executed immediately at the ask (bid) price; this order is thus a market 
order.  
The fundamental value of the asset,   , evolves over time, with innovations 
following a Poisson process with parameter   . When an innovation takes place, the 
fundamental value increases or decreases by    ticks, both with equal probability 0.5. 
Similarly to Biais et al. (2015), Foucault et al. (2016), and Roşu (2016), I assume that fast 
traders can process new information faster than slow traders. Thus, I assume that fast 
traders know the current fundamental value of the asset at time  , while slow traders only 
know the fundamental value with a lag    (i.e., fast traders have an informational 
advantage). Consequently, the agent's current beliefs concerning the fundamental value of 
the asset,   
 , depend on the agent's type,  . In the case of a fast trader,   
  is equal to the 
contemporaneous fundamental value of the asset (i.e.,   
    ). In the case of a slow trader, 
she only knows the fundamental value of the asset with a lag    (i.e.,   
       ).  
Despite the fact that slow traders can observe the fundamental value of the asset 
with a time lag   , in the model I allow them to capture and learn the information revealed 
by the fast traders’ market activity. The learning process followed by slow traders helps 
them to make more precise estimations of the contemporaneous fundamental value of the 
asset, and thus to make better trading decisions. Thus, the cognitive capacities of slow 
traders, combined with the presence of fast traders in the market (who submit informative 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

15 
 
and competitive orders), induces a reduction in the errors in the slow traders’ beliefs in 
relation to   . 
Traders can revise their unexecuted limit orders multiple times. However, due to 
limited cognition or a random latency, agents cannot modify their previous limit orders 
immediately after a change in market conditions; thus, trading decisions are "sticky". 
Nevertheless, fast traders have more tools and resources with which to evaluate possible 
cancellations, and they can make modifications faster than slow agents (i.e., fast traders 
have a trading speed advantage). Therefore, fast traders re-enter the market following a 
Poisson process at rate   
   to revise unexecuted limit orders, while slow traders re-enter 
according to a Poisson process at rate   
  , where   
     
  .  
 
Agents make decisions strategically to maximize profits and to avoid being picked 
off. For instance, an agent   can be picked off when she has a limit order in the buy side at 
the bid price,   , and the fundamental value of the asset,   , decreases to a level below the 
bid price (i.e.,      ). In this scenario, a quick agent   can submit a market order to sell 
immediately at price   , so as to pick off the limit buy order of agent  . Thus, agent   makes 
an instantaneous profit equal to         thanks to the transaction, while agent   loses 
       . A similar example can be explained using the cost of being picked off when the 
fundamental value of the asset is above the price of a limit sell order.  
Therefore, the main activity in the limit order book should be around the 
fundamental value of the asset, because agents do not want to be picked off in relation to 
their unexecuted limit orders waiting in the book. In fact, I should observe in general that 
limit buy orders have prices below   , while limit sell orders have prices above   . If that 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

16 
 
were not the case, a quick agent could pick off limit buy (sell) orders above (below)   , as 
explained in the previous paragraph. Thus, limit orders in the wrong positions should 
disappear promptly from the market.  
I use this feature of limit order markets, and I always put the center of the book at 
the level of the agent's current beliefs concerning the fundamental value of the asset,   
 . 
Hence, given that the limit order book is represented by a discrete set of prices         
 
, I 
put the center of the book    equal to   
 . For instance, imagine the scenario in which the 
discrete level of the fundamental value today is   
 , but it changes to the value   
  after a 
period  . Suppose that   
    
    , where   is an integer that can be positive or 
negative. In this scenario, I move the book by m ticks to center the book again at the 
discrete level of the current fundamental value   
 . Hence, by moving the center of the 
book, I modify the limit orders in the book to take into account the new relative difference 
with respect to   
 .6 Thus, the prices of all orders are always relative to the current beliefs 
regarding the fundamental value of the asset, which makes traders think about relative 
prices (it is important to realize that the   
  do not necessarily coincide with the bid-ask 
midpoint, since   
  can be above or below the quotes, depending on the market condition). 
This market feature allows to reduce the dimensionality of the state space enormously.  
 
Traders have to pay a cancellation fee       when they cancel an unexecuted limit 
order. In the case of a re-entry, a trader can leave the order unchanged, which has the 
                                                 
6 It is important to note that slow traders and fast traders observe the book differently given their 
informational differences. Fast traders observe the book as centered on   , while slow traders observe the 
book as centered on      . However, all transactions (by slow traders and fast traders) are finally considered 
using the right prices (i.e., in a book centered on   ), since slow traders will realize what the correct state of 
the book is after   . 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

17 
 
benefit of allowing her to retain her priority in the queue.7 The negative side of leaving an 
order in the book is that the asset value could move in a direction that affects future 
payoffs. For instance, as explained before, in the scenario of a reduction in the asset value, 
some limit buy orders could be priced too high, and a quick trader could profit from the 
difference. This possibility represents an implicit transaction cost of being picked off when 
prices change unexpectedly against limit orders that have been submitted. Conversely, 
when the asset value increases, a limit buy order features the risk of not resulting in a 
trade. To take into account this risk, I include a cost of delaying, reflected in a discount rate 
  , which considers the cost of not executing immediately. This delaying cost does not 
represent the time value of money; instead    reflects opportunity costs and the cost of 
monitoring the market until a limit order is executed. Thus, the payoffs of order executions 
are discounted back to the trader's arrival time at rate   , where       .  
 
Each trader has an intrinsic private value from trading the asset,  , which is known 
by them before they make any trading decision. The value of   is drawn from the discrete 
vector  ={  ,   , ...,   } using a discrete distribution,   , where   is a finite integer. The 
private value is idiosyncratic and constant for each trader. The private value arises from 
differences in terms of the intrinsic benefits of trading, such as tax exposure, wealth shocks, 
hedging needs, or differences in investment horizons, among other things.  
 
Agents (fast traders and slow traders) arrive in the market following a Poisson 
process at rate  . Each agent has to decide whether to be a fast or a slow trader, 
immediately after arriving and before knowing her private value, and this cannot be 
                                                 
7 It is important to point out that the order priority could have changed, depending on the shape of the book, 
which should be taken into account in the decision to cancel and re-submit an unexecuted limit order. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

18 
 
changed later in the game. This decision determines the proportion of fast traders,  , in the 
market. An agent can be a fast trader at a cost  , which includes the costs of programmers, 
information providers, computers, and collocation, amongst other costs related to HFT 
technology.  
 
Each agent can trade one share and has to make three main trading decisions: (i) to 
submit an order or to wait until the market conditions change; (ii) to buy or to sell the 
asset; and (iii) to choose the price at which she will submit the order, which implies 
whether she will submit a market order or a limit order, depending on whether the price is 
inside or outside the bid-ask spread.8  
 
As was previously mentioned, traders can re-enter the market and modify their 
previously unexecuted limit orders. Therefore, they have to make additional trading 
decisions after re-entering: (i) whether to cancel an unexecuted limit order or retain the 
order without changes; (ii) if they decide to cancel the order, whether to submit a new 
order immediately or wait for different market conditions in the future; and (iii) if they 
decide to submit a new order after a cancellation, they must also decide on the type of the 
new order and its price. Therefore, agents have to take the possibility of re-entry into 
account in their utility maximization problem. Once a trader submits a limit order, she 
remains part of the trading game by revising her order until it is executed; however, the 
trader exits the market permanently after the execution of her order.  
 
 
 
                                                 
8 I could include additional shares per agent in the trading decision. However, I assume one share per agent to 
make the model computationally tractable.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

19 
 
3.2  
The trader’s dynamic maximization problem 
 
Suppose that a trader arrives at the trading game and observes state   of the market, 
in which she knows her private value,  . For convenience, let the entry time be equal to 
zero. The state that a given trader observes includes: (i) the contemporaneous limit order 
book   that is a consequence of agents' previous trading activity; and (ii) the status of her 
previous action, if she has already submitted a limit order to the market, which includes the 
submission price, the priority in the book given that price, and the type of order (sell or 
buy). The fundamental value of the asset    is not directly one of the variables that identify 
a state, given that the limit order book   is centered on   .  
 
Let      be the set of possible actions that a trader can take given the state   (e.g., to 
wait until market conditions change, to buy or to sell the asset, or to decide on the 
submission price, among others). Let           be the probability that an order is executed 
at time   given that the trader takes action           when facing state  . It is important to 
notice that      incorporates all possible future states and strategic actions adopted by 
other traders until  . If the decision    is the submission of a market order, then 
            , while           will be lower when the trader decides to submit a limit order 
with a price far away from the fundamental value. In addition, let       be the density 
function of    at time h that is described by the Poisson process followed by the 
fundamental value. The density function      depends on   because it takes into account 
the trader’s current belief regarding the fundamental value of the asset. Therefore, the 
expected value of an order, gross of the cost of having HFT technology, executed prior to reentry at time   , is: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

20 
 
             
                    
 
  
  
 
                         
(1)
Here,             is the instantaneous payoff of the order, where    is the submission 
price, which is part of decision   ;    is also a component of decision    and reflects whether 
the trader decides to submit a buy order (    ), submit a sell order (     ) or submit 
nothing (    ). This payoff is transformed into a present value at rate     which is the cost 
of delaying defined in Section 3.1.  
 
Let      be the probability distribution of the re-entry time, which is exogenous and 
follows an exponential distribution at rate   
   or   
   depending on whether the agent is a 
fast or a slow trader, respectively. In addition, let                be the probability that 
state     takes place at time    given the previous state   and action   , which also includes 
all potential states and strategic decisions followed by other traders until   . Therefore, the 
value to an agent of arriving at state   gross of the cost of having HFT technology,     , is 
given by the Bellman equation of the trader’s optimization problem: 
        
                           
                                     
     
 
 
 
        (2)
where   is the set of possible states. The first term is defined in equation (1), while the 
second term reflects the subsequent payoff in the case of re-entries. In the case of re-entry, 
traders pay a cancellation fee       when they cancel an unexecuted limit order; thus 
        if the optimal decision of an agent in state     is a cancellation and         in any 
other case.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

21 
 
3.3 
The model parameterization 
I assume the following plausible parameter values for the model setup of the base 
case. I assume that the distribution of the private value is discrete, with support 
              measured in ticks, and with a cumulative distribution function 
                          , which is the same for HFT firms and slow traders. The 
distribution values are based on the findings of Hollifield et al. (2006) regarding the private 
values of agents calculated for stocks on the Vancouver Stock Exchange, which were also 
used by Goettler et al. (2009). In addition, given that the subgroup of algorithmic traders, 
called "pure" high-frequency traders, may not have private valuations (since they often 
carry small inventories), I also analyze the case in which fast traders only have a private 
value equal to zero; these unreported results are consistent with the findings reported in 
the main body of the paper.  
I assume that traders arrive on average every 40 milliseconds. Although the current 
trading speed in some markets is at the level of microseconds rather than milliseconds, I 
select this arrival rate for computational tractability. This rate of arrivals is consistent with 
the timescales of some of the first papers regarding HFT technology. For instance, Cont 
(2011) works with a millisecond scale when analyzing the impact of fast traders on market 
quality.  
Limited cognition, due to the fact that traders are engaged in other tasks, may affect 
the speed of modification of previous trading decisions. In the model, I assume that slow 
traders can re-enter the market to modify limit orders on average every 600 milliseconds 
(  
         ). This is consistent with the literature on human behavior in relation to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

22 
 
reaction times. The reaction times of human beings are around 200 milliseconds for a 
single stimulus, increasing to 700 milliseconds for six stimuli (see Kosinski, 2012). Fast 
traders have more tools and resources for evaluating and monitoring their orders in the 
book than slow traders. Thus, I assume that HFT firms re-enter the market five times as fast 
as slow traders (i.e.,   
         ). This reflects the fact that even fast traders cannot 
monitor the market continuously, because there are processing times even when using this 
technology. The assumption that fast traders are only five times as fast as slow traders may 
be unrealistic given the current trading speed in the markets. However, the theoretical 
model aims mainly to reflect the relative trading speed difference, and its potential impact 
on market quality and stability, rather than to reproduce the exact current speed difference 
that we can observe in the market, which would be computationally intractable. 
Nevertheless, I changed the relative speed difference between slow and fast agents in 
unreported tests and the results reflect the robustness of the model to changes in the 
trading speed advantage of HFT firms. 
I assume that the fundamental value of the asset,   , experiences innovations every 
320 milliseconds (i.e.,          ), according to which the fundamental value increases or 
decreases by one tick (i.e.,     ), with equal probability 0.5. For instance, if we assume 
that the stock price is $450 with tick size $0.05, we obtain an annual volatility of 0.529 
when           and     . This value is consistent with Zhang (2010), who reports a 
daily volatility for U.S. stock returns of 0.033 (i.e., an annual volatility of 0.524). I assume 
that the delaying cost,   , is reflected in a continuous discount rate equal to 0.03 for all 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

23 
 
agents.9 In unreported analyses, I experiment with different values for   , and the results 
are qualitatively equivalent to those presented in the following sections.  
Fast traders also have a further informational advantage, since they can observe the 
contemporaneous level of the fundamental value of the asset, while slow traders can only 
observe it with a time lag. I assume this time lag,   , to be equal to 800 milliseconds. In 
unreported tests, I examine the robustness of the model to different values of   ; the 
results are congruent with the results presented here.  
I obtain the model equilibrium and reproduce a historical limit order book with a 
cancellation fee for traders equal to zero; thus, the results shown in Sections 4 and 5 are 
obtained assuming        . However, I also include a cancellation cost in the model, with 
the objective of evaluating potential HFT regulations, as shown in Section 6.  
 
4 
Equilibrium investment in HFT technology 
I endogenize the equilibrium investment in HFT technology, in the same spirit as 
Biais et al. (2015). Thus, I first analyze the gross expected payoff of slow traders (STs) and 
fast traders (FTs) when the investment cost of having HFT technology is zero. Then, I 
analyze differences in the gross expected payoffs of STs and FTs to determine investment 
decisions. In order to explain the main intuitions, I start by explaining the equilibrium 
investment in the case where FTs have both an informational advantage and a trading 
speed advantage. Afterwards, I independently analyze information acquisition and speed 
acquisition.  
                                                 
9 Foucault et al. (2005) use a similar delaying cost, which they call an "impatience" rate.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

24 
 
4.1 
Equilibrium  
The intuition behind the equilibrium is that a trader chooses an optimal action by 
maximizing her expected discounted utility as described in equation (2), conditional on the 
state   observed in the economy. Hence, optimal decisions are state-dependent. Moreover, 
the decision process is Markovian, since the market condition reflected in the observed 
state is a consequence of the history of events and previous states that define the game.  
I focus on stationary and symmetric equilibrium, in the sense of Doraszelski and 
Pakes (2007), in which the optimal trading decision of a given type of trader is the same 
regardless of whether they are facing a given state in the present or in the future (i.e., 
optimal decisions are time-independent). The game is also a Bayesian game, since each 
trader knows her private intrinsic value  , which is unknown to other traders. Thus, the 
solution concept is a Markov-perfect Bayesian equilibrium (see Maskin and Tirole, 2001). 
Given the set of possible states   with a transition process characterized by transition 
probabilities     , and where agents know the rules of the trading game, in the equilibrium, 
two conditions must hold: each trader type solves equation (2) for any    , and the 
equilibrium beliefs are consistent for each state over time.  
The state   is defined by the two-tuple (the limit order book  , status of previous 
action). The limit order book   is described by a discrete price set, which is centered on the 
discrete level of the agent's belief about the fundamental value of the asset   . The status of 
previous action, in the case that an agent re-enters the market due to an unexecuted limit 
order, comes from a discrete set of possible actions given the market conditions. In 
addition, the intrinsic private value of trading the asset, α, is drawn from a discrete 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

25 
 
distribution   , and the trader indicator   can take two possible values (    or    , 
indicating a fast or a slow trader, respectively). Moreover, each new action    is taken from 
    , which is a discrete and finite set of potential decisions or actions given the state  . 
Therefore, the action space is finite and the state space is countable, and thus the model 
game has a Markov-perfect equilibrium (see Rieder, 1979).10 
I solve the model using a numerical method due to the analytical intractability of the 
trading game given the large dimensionality of the state space. I obtain a stationary 
Markov-perfect equilibrium using the algorithm introduced by Pakes and McGuire (2001), 
which solves dynamic models with a large state space by reaching the equilibrium only on 
the recurring state class.  
The intuition behind Pakes and McGuire’s (2001) algorithm is that we can initially 
see the trading game as a learning process, in which traders learn how to behave in each 
state. Thus, traders follow a learning-by-doing mechanism, by playing the game until 
equilibrium is reached. In this learning-by-doing process, the trading game starts with each 
type of trader having initial beliefs about the expected payoffs of different actions given the 
state  . Afterwards, traders update their beliefs dynamically by playing the game when they 
observe the realized payoffs from their actions. Equilibrium is reached when the expected 
payoff and the optimal trading decision of each trader type in a given state,   , are exactly 
the same as the expected payoff and decision that would occur if a similar trader were to 
observe    in the future (i.e., there is no longer anything to learn).  
                                                 
10 Although I do not prove uniqueness, I check whether the equilibrium is computationally unique. For each 
parameter setup, I use different initial values at the beginning of the algorithm, with the objective of being 
sure that I am obtaining the same computational equilibrium.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

26 
 
Once I obtain equilibrium after making traders play the game for at least two billion 
trading events, I fix the traders’ beliefs and simulate a further 500 million events. These last 
500 million simulated events allow to evaluate the behavior of the different agents without 
the effects of the learning process described in the previous paragraph that came from 
Pakes and McGuire’s (2001) algorithm. Consequently, all the results presented in this paper 
are obtained from the last 500 million simulated events. Additional explanations of the 
convergence criteria used to obtain the model equilibrium and the learning capacity of STs 
regarding the information revealed by FTs can be found in Goettler et al. (2009), who 
develop a similar model but without high-frequency traders, and also employs Pakes and 
McGuire’s (2001) algorithm.  
 
4.2 
Expected payoffs  
In equilibrium, as explained previously, agents make decisions with the objective of 
maximizing their expected payoffs (i.e., by solving equation (2)). Let        and        be 
the gross expected payoffs (i.e., gross of the cost of having HFT technology) of STs and FTs, 
respectively, which depend on the proportion of FTs in the market,  . I present, in the lefthand side of Figure 1,        and        for different values of  .  
[Insert Figure 1 here] 
Observation 1. (i) Fast traders have higher gross expected payoffs than slow traders.  
(ii) The gross expected payoffs for both agent types are reduced when there are more 
fast traders in the market. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

27 
 
Figure 1 shows that FTs have a higher gross expected payoff than STs. This result is 
expected, as FTs economically exploit their informational and trading speed advantages to 
the detriment of STs' trading profits by using limit and market orders. In terms of limit 
orders, FTs have more trading skills than STs in providing liquidity to the market. FTs may 
want to capture through limit orders the "immediacy cost" (implicit in the bid-ask spread) 
paid by agents who want to trade as soon as possible through market orders. FTs can use 
HFT technology for liquidity provision, since they observe the contemporaneous level of 
the fundamental value and they are quick at modifying unexecuted limit orders. For 
instance, FTs can react promptly and modify their unexecuted limit orders when they are 
not in optimal positions in the limit order book. Thus, FTs compete at liquidity provision 
against STs (who may also want to provide liquidity to the market), which is to the 
detriment of STs as they do not have the trading skills of HFT firms.  
In terms of market orders, FTs also have more of the skills required for submitting 
this type of order than STs. FTs can use their trading features to compete at demanding 
liquidity with the objective of obtaining a better price in their market orders. FTs can 
obtain better prices because they know the fundamental value of the asset and can wait 
and quickly submit a market order so as to get a better deal (i.e., they can reduce the 
immediacy cost paid on their market orders). This induces indirect damages to impatient 
STs, who also want to consume liquidity through market orders. This is because "good" 
deals for market orders are quickly detected and used by FTs, leaving market orders with 
higher immediacy costs to STs.  
Moreover, FTs can use their trading features to make extra profits by submitting 
market orders that pick off unexecuted limit orders in unfavorable positions (in particular 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

28 
 
those submitted by STs). This is because limit orders have an associated risk of being 
picked off when the fundamental value of the asset moves against them, which can be 
detected easily by agents using HFT technology. For example, when the fundamental value 
of the asset decreases, some limit orders on the buy side could end up being priced too 
high, and a FT will be able to make a profit from the difference.  
The left-hand side of Figure 1 also shows that there is a reduction in the expected 
payoffs for both agent types when there are more FTs in the market. On the one hand, as 
explained above, STs suffer from the presence of FTs in either market or limit orders, and 
this effect is intensified as the proportion of FTs increases. Thus,        is reduced as   
goes up. On the other hand, FTs will see the expected payoffs they obtain fall when their 
proportion in the market increases, since there will be more agents with similar trading 
features (informational and trading speed advantages) competing under the same 
conditions. Thus, when HFT competition increases, it becomes more difficult for FTs to 
extract benefits from STs. 
 
4.3 
Equilibrium investment in HFT technology 
As in Biais et al. (2015), I examine differences between the gross expected payoffs of 
FTs and STs,              , to determine the proportion of FTs in the market,  , given 
that agents have to pay   to have HFT technology. The right-hand side of Figure 1 shows 
how               changes for different values of     
The analysis of               is important for equilibrium investment in HFT 
technology, because an agent is better off investing in this technology if and only if 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

29 
 
               , where          is the net expected profit of FTs (i.e., net of the 
cost paid to have HFT technology). Equivalently, an agent would be an FT if and only if the 
difference between the gross expected payoffs of FTs and STs is higher than the cost of 
being an FT (i.e.,                ).  
Let    be the equilibrium investment in HFT technology, when the cost of having 
HFT technology is  . In terms of the endogenous acquisition equilibrium on the right-hand 
side of Figure 1, all agents prefer not to invest in HFT technology,         , in the case 
where         . Conversely, all agents prefer to be FTs,           , in the case where 
       .  
An interior equilibrium investment in HFT technology is obtained when STs and FTs 
have the same net expected profit, which can be written as: 
                   
(3)
For instance, in Figure 1, on the right-hand side,           when         and 
          when        , at points A and B, respectively. In fact, this is a unique 
equilibrium, since the value of               is a continuous and decreasing function in 
 .  
Observation 2. The difference between the gross expected payoffs of fast and slow 
traders becomes lower, when the number of fast traders in the market increases. 
The right-hand side of Figure 1 shows that the difference between the gross 
expected payoffs of FTs and STs decreases when there are more FTs in the market. This 
means that        is reduced more than        as   increases, which is consistent with 
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). The intuition behind this result is simple. When there are 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

30 
 
more FTs in the market, STs can free ride on the improvements in informational efficiency 
and reductions in market frictions. Firstly, as more FTs are in the market, prices become 
more informative, since a larger proportion of FTs are acting optimally on their 
informational advantage. Thus, STs can learn just by observing market conditions (prices 
and the shape of the book), with the objective of reducing their belief error regarding the 
fundamental value of the asset. In fact, I will show in the following section (Figure 3) that 
the mean of the absolute value of the belief error of STs about the fundamental value of the 
asset is reduced when the proportion of FTs increases. Therefore, the relative 
informational advantage of FTs in relation to STs goes down as   increases.  
Secondly, as more FTs are in the market, there are more traders with a trading 
speed advantage, which reduces market frictions in the system. For instance, I show in the 
following subsection that the mean of the absolute value of microstructure noise decreases 
when the number of FTs in the market increases. Thus, STs can also free ride on this 
improvement in market quality. 
 
4.4 
Pure information acquisition and pure trading speed acquisition 
 
I now analyze equilibrium investment when HFT technology only involves either an 
informational advantage or a trading speed advantage. The left-hand side of Figure 2 
presents the case when FTs have only an informational advantage (solid gray line). This 
figure shows the differences between the gross expected payoffs of FTs and STs, 
             . In this case, I assume that FTs can observe the contemporaneous level of 
the fundamental value, while STs only know the fundamental value with a lag    (i.e., 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

31 
 
       for FTs and        for STs). However, I assume that both agents are slow in reentering and modifying unexecuted limit orders (i.e.,          for STs and also 
         for FTs). In this figure, as a benchmark, I also report the case when FTs have 
both informational and trading speed advantages (solid black line). 
[Insert Figure 2 here] 
 
The right-hand side of Figure 2 shows the case when FTs only have a trading speed 
advantage (solid gray line). In this figure, as in the one on the left-hand side, I present 
              for different values of  . In this case, I assume that FTs are faster than STs 
in re-entering and modifying unexecuted limit orders (i.e.,           for FTs and 
         for STs), but there are no informational advantages for FTs (i.e.,        for FTs 
and        for STs). I also present, as a benchmark, the case when FTs have both 
informational and trading speed advantages (solid black line). 
 
Similarly to Figure 1, Figure 2 shows that               is reduced as   
increases, when there is only either speed acquisition or information acquisition. This can 
be explained through the same arguments as used for the same patterns observed in the 
case where FTs had both informational and trading speed advantages, in Figure 1. On the 
one hand, in the case with only the informational advantage, as more agents acquire HFT 
technology, prices become more informative, making it easier for STs to free ride by 
learning from the information revealed by FTs in their trading strategies. On the other 
hand, in the case with only the trading speed advantage, when there are more agents with 
HFT technology, market frictions are reduced. Hence, STs can free ride on this 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

32 
 
improvement in market quality. Therefore, in both cases (left- and right-hand sides of 
Figure 2), the relative advantage of FTs compared to STs decreases as   rises.  
Observation 3. (i) In the case that a fast trader only has an informational (a trading 
speed) advantage, it is valuable for the fast trader to additionally acquire a trading 
speed (an informational) advantage. 
(ii) In the case that a fast trader only has either an informational or a trading speed 
advantage, her willingness to pay for the other skill is reduced as the proportion of fast 
traders increases. 
 
Figure 2 also shows that there is a synergy between the informational and trading 
speed skills. This means that, if an FT has only an informational (a trading speed) 
advantage, it is valuable for her to additionally acquire the trading speed (informational) 
skill. This is expected, since FTs can use either of these advantages more efficiently when 
they also have the other one. For instance, the left-hand side of Figure 2 shows that, for 
        , the cost that FTs pay to have only the informational technology is 0.198, but 
they are willing to pay an additional 0.037 to have the fast trading technology as well (i.e., 
  
     is                  ). Similarly, the right-hand side of Figure 2 reports that, for 
        , the cost that FTs pay to have only the trading speed is 0.073, but they are 
willing to pay an additional 0.162 to have the informational advantage as well (i.e.,   
     is 
                 ).  
 
Moreover, Figure 2 also shows that, if an FT only has either the informational or the 
trading speed technology, her willingness to pay for the other technology decreases as   
goes up. For instance,   
     is 0.037 for          and   
     is 0.030 for          on the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

33 
 
left-hand side of the figure, while   
     is 0.162 for          and   
     is 0.127 for 
         on the right-hand side of the figure. This means that, as the number of agents 
with only the informational (trading speed) technology increases, it becomes less valuable 
for them to additionally acquire the trading speed (informational) technology. This is 
because the possibilities that FTs have to extract benefits from STs decrease as the number 
of FTs in the market increases, since STs can free ride on market quality improvements, as 
previously explained.  
 
5 
Empirical implications 
5.1 
The effect of HFT competition on microstructure noise and market 
 
informativeness 
 
The microstructure features of financial markets may induce some frictions that 
make the transaction price,   , depart from the fundamental value of the asset,   . Thus, the 
transaction price can be decomposed into two components: the fundamental value of the 
asset    plus a microstructure noise   , such that         .11 In a frictionless world, 
microstructure noise should be zero; however,    can be an important component of prices 
in real markets.  
 
An important friction that affects financial markets is the reaction speed of agents, 
in modifying trading decisions when market conditions change. For instance, a trader may 
have additional information about the asset, but this information will be worthless if she 
cannot quickly use it in the market. Thus, HFT technology can mitigate frictions related to 
                                                 
11 See Hasbrouck (2002) for a discussion on microstructure noise.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

34 
 
reaction times, since this technology improves agents’ trading speed through superfast 
connections to the exchanges.  
Observation 4. (i) The mean of the absolute value of microstructure noise is reduced 
as the number of fast traders competing in the market increases. 
(ii) HFT competition increases informational efficiency. 
 
I show that the HFT competition improves market quality in terms of a reduction in 
microstructure noise. The left-hand side of Figure 3 shows the mean of the absolute value 
of microstructure noise for different levels of HFT competition. This confirms the 
arguments, explained above, in relation to HFT competition reducing market frictions, 
which is reflected in a drop in the mean of the absolute value of microstructure noise.12 
[Insert Figure 3 here] 
 
An additional friction in financial markets is the limited cognition of market 
participants. Currently, a large amount of information has to be analyzed by agents in order 
for them to make optimal trading decisions. However, investors have cognition limits 
because, for instance, they could be busy completing other tasks. The existence of traders 
with HFT technology may mitigate the cognitive limits of human beings, as computers can 
rapidly analyze and process large amounts of information. 
 
In terms of the improvements in the informational efficiency due to HFT technology, 
I show in Figure 3, on the right-hand side, that the mean of the absolute value of the belief 
error of STs is reduced as   goes up. Following Goettler et al. (2009), the belief error of STs 
is defined as the expected value of    for an ST given market conditions at time  ,         , 
                                                 
12 Furthermore, in an unreported analysis, I also find that the mean of the absolute value of microstructure 
noise is reduced even when FTs only have either an informational advantage or a trading speed advantage.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

35 
 
minus the current value of    (i.e.,            ). This figure shows that the mean of the 
absolute value of the STs’ belief error decreases when there is more HFT competition. This 
is because STs are eager to capture and learn from any information disclosed in trades by 
FTs, with the objective of improving the accuracy of their estimations of the fundamental 
value. They do so to make better trading decisions and to decrease the adverse selection 
they face when there are FTs in the market.13  
 
The results shown in Figure 3 are supported by previous empirical studies, which 
present evidence that algorithmic traders can submit orders in the same direction as price 
movements due to the advantage they have in analyzing information (e.g., Kirilenko et al., 
2017). Hendershott and Riordan (2010) and Brogaard et al. (2014) also show that FTs play 
a beneficial role in price discovery, as they trade in the direction of permanent price 
movements, and in the reverse direction to transitory pricing errors. Brogaard (2010) finds 
that FTs add more to price discovery than traditional market participants.14 In addition, 
Boehmer et al. (2018) present evidence that HFT competition in liquidity provision 
improves informational efficiency by reducing the price impact of trades. 
 
                                                 
13 The reduction in the mean of the absolute value of the belief error of the STs as   increases is only observed 
when FTs have an informational advantage (i.e., either when FTs have an informational and a trading speed 
advantages, or when they just have an informational advantage). By construction, in the case where there is 
only the trading speed advantage, FTs cannot reveal additional information that can be learned by STs.  
14 Reductions in microstructure noise can also be related to reductions in transaction price volatility, as 
reported in the empirical analysis of Hasbrouck and Saar (2012), because          and hence 
microstructure noise is an important component of the realized volatility obtained from market-traded 
prices. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

36 
 
5.2 
The effect of HFT competition on the bid-ask spread and market depth 
 
The effect of HFT technology on liquidity depends on which agent type (i.e., FTs or 
STs) is more willing to provide liquidity to the market. In the case that FTs compete more 
using their trading skills for liquidity provision than for liquidity taking, market liquidity 
should improve. In this case, an FT has to compete with other FTs who want to provide 
liquidity, by using their trading skills, which can make the liquidity provision more 
efficient.  
 
Conversely, in the case that FTs compete more in liquidity taking than in liquidity 
provision, market liquidity should be reduced. In this case, STs will have more control over 
liquidity provision, which could increase the bid-ask spread. This is because limit orders 
from STs are exposed to the risk of being picked off by market orders submitted by FTs. 
Thus, STs should submit less aggressive limit orders in response to the adverse selection 
their limit orders face.  
Observation 5. (i) Fast traders exhibit predatory behavior when there is low HFT 
competition, by competing more through market orders that pick off limit orders 
coming from the big crowd of traditional slow agents in the market. 
(ii) Conversely, when there are many HFT firms, they compete more in terms of 
liquidity provision. 
(iii) Consequently, market liquidity has a humped shape as a function of HFT 
competition. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

37 
 
The left-hand side of Figure 4 presents the bid-ask spread and the depth at the ask 
price for different values of HFT competition.15 This figure shows that, in the case where 
there are few HFT firms in the market (i.e., for low values of  ), additional HFT competition 
generates liquidity damages in terms of an increase in the bid-ask spread and a reduction 
in market depth. For instance, the bid-ask spread has a positive slope between the values of 
        and         . Nevertheless, additional HFT competition improves market 
liquidity when there are more HFT firms in the market (i.e., when         ). For 
instance, for values of   greater than or equal to 38.40%, additional HFT competition 
reduces the bid-ask spread to a level lower than that when there are no FTs in the market 
(i.e.,        ). 
[Insert Figure 4 here] 
 
This result can be explained by the behavior of agents as the proportion of FTs in 
the market increases, which affects the preferences of FTs for providing (or consuming) 
liquidity. As explained in Subsection 4.2, FTs can use HFT technology in their limit orders, 
or in their market orders, to the detriment of STs. On the one hand, FTs can use their skills 
in limit orders to obtain benefits from liquidity provision by capturing the immediacy cost 
paid on market orders submitted by other traders. This is because FTs can react quickly 
and modify their unexecuted limit orders whenever they are not in an optimal position in 
the limit order book. On the other hand, FTs can also use their trading skills to submit 
market orders, for example making profits by submitting predatory market orders that 
pick off other agents’ unexecuted limit orders (in particular those of STs).  
                                                 
15 I only report depth at the ask price since the model is symmetric across the two sides of the book. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

38 
 
 
The right-hand side of Figure 4 reports the percentage of executions made through 
limit orders by slow traders and the probability of observing a submission through an 
aggressive limit sell order, as a function of HFT competition. This figure shows that, in the 
case that there are few HFT firms, they compete more by engaging in predatory behavior 
through market orders. For instance, this figure shows that 51.12% (48.88%) of the STs 
perform transactions through limit (market) orders when         . This implies that, 
when         , 44.63% (55.37%) of the FTs perform transactions through limit 
(market) orders. FTs compete more through market orders to pick off limit orders coming 
from the large crowd of STs, instead of using HFT technology to provide liquidity. The 
predatory behavior of FTs when   is low induces a reduction in market liquidity.  
 
Moreover, in this scenario, STs are the main agents responsible for providing 
liquidity. As explained above, the liquidity provision coming from STs increases the bid-ask 
spread, since they submit unaggressive limit orders to reduce their picking-off risk. For 
example, the right-hand side of Figure 4 shows that the probability of observing a 
submission through an aggressive limit order is at its lowest level when there are few HFT 
firms. This result is consistent with Breckenfelder (2013), who provides empirical evidence 
of a liquidity reduction after an increase in HFT competition.  
 
The behavior of FTs is different when there are many of them in the market. In this 
case, it is more difficult for FTs to find limit orders submitted by STs in incorrect positions 
that can be picked off. Thus, FTs change their trading preferences when   goes up, 
competing more through limit orders than market orders. This is reinforced by the fact that 
STs can learn from the information revealed by FTs in their trading strategies, especially 
when there are many FTs in the market. The learning process followed by STs makes it 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

39 
 
even more difficult for FTs to observe limit orders in incorrect positions that can be picked 
off. For example, Figure 4 shows that 43.33% (56.67%) of the STs perform transactions 
through limit (market) orders when         . This means that, when         , 
51.67% (48.33%) of the FTs perform transactions through limit (market) orders. In this 
scenario, a FT has to compete with other FTs (who also have informational and trading 
speed advantages) to provide liquidity, which makes the FTs submit more aggressive limit 
orders (due to competition) so as to obtain the immediacy cost paid on market orders. For 
instance, we can observe on the right-hand side of Figure 4 that the probability of 
submitting an aggressive limit order is at its largest when there are many HFT firms in the 
market.16 
 
The improvement in liquidity due to HFT competition under high levels of   is 
consistent with Brogaard and Garriott (2018), who report that HFT competition induces an 
increase in market liquidity. Moreover, this result is congruent with the findings presented 
in other empirical studies, in which HFT technologies are associated with reductions in the 
bid-ask spread. For instance, Hasbrouck and Saar (2012), Hendershott et al. (2012), and 
Riordan and Storkenmaier (2012) report evidence that FTs reduce market spreads.  
 
6 
Social optimum and policy intervention 
 
Social welfare is given by: 
                               
(4)
                                                 
16 In unreported analysis, I find similar patterns to those presented in Figure 4 when FTs only have either an 
informational advantage or a trading speed advantage. In this analysis, I find that additional HFT competition 
decreases (increases) market liquidity when there are few (many) HFT firms in the market.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

40 
 
Thus, social welfare depends on the cost of having HFT technology,  , and the level of HFT 
competition,  . Figure 5 presents the social welfare across different values of   and using 
three levels of  . In addition, let     be the proportion of FTs that maximizes social 
welfare.  
[Insert Figure 5 here] 
 
Figure 5 shows that the shape of the social welfare, as a function of the level of the 
HFT competition, changes depending on the amount agents have to pay to acquire HFT 
technology,  . On the one hand, in the case that there is no cost of acquiring HFT 
technology (i.e.,    ), the social welfare has a humped shape as a function of  . In this 
case, the maximum social welfare is reached when the proportion of FTs in the market is 
72.20% (i.e.,           ). On the other hand, in the case that         or        , 
the social welfare describes a decreasing curve as a function of the level of the HFT 
competition. Thus, if         or        , the maximum social welfare is reached when 
there are no FTs in the market (i.e.,          ). 
 
Most importantly, when we compare Figure 1 to Figure 5, we observe that there is 
overinvestment in HFT technology. This means that the equilibrium investment in HFT 
technology (see equation (3)), in terms of the proportion of FTs in the market,   , which is 
larger than the proportion of FTs that maximizes social welfare,    . For instance, if there 
is no cost to being an FT (i.e.,    ), Figure 1 shows that all agents acquire HFT technology 
(i.e.,           ). However, as explained in the previous paragraph, the proportion of 
FTs that maximizes social welfare,    , is        when    . In addition, Figure 1 
reports that the equilibrium investment levels are           and           for 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

41 
 
        and        , respectively. Nevertheless, if         or        , the 
maximum social welfare is observed when there are no HFT firms in the market, thus 
         . The reason    is larger than     is that FTs do not consider, when choosing 
their equilibrium investment, the negative externality they generate for STs. 
Observation 6. There is overinvestment in HFT technology, as there are incentives to 
be a fast trader even in scenarios in which being one is socially wasteful. 
 
Consequently, the model shows that there are incentives to being an FT even in 
scenarios in which it is socially wasteful to be one. Thus, I analyze some potential policy 
measures designed to move the equilibrium investment closer to the socially optimal level. 
In fact, policy makers have already been analyzing the potential implementation of 
regulations aimed at controlling the market activity of HFT firms. For instance, on 
September 22, 2010, the SEC Chairman, Mary Schapiro, said that "...high frequency trading 
firms have a tremendous capacity to affect the stability and integrity of the equity markets. 
Currently, however, high frequency trading firms are subject to very little in the way of 
obligations, either to protect that stability by promoting reasonable price continuity in 
tough times, or to refrain from exacerbating price volatility." However, some regulators and 
exchanges have argued that potential measures for controlling HFT activity may induce 
more damages than benefits. For example, in 2011, the London Stock Exchange stated, 
referring to cancellation fees, that “Any measure that increases transaction costs will 
reduce liquidity in markets, increasing the cost of capital for companies, and may also 
exacerbate volatility." 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

42 
 
 
In particular, I analyze three policy responses: a Pigovian tax, a cancellation fee, and 
a latency constraint. The outcomes of these potential policy interventions are reported in 
Table 1. In this table, I use as a benchmark a model setup without regulation, where 
         . 
[Insert Table 1 here] 
Observation 7. The use of either a Pigovian tax, a cancellation fee or a latency 
constraint will improve social welfare but reduce market quality. 
 
In terms of the Pigovian tax, I assume there is a social planner who imposes a tax on 
FTs with the purpose of moving the equilibrium investment to the socially optimal level of 
fast trading. Let T be the Pigovian tax. Thus, the total cost that FTs face when they have HFT 
technology is    . Therefore, if the social planner knows that the socially optimal level of 
fast trading is    , the Pigovian tax should be: 
                       
(5)
Equation (5) is obtained from the fact that the "social" equilibrium investment in HFT 
technology is reached when STs and FTs have the same net expected profit:          
              . Thus, after applying the Pigovian tax, the "social" equilibrium level of 
the proportion of FTs in the market,    , coincides with the "private" equilibrium level of 
the proportion of FTs in the market,   . Then, the Pigovian tax can be redistributed among 
agents to share the welfare improvements associated with HFT technology. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

43 
 
 
In Table 1, the Pigovian tax is 0.121, which generates an improvement in social 
welfare of 0.095 (i.e., 3.763-3.668=0.095) relative to the case without regulation.17 It is 
important to note that an improvement in social welfare does not necessarily generate an 
improvement in market quality measures. In fact, we observe that, when the Pigovian tax is 
applied, the bid-ask spread and the means of the absolute values of both the microstructure 
noise and the belief error of the STs all increase, while the depth at the ask price decreases.  
 
It is important to note that the implementation of a Pigovian tax faces two important 
problems. Firstly, although the identification of FTs with a trading speed advantage is 
relatively easy, as their trading ratio is directly observable (and they have to pay for 
collocation services in exchanges), it is much more difficult to identify agents who have an 
informational advantage. Thus, the social planner would face problems over whom to 
impose the Pigovian tax on. 
 
Secondly, the Pigovian tax is equal to the net negative externality that FTs generate 
on STs when the socially optimal level of fast trading is reached, which is difficult to 
calibrate. This is because the optimal Pigovian tax should be asset-specific and evolve over 
time. For instance, I show in the Appendix that the negative externality of FTs on STs 
                                                 
17 The value assumed for the Pigovian tax in Table 1 is of the same order of magnitude as the financial 
transaction tax (FTT) implemented in 2012 in France. In 2012, the French government imposed an FTT of 20 
basis points (bps) on stock purchases. However, this tax is payable on daily net position changes; thus 
intraday trading is exempted. This tax exemption on intraday trading is very relevant, since HFT firms carry a 
low level of their volume overnight, which implies that a small amount of the transactions of HFT firms would 
be affected. For instance, Kirilenko et al. (2017) use such a criterion to classify a trader as an HFT firm, in 
which a trader has to carry less than 5% of its daily volume overnight to be classified as a firm with HFT 
technology. Therefore, if we consider that the price of a stock is €15, on average an HFT firm would pay 
€0.0015 (i.e., €15*20bps*0.05=€0.0015) per share due to this FTT in France. Moreover, the French 
government also introduced a tax of 1 bp on the notional amount of modified or canceled messages of HFT 
firms that exceed an order-to-trade ratio of 5:1. This second tax is similar to the cancellation fee that I also 
analyze in Table 1. Thus, if we also consider that the price of a stock is €15 and an HFT firm exceeds the 
established trade ratio, this firm would pay €0.0015 (i.e., €15*1bp=€0.0015) as a result of this tax. Therefore, 
if we consider that the tick size of the stock is €0.01, then the Pigovian tax of 0.121 ticks used in this study is 
equal to €0.00121 per share, which is similar to the values paid by HFT firms under these French taxes.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

44 
 
increases with the volatility of the fundamental value of the asset, which should vary for 
different securities. Also, the volatility of the fundamental value of an asset should change 
over time in real markets, meaning that the optimal value of the Pigovian tax should not be 
constant over time, even for the same asset.  
 
In terms of the second policy intervention, which is related to a cancellation fee, I 
assume that traders pay a fee of 0.1 ticks when they cancel a limit order (i.e.,           in 
equation (2)).18 To make the evaluation of the welfare level comparable with the 
unregulated result, I redistribute the money obtained from the cancellation fee among 
agents.  
 
I show in Table 1 that a cancellation fee marginally improves social welfare by 0.007 
(i.e., 3.675-3.668=0.007) in relation to the case without any policy measures. In addition, 
and similar to the Pigovian tax, a cancellation fee has negative impacts on market quality 
(i.e., the bid-ask spread, and the means of the absolute values of both the microstructure 
noise and the STs’ belief error go up, while the depth at the ask price goes down). This is 
because a cancellation fee represents an additional market friction that unfavorably affects 
market performance, as it is costly to modify unexecuted limit orders.19  
                                                 
18 The value assumed for the cancellation cost is consistent with the value imposed in NYSE Euronext, in 
which, above an order-trade ratio of 100:1, a €0.10 fee is applied to cancellations. Suppose that a trader in 
NYSE Euronext submits and cancels 100 consecutive orders and, immediately after that, she submits and 
cancels another one. The cancellation fee for the 101st cancellation can be shared with the previous 
uncharged cancellations to distribute the cost, which makes a cancellation cost per order of €0.001 (i.e., 
€0.10/101= €0.001). The cancellation cost per order of €0.001 represents a lower bound since, after the 
101st cancellation, additional cancellation costs (from unexecuted limit orders) will be divided by the first 
100 uncharged cancellations plus the new charged cancellations. Therefore, if we assume that the tick size is 
€0.01, the cancellation fee of 0.1 ticks (€0.01*0.1 = €0.001) is similar to what we can currently observe in the 
market. 
19 In an unreported analysis, I run the case in which the cancellation fee is applied only to FTs. In this 
unreported analysis, I find that the welfare increases by       (i.e., the welfare in this case is 3.679) in 
relation to the case without regulation. In addition, market quality is still damaged even when the 
cancellation fee is only applied to FTs. However, this case would be difficult to implement, because it is 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

45 
 
 
Despite the improvements in welfare, the decision about the right level of the 
cancellation fee is also complex, as with the calibration of the optimal Pigovian tax. A small 
cancellation fee may have no impact on market welfare. More importantly, an incorrect 
level of cancellation fee could induce severe liquidity problems by moving the equilibrium 
level of the proportion of FTs in the market,   , to a value that may induce more damages 
than benefits. As explained above, for instance in the case where          , we can 
observe an important worsening of market liquidity measures (see Figure 4). 
 
In terms of the third policy response analyzed in this study, several exchanges have 
proposed regulations to reduce the speed advantage of FTs by imposing latency constraints 
on agents. Some of these regulations include minimum resting times for orders before they 
can be modified, or speed bumps to delay orders. Thus, I next evaluate the implementation 
of a latency constraint using this modeling approach.  
 
I impose a latency constraint by changing the average re-entry speed of FTs. Thus, I 
impose that the average re-entry time for FTs increases from 120 milliseconds to 600 
milliseconds, which is the same as the average re-entry time of STs. Table 1 shows that the 
latency constraint increases social welfare by 0.011 (i.e., 3.679-3.668=0.011) compared to 
the case without regulation. Similarly to the policy measures analyzed previously, though, 
Table 1 shows that the latency constraint has a negative effect on market quality.  
 
Nevertheless, latency constraints have important advantages over the other 
potential regulations analyzed. A latency constraint does not need to deal with the complex 
calibration of an optimal Pigovian tax or optimal cancellation fee. Instead, a latency 
                                                                                                                                                             
complex to identify who has HFT technology (specifically an informational advantage), as mentioned for the 
case of the Pigovian tax.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

46 
 
constraint, where there is a fair trading speed for all agents (i.e., which is fair for STs), can 
be estimated using reaction times of human beings. Thus, a fair trading speed can be 
obtained by observing the trading activity of traditional slow investors. This an important 
point since human beings’ reaction times are independent of the asset and do not change 
over time.  
 
7 
Conclusions 
In this paper, I analyze HFT competition when traders can endogenously decide to 
compete through limit orders and market orders. I present a dynamic equilibrium model in 
continuous time for a limit order market, in which there are endogenous make-take 
decisions in an HFT competitive landscape. I show that the bid-ask spread has a humped 
shape as a function of HFT competition, induced by changes in HFT firms’ preferences for 
liquidity demand and liquidity provision. On the one hand, in the case where there are few 
HFT firms in the market, they exhibit predatory behavior by competing more through 
market orders, which pick off limit orders coming from the big crowd of slow less skilled 
agents in the market. In this case, additional HFT competition reduces liquidity. On the 
other hand, in the case where there are many HFT firms in the market, they compete more 
in liquidity provision; in this environment, additional HFT competition improves liquidity.  
I show that the difference in the gross expected payoffs of FTs and STs is reduced as 
the number of FTs in the market increases. This is because, when there are more FTs, STs 
can free ride on the improvements in informational efficiency and reductions in market 
frictions. In fact, I show that HFT competition increases informational efficiency and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

47 
 
reduces microstructure noise. In addition, I show that there is a synergy between the 
informational advantage and the trading speed advantage. This is expected since FTs can 
use either of these advantages more efficiently when they also have the other trading skill. 
Furthermore, I show that there is overinvestment in HFT technology. Thus, I examine three 
potential policy responses designed to move the equilibrium investment closer to the 
socially optimal level. I show that all policy measures improve social welfare but reduce 
market quality. 
The model presented in this paper is intuitive. However, other interesting issues 
remain to be addressed. For instance, the study of the effect of informational and trading 
speed advantages on the correlations between different assets, the study of the impact of 
HFT on multiple markets, and an analysis of HFT competition when dark pools are present 
have been left for future research. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

48 
 
Appendix: The impact of volatility changes on HFT equilibrium investment, the bidask spread, and microstructure noise 
In this Appendix, I examine the impact of volatility on the HFT equilibrium 
investment, the bid-ask spread, and microstructure noise. The left-hand side of Figure A1 
reports the difference between the gross expected payoffs of FTs and STs as a function of 
the volatility of the fundamental value of the asset. This figure shows that the relative 
benefit of being an FT in relation to an ST increases when the volatility of the asset 
increases. Thus, FTs are willing to pay a higher cost to have HFT technology, as the 
volatility of the asset rises. This result sheds some light on the behavior of FTs across 
assets. For instance, if we assume that the cost of having HFT technology is constant, FTs 
will prefer to trade in an asset with higher volatility since they will gain a greater benefit 
relative to STs by doing so.  
[Insert Figure A1 here] 
The right-hand side of Figure A1 presents the bid-ask spread and the mean of the 
absolute value of the microstructure noise, again as a function of the volatility of the 
fundamental value of the asset. This figure shows that the bid-ask spread increases as the 
volatility increases, which is consistent with Biais et al. (2015). Moreover, this figure shows 
that there is a volatility multiplier effect, as in Goettler (2009), in which the limit order 
market generates an increase in the mean of the absolute value of the microstructure noise 
as the volatility of the fundamental value rises.  
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

49 
 
References 
Ait-Sahalia, Y., and M. Sağlam. 2016. High Frequency Market Making: Implications for 
Liquidity. Working Paper, Princeton University.  
Ait-Sahalia, Y., and M. Sağlam. 2017. High Frequency Market Making: Optima Quoting. 
Working Paper, Princeton University.  
Alvarez, F, L. Guiso, and F. Lippi, 2012, Durable consumption and asset management with 
transaction and observation costs, American Economic Review 102, 2272-2300.  
Alvarez, F., F Lippi, and L. Paciello, 2011, Optimal price setting with observation and menu 
costs, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 1909-1960. 
Biais, B., T. Foucault, and S. Moinas, 2015, Equilibrium high frequency trading, Journal of 
Financial Economics 115, 292-313.  
Biais, B., J. Hombert, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2012, Pricing and liquidity with sticky trading 
plans. Working paper, TSE, HEC, UCLA. 
Boehmer, E., Li, D., & Saar, G., 2018, The Competitive Landscape of High-Frequency Trading 
Firms, Review of Financial Studies 31, 2227-2276. 
Bongaerts, D.G.J., and M.V. Achter, 2016, High-Frequency Trading and Market Stability, 
Working paper Erasmus University 
Breckenfelder, J. H. 2013. Competition between high-frequency traders, and market quality. 
Working Paper, Stockholm School of Economics. 
Brogaard, J.A., 2010, High frequency trading and its impact on market quality, working 
paper Northwestern University. 
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., & Riordan, R. (2014). High-frequency trading and price 
discovery. The Review of Financial Studies, 27(8), 2267-2306.  
Brogaard, J., and C. Garriott. 2018. High-frequency trading competition. Working Paper, 
University of Washington and Bank of Canada. 
Budish, E. B., P. Cramton, and J. Shim (2013), The High-Frequency Trading Arms Race: 
Frequent Batch Auctions as a Market Design Response, Working paper University of 
Chicago. 
Chaboud, A. P., Chiquoine, B., Hjalmarsson, E., & Vega, C., 2014,. Rise of the machines: 
Algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange market. The Journal of Finance, 69(5), 
2045-2084. 
Colliard, J. E., & Hoffmann, P. (2017). Financial transaction taxes, market composition, and 
liquidity. The Journal of Finance 72, 2685-2716. 
Cont, R., 2011. Statistical modeling of high frequency ﬁnancial data: facts, models and 
challenges. IEEE Signal Processing 28 (5), 16–25. 
Egginton, J., B. F. VanNess, and R. A. VanNess, 2012, Quote stuffing, Working paper, 
University of Mississippi. 
Foucault, T., 1999, Order Flow Composition and Trading Costs in a Dynamic Limit Order 
Market, Journal of Financial Markets 2, 99–134. 
Foucault, T., J. Hombert, and I. Roşu. 2016. News trading and speed. Journal of Finance 
71:335–82. 
Foucault, T., O. Kadan and E. Kandel, 2005, The Limit Order Book as a Market for Liquidity, 
Review of Financial Studies 18, 1171–1217. 
Friederich, S. and Payne, R. 2015. Order-to-trade ratios and market liquidity. Journal of 
Banking & Finance 50, 214-223. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

50 
 
Goettler, R., C. Parlour, and U. Rajan, 2005, Equilibrium in a Dynamic Limit Order Market, 
Journal of Finance 60, 2149-2192. 
Goettler, R., C. Parlour, and U. Rajan, 2009, Informed traders and limit order markets, 
Journal of Financial Economics 93, 67-87. 
Government Office for Science, 2012, Foresight: The Future of Computer Trading in 
Financial Markets (2012) Final Project Report, London.  
Grossman, S. and J. Stiglitz, 1980. , "On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient 
Markets", American Economic Review, 70, 393-408. 
Hagstro mer, B., Norden, L., 2013, The diversity of high-frequency traders. Journal of 
Financial Markets16, 741–770. 
Hasbrouck, J. and G. Saar, 2012, Low-latency trading, working paper, AFA 2012 Chicago 
Meetings Paper. 
Hendershott, T., and R. Riordan, 2010, Algorithmic trading and information, working paper 
UC Berkeley. 
Hendershott, T., C. Jones and A. Menkveld, 2012, Does Algorithmic trading improve 
liquidity, Journal of Finance 66, 1-33. 
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., & Riordan, R., 2014, High-frequency trading and price 
discovery. The Review of Financial Studies, 27(8), 2267-2306. 
Hoffmann, P., 2014, A dynamic limit order market with fast and slow traders, Journal of 
Financial Economics 113, 156-169. 
Hollifield, B., Miller, R., Sandås, P., Slive, J., 2006. Estimating the gains from trade in limit 
order markets. Journal of Finance 61, 2753–2804. 
Huang, S., & Yueshen, B. Z. (2017). Speed Acquisition, working paper INSEAD. 
Ifrach, B. and Weintraub, G.Y., 2016. A framework for dynamic oligopoly in concentrated 
industries. Review of Economic Studies 84, 1106-1150.  
Jain, P. K., 2005, Financial Market Design and the Equity Premium: Electronic versus Floor 
Trading, Journal of Finance 60, 2955-2985. 
Jovanovic, B., and A. Menkveld. (2012). “Middlemen in Limit-Order Markets.” Working 
Paper, New York University and VU University of Amsterdam. 
Jovanovic, B., R.W. Rosenthal, 1988, Anonymous sequential games, Journal of Mathematical 
Economics 17, 77–87. 
Kirilenko, A., A.S. Kyle, M. Samadi, and T. Tuzun, 2017, The Flash Crash: High‐Frequency 
Trading in an Electronic Market, Journal of Finance, 72: 967-998 
Kosinski, R. J., 2012, A literature review on reaction time, Working paper, Clemson 
University. 
Krusell, P., A. A. Smith, Jr., 1998, Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy. 
Journal of Political Economy 106(5) 867–896. 
London Stock Exchange, 2011, LSEG Public Comment to IOSCO’s Consultation Report: 
Regulatory Issues Raised by the Impact of Technological Changes on Market Integrity 
and Efficiency (CR02/11, July 2011). 
Lynch, A. W., 1996, Decision frequency and synchronization across agents: Implications for 
aggregate consumption and equity return, Journal of Finance 51, 1479-1497. 
Mankiw G., and R. Reis, 2002, Sticky information versus sticky prices: a proposal to replace 
the new Keynesian phillips curve, Quarterly Journal of Economics 4, 1295-1328. 
Malinova, K., A. Park, and R. Riordan, 2018, Do Retail Traders Suffer from High Frequency 
Traders?, Working Paper University of Toronto. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

51 
 
Maskin, 
E., 
Tirole 
,J.,2001.MarkovperfectequilibriumI:observable 
actions. 
JournalofEconomicTheory100,191–219. 
Menkveld, A., 2013. High-frequency trading and the new-market makers. Journal of 
Financial Markets16, 712–740. 
Menkveld, A. J., and M. A. Zoican. 2017. Need for speed? Exchange latency and liquidity. 
Review of Financial Studies 30:1188–228. 
NYSE Euronext, 2012, Trading Fee Guide for NYSE Euronext European Cash Market 
Members. Trading fee guide for European equities, NYSE Euronext. 
Pakes, A., and P. McGuire, 2001, Stochastic algorithms, symmetric Markov perfect 
equilibrium, and the ‘curse’ of dimensionality, Econometrica 69, 1261–1281. 
Parlour, C., 1998, Price Dynamics in Limit Order Markets, Review of Financial Studies 11, 
789–816. 
Rieder, U., 1979, Equilibrium plans for non-zero-sum Markov games, in Otto Moeschlin and 
Diethard Pallaschke, eds.: Game Theory and Related Topics (North Holland 
Publishers,Amsterdam), pp. 91–101. 
Reis, R., 2006a, Inattentive producers, Review of Economic Studies 3, 793-821. 
Reis, R., 2006b, Inattentive consumers. Journal of Monetary Economics 8, 1761-1800. 
Riordan, Ryan, and Andreas Storkenmaier, 2012, Latency, liquidity, and price discovery, 
Journal of Financial Markets 15, 416-437. 
Roşu, I., 2009, A Dynamic Model of the Limit Order Book, Review of Financial Studies 22, 
4601-4641. 
Roşu, I. 2016. Fast and slow informed trading. Working Paper, HEC Paris. 
SEC, 2010, Concept release on equity market structure, Release No. 34-61358, File No. S702-10. 
Yueshen, B. Z., 2014, Queuing Uncertainty, working paper, Yale University. 
Zhang, Frank, 2010, The effect of high-frequency trading on stock volatility and price 
discovery, working paper, Tinbergen Institute. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

52 
 
 
Figure 1. Gross expected payoffs of agents and equilibrium investment in HFT technology. The lefthand side of this figure shows the gross expected payoffs of fast traders (FTs) and slow traders (STs) as a 
function of HFT competition. The right-hand side presents the equilibrium investment in HFT technology, 
also as a function of HFT competition. The gross expected payoffs are expressed in ticks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.60
3.70
3.80
3.90
4.00
4.10
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Expected payoff 
Level of fast trading (β)
STs 
FTs 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Difference between the gross 
expected payoffs of FTs and STs 
Level of fast trading (β)
B
A
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

53 
 
 
Figure 2. Equilibrium investment in HFT technology with pure information acquisition and pure 
trading speed acquisition. This figure shows equilibrium investment when I isolate either information 
acquisition or trading speed acquisition (solid gray line), as a function of HFT competition. The left-hand side 
presents the equilibrium investment in HFT technology in the case where HFT technology only involves the 
informational advantage (i.e., information acquisition); the right-hand side shows the equilibrium investment 
in the case where HFT technology only includes the trading speed advantage (i.e., trading speed acquisition). 
In both cases, the equilibrium investment in HFT technology when FTs have both the informational and the 
trading speed advantage is reported (solid black line). The difference between the gross expected payoffs of 
FTs and STs is expressed in ticks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Difference between the gross 
expected payoffs of FTs and STs 
Level of  fast trading (β)
STs: ∆t = 0.8; λr = 1/0.6
FTs: ∆t = 0.0; λr = 1/0.12 
STs: ∆t = 0.8; λr = 1/0.6
FTs: ∆t = 0.0; λr = 1/0.6
A
B
C
D
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Difference between the gross 
expected payoffs of FTs and STs 
Level of fast trading (β)
STs: ∆t = 0.8; λr = 1/0.6
FTs: ∆t = 0.0; λr = 1/0.12 
STs: ∆t = 0.8; λr = 1/0.6
FTs: ∆t = 0.8; λr = 1/0.12 
A
B
E
F
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

54 
 
 
Figure 3. The effect of HFT competition on microstructure noise and market informativeness. The lefthand side of this figure shows the mean of the absolute value of microstructure noise as a function of HFT 
competition. The right-hand side presents the mean of the absolute value of the belief error of slow traders 
about the fundamental value of the asset, also as a function of HFT competition. Microstructure noise and 
belief error are expressed in ticks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Mean |vt - pt|
Level of fast trading (β)
Mean of the absolute 
value of 
microstructure noise: 
Mean |vt - pt|
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Mean |E(vt|st) - vt| of STs
Level of fast trading (β)
Mean of the absolute 
value of the belief 
error of STs: 
Mean |E(vt|st) - vt|
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

55 
 
 
Figure 4. The effect of HFT competition on market liquidity. The left-hand side of this figure shows the 
bid-ask spread and market depth as a function of HFT competition. The right-hand side presents the 
percentage of executions made through limit orders by slow traders and the probability of observing a 
submission through an aggressive limit sell order, also as a function of HFT competition. The probability of 
observing a submission through an aggressive limit sell order is calculated as the number of submissions at 
the ask (or at a lower price), divided by all limit order submissions on the sell side. I only report depth at the 
ask price and the probability of observing a submission through an aggressive limit order on the sell side, 
since the model is symmetric across the two sides of the book. The bid-ask spread is expressed in ticks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Depth (# orders)
Bid-ask spread
Level of fast trading (β)
Bid-ask spread
Depth at the ask price
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
36%
38%
40%
42%
44%
46%
48%
50%
52%
54%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Prob. of an aggress. limit order
% of limit ord. 'executed'  for STs
Level of fast trading (β)
% of executions through 
limit orders  for slow 
traders
Prob. of observing a 
submission through an 
aggressive limit sell order
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

56 
 
 
Figure 5. The effect of HFT competition on welfare. This figure shows the level of social welfare as a 
function of HFT competition, and using three levels of the cost of having HFT technology ( ). Social welfare is 
calculated using equation (4) and is expressed in ticks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.35
3.40
3.45
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
3.75
3.80
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Welfare
Level of  fast trading (β)
Cost to be a FT (K): 0.000
Cost to be a FT (K): 0.166
Cost to be a FT (K): 0.350
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

57 
 
 
Figure A1. The effect of volatility on equilibrium investment in HFT technology, the bid-ask spread 
and microstructure noise. The left-hand side of this figure shows the difference between the gross expected 
payoffs of fast traders (FTs) and slow traders (STs) as a function of the volatility of the fundamental value of 
the asset. The right-hand side of this figure presents the bid-ask spread and the mean of the absolute value of 
microstructure noise, also as a function of the volatility of the fundamental value of the asset. The different 
levels of volatility are obtained by modifying the parameter   , which controls the time between innovations 
in the fundamental value of the asset. Afterwards, the volatility of the fundamental value of the asset is 
calculated by assuming that the stock price is $450, with tick size $0.05. In both plots, I assume that    
    . The difference between the gross expected payoffs of FTs and STs, the bid-ask spread, and the 
microstructure noise are expressed in ticks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0%
20%
40%
60%
Difference between the gross 
expected payoffs of FTs and STs 
Level of volatility
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
0%
20%
40%
60%
Mean |vt - pt|
Bid-ask spread
Level of volatility
Bid-ask spread
Mean of the absolute value of 
icrostructure noise: Mean |vt - pt|
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257

58 
 
Table 1. The effects on social welfare and market performance of potential policy interventions. This 
table reports welfare and market quality measures (used in Figures 3-5) to evaluate the impact of three 
potential policy responses: a Pigovian tax, a cancellation fee, and a latency constraint. The first column 
presents a benchmark setup where there is no regulation (with        ).  
 
Tax for FTs
Cancellation fee 
Latency constraint
Welfare
3.668
3.763
3.675
3.679
Cost to be fast trader
0.166
0.166
0.148
0.136
Tax
0.000
0.121
0.000
0.000
Bid-ask spread
1.444
1.667
1.464
1.485
N. of limit orders at the ask
2.223
1.944
2.159
1.632
% of limit orders 'executed' for slow traders
0.465
0.500
0.457
0.477
Prob. of submitting an agressive limit order 
0.414
0.357
0.365
0.391
Mean |v t - p t|
0.515
1.326
0.532
0.582
Mean |E(v t|s t) - v t|
0.503
1.328
0.522
0.571
Potential regulation under HFT competition
No regulation
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3336257
