Market Microstructure and
Informational Efﬁciency: The Role of
Intermediation
Rafael R. Guthmann* and Brian C. Albrecht†
January 2024
The competitive market is informationally efﬁcient; people only need to know
prices to implement a competitive allocation. However, the standard formulation of competition neglects any underlying market microstructure; prices, which
provide the necessary information, are exogenous. We study two speciﬁc market
microstructures: a model where trade is intermediated by market-makers and a
model of random matching and bargaining. First, we show that an economy where
competition among market-makers determines prices can approximate the informational efﬁciency of the competitive model. Second, we show that as the size of
the economy increases, matching markets require inﬁnitely more information than
the competitive market.
JEL-Classiﬁcation: C78, D40, D60, D82, D83
Keywords: allocation mechanisms; informational efﬁciency; random matching equilibrium; market-makers; intermediation
*Departamento de Economía, Facultad de Economía y Negocios, Universidad Alberto Hurtado,
Erasmo Escala 1835, 8340539 Santiago, Chile. Email: rafaelguthmann@hotmail.com.
†International Center for Law & Economics. Email: mail@briancalbrecht.com.
We would like to thank helpful referees and seminar participants for their great feedback.
1
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

1
Introduction
Economists have long noted that competitive markets exhaust gains from trade:
they are Pareto efﬁcient.This paper studies a second argument economists have
used to argue that markets are desirable. Market prices communicate all the relevant information dispersed throughout the economy; that is, competitive markets are informationally efﬁcient. To use the famous example from Hayek (1945,
p. 526), when the price of tin increases, "All that the users of tin need to know is
that some of the tin they used to consume is now more proﬁtably employed elsewhere." Knowing that a shift in either supply or demand caused the price increase
would be redundant information for the tin user; the price provides all the information regarding market conditions that the user needs. Our paper then argues
that the intermediating agent who sets prices plays a fundamental role in a market
economy by allowing other agents to economize on information.
Mount and Reiter (1974), Hurwicz (1977b), and Jordan (1982) showed that competitive markets, where agents take prices as given, are informationally efﬁcient.
However, as Gale (2000) and others have asked: "who sets the prices in a competitive equilibrium?" They argue that instead of interpreting the model of competitive equilibrium as a literal description of the behavior of agents in the economy, it should be interpreted as a simpliﬁed representation of an economy where
prices are strategically determined, the frictions of trade are low, and the number
of agents is high. Building on this work on strategic foundations for competitive
equilibrium, we argue that markets should be thought of as informationally efﬁcient only if markets where agents explicitly set prices can approximate the informational efﬁciency of the competitive equilibrium. Therefore, our paper studies
informational efﬁciency in markets with strategic price-setters and without the Walrasian auctioneer. We conclude that such decentralized markets require that some
agents act as intermediaries between traders to approximate the informational efﬁciency attained in a competitive equilibrium.
To study markets with strategic agents, we need to incorporate the market microstructure explicitly and model intermediaries and other institutions that facilitate trade (Spulber 1996b, p. 135). Following the market microstructure literature
2
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

(Gehrig 1993; Spulber 1996a, 2002; Rust and Hall 2003), we compare two forms
of trade that we observe in the world: direct trade between buyers and sellers
and indirect trade mediated through explicit market-making ﬁrms or institutions
(such as the stock market). We show that direct trade is very informationally inefﬁcient and that indirect trade mediated through intermediaries can approximate
informational efﬁciency.
First, we prove that a market microstructure with intermediaries that we call
market-makers can approximate the informational efﬁciency of the competitive
mechanism. We study a model of price formation with strategic market-makers
who intermediate trade between buyers and sellers.1 We show that a model of exchange through intermediaries can approximate the informational efﬁciency properties of the competitive equilibrium. Because most agents are not market-makers,
buyers and sellers can act as they do in the competitive mechanism and use prices
as a sufﬁcient statistic. The size of the message space needed to implement the
equilibrium allocations grows at only O (N), where N is the number of types in
the economy, which is the same order as the competitive model.
As buyers and sellers outsource the price formation process to intermediaries,
with positive trade frictions, the market-makers proﬁt by extracting part of the
surplus from trade. These market-makers are arbitrageurs who can buy low, sell
high, and exploit opportunities other actors do not see.2 As trade frictions go to
zero, the market-makers still economize on information for the other agents, but
the arbitrage opportunities disappear, market-makers no longer make any proﬁts,
and the allocation converges to the competitive allocation.3
We then extend the general market-maker model to a dynamic setting with a
1. This model has similarities with the intermediation models of Gehrig (1993), Spulber (1996a,
1996b), and Rust and Hall (2003). Following Rust and Hall (2003), we use the term market-maker
because they operate an exchange. There are subtleties of the market microstructure that we do
not study. For example, we do not address the difference between being a merchant or a platform
(Hagiu 2009) or a marketplace or a reseller (Hagiu and Wright 2015). See Spulber (2019) for a recent
discussion.
2. Following Kirzner (1973, pp. 14-6) there is a literature that calls these market-makers "entrepreneurs" who "discover" proﬁt opportunities in the market.
3. The formal connection between no-arbitrage and competitive equilibrium is well understood
in the case of product markets (e.g., Makowski and Ostroy 1998) and ﬁnancial markets (e.g., Werner
1987).
3
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

monopoly market-maker. Other potential market-makers can pay a ﬁxed cost to
enter, and the market is contestable (Baumol 1982). In equilibrium, the monopoly
incumbent will deter entry and set all prices like the Walrasian auctioneer. Unlike the auctioneer, the market-maker is strategic, and prices are endogenous. The
downside is that, with positive frictions, there are different bid and ask prices for
the good instead of the single price from the auctioneer. The spread means that
to implement the market-maker allocation, the message space requires only one
more dimension than the uniquely informationally efﬁcient competitive market,
making an economy with a monopoly market-maker second-best compared to the
competitive market.
Given that the market-maker microstructure is approximately informationally
efﬁcient, it is natural to ask whether that is a feature of other microstructures.
Our second result shows that the answer is no: We show that a standard, random matching model, as articulated in Mortensen and Wright (2002), is unattractive from an informational efﬁciency perspective. If matching frictions are small,
the random matching mechanism is approximately competitive and, therefore, approximately efﬁcient from an allocative perspective. However, matching remains
inefﬁcient from an informational perspective. We show that the random matching
and bargaining allocation mechanism requires inﬁnitely more information than the
competitive mechanism as the number of types of agents in an economy grows.
Random matching is informationally inefﬁcient because each participating agent
needs to have an exhaustive picture of market conditions. For example, if there are
N types of buyers and N types of sellers who trade one good, the message space
must include k2 prices. Therefore, the size of the message space grows at O
 k2
:
Random matching may be too informationally complex in large economies to be
practical.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses related literature. Section
3 lays out the abstract environment within which we will consider the speciﬁc
mechanisms. Section 4 explains the baseline competitive mechanism. We then
construct our market-maker in Section 5. Section 5.6 develops a dynamic model
with a monopoly market-maker. Section 6 describes the matching and bargaining
mechanism and our result on informational inefﬁciency. Section 7 concludes.
4
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

2
Related Literature on Informational Efﬁciency and
the Foundations of Competitive Equilibria
As Vernon Smith (2015) recalled, "In the 1950s and ’60s, our expectation was that
complete information was necessary for equilibrium of supply and demand." This
turned out to be false. First, early experiments showed that with proper trading
rules, competitive outcomes emerge even with "strict privacy wherein each buyer
in a market knows only his/her own valuation of units of a commodity, and each
seller knows only his/her own cost of the units that might be sold" (Smith 1982).
Vernon Smith (1982) called this concept the "Hayek Hypothesis."
Then, the formal articulations of the Hayek Hypothesis (e.g., Mount and Reiter
1974; Hurwicz 1977b, 1977c; Jordan 1982) have shown that competitive markets–
decision makers take prices as a given and prices equate supply with demand,
contrary to requiring complete information–require minimal information.4 Every
agent can be unaware of most of the economy, and their preferences are private.
Mount and Reiter (1974) showed that competitive equilibria are informationally
efﬁcient in the sense that competitive prices communicate the minimum amount
of information necessary to implement a Pareto efﬁcient allocation in an environment where information is dispersed. Jordan (1982) proved that competitive prices
are the unique decentralized mechanism that achieves informational efﬁciency and
satisﬁes the individual rationality constraint: Jovanovic (1982) showed that for any
allocation mechanism that satisﬁes the individual rationality constraint (which he
deﬁned as "non-coercive"), implements a Pareto efﬁcient allocation, and is informationally efﬁcient, then that mechanism is the competitive allocation mechanism,
that is, the mechanism implements the competitive equilibrium allocation. Thus,
Mount and Reiter (1974) showed the analogous result to the ﬁrst welfare theorem
for informational efﬁciency, and Jovanovic (1982) showed the analogous concept
to the second welfare theorem for information efﬁciency.5
4. See Maskin (2015) for a summary of the connections between Hayek’s work and informational
efﬁciency.
5. Sato (1981) and Tian (2004) extended informational efﬁciency results to convex economies
with public goods and externalities. More recently, Nisan and Segal (2006) extended this literature
to non-convex economies and the analysis of the allocation of indivisible goods.
5
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

Throughout the paper, we focus on informational efﬁciency in the sense of the
size of the message space.6 The size of the messages is interpreted as a measure of
the complexity of a veriﬁcation protocol. As Segal (2010, p. 228) explains
[I]magine an omniscient oracle who knows the agents’ valuations and
consequently the optimal allocation(s) but needs to prove to an ignorant
outsider that an allocation x is [a solution]. The oracle does this by
publicly announcing a message m ∈M. Each agent i either accepts
or rejects the message, doing this on the basis of his own type. The
acceptance of message m by all agents must verify to the outsider that
allocation x is optimal.
For example, the original papers on informational efﬁciency focused on a Walrasian equilibrium, which can be interpreted through the lens of a veriﬁcation protocol. As Segal (2010, p. 229) further explains, "The role of the oracle is played
by the ‘Walrasian auctioneer’ who announces the equilibrium prices and allocation. Each agent accepts the announcement if and only if his announced allocation
constitutes his optimal choice from the budget set delineated by the announced
prices." Thus, the agents verify the equilibrium.
Informational efﬁciency is a relevant metric to judge allocation mechanisms
if decision-makers are constrained by the quantity of information they can incorporate into their decision-making process. In conventional economic theory,
decision-makers maximize their utility regardless of the complexity of their decision problem. In contrast, if agents are boundedly rational (Selten 2001) or have
rational inattention (Caplin and Dean 2015; Ma´ckowiak, Matˇejka, and Wiederholt
2020), the amount of information matters. Recent work has explicitly incorporated
these limitations when evaluating alternative mechanisms (Li 2017; Oprea 2020).
The Hayek Hypothesis suggests that markets are desirable institutions not because
6. Informational efﬁciency as the "minimal message space" should not be confused with informational efﬁciency in the sense of "information aggregation," as used in papers such as Grossman
and Stiglitz (1980), Vives (1995), Boehmer and Kelley (2009), and Lauermann and Wolinsky (2016).
Although both notions trace back to ideas in Hayek (1945), they are distinct; efﬁcient information
aggregation refers to the concept that the market prices for assets incorporate all the information
available to market participants. We do not address information aggregation in this paper.
6
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

humans are perfectly rational instantaneous utility maximizers but because they
are not. While we do not explicitly model any cognitive constraints, our results
suggest market-makers are desirable as means to reduce cognitive costs.
Separate from the informational efﬁciency literature, there is a large literature
on strategic foundations for competitive equilibrium (Gale 2000). Under various
market microstructures, the strategic equilibrium of decentralized economies generates the same allocation as the competitive equilibrium. Therefore, the competitive equilibrium can be thought of as a convenient shortcut for the more complicated, decentralized process. Our paper shows informational efﬁciency can only
be approximated by speciﬁc market microstructures. Not all models that provide
strategic foundations for competitive equilibrium also approximate the informational efﬁciency of competitive equilibrium. The random matching and bargaining model is one popular explanation for economists to expect competitive allocations as frictions of trade are low (Gale 1986a, 1986b), but a random matching
and bargaining equilibrium requires much more information than a competitive
equilibrium. Thus, matching markets can implement allocations approximately
competitive when frictions are low, but they cannot describe the informational efﬁciency that is understood to be a feature of markets.
3
Environment
In this section, we deﬁne our physical environment and abstract allocation mechanisms. In the next sections, we describe three speciﬁc allocation mechanisms and
their properties in terms of informational efﬁciency: the competitive market in
Section 4, the market-maker mechanism in Section 5, and the random matching
mechanism in Section 6.
Allocation mechanisms
The basic framework is as follows. There are N individuals in the economy, for
each individual i ∈1, 2, . . . , N, let Ei be the set of "individual environments",
which speciﬁes endowments and preferences for each individual. Then, the set
7
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

of possible environments E is the product of the set of individual environments, so
E = ∏i Ei.
We let M be an abstract message space, and Y be the set of feasible net trades for
the individuals of this economy. The non-empty valued correspondence µ : E ⇒
M speciﬁes a set of messages for each environment. Finally, the outcome function
g : M →Y then maps messages to net trades.
Putting this together, we can deﬁne an allocation mechanism, following Mount
and Reiter (1974) and Hurwicz (1977b, 1977c), and Jordan (1982):
Deﬁnition 1. An allocation mechanism is a triple (µ, M, g).
We call (µ, M) the message process of the allocation mechanism (µ, M, g): the
message process is the correspondence that speciﬁes messages given each environment and the message space M. We are interested in informationally decentralized allocation mechanisms, which are mechanisms that feature a message process
(µ, M) that is privacy-preserving. In words, a mechanism is privacy-preserving
if each individual’s response to a message only incorporates that person’s information and not the information of others. The informational efﬁciency literature
considers this a desirable feature of a mechanism, since only a consumer knows
her own endowment and preferences.
Deﬁnition 2. A message process (µ, M) is privacy-preserving if for each i there exists
a correspondence µi : Ei ⇒M such that for each e = (e1, e2, . . . , eN) ∈E, the proﬁle
of correspondences (µi)i∈{1,...,N}) satisﬁes
µ(e) = ∩i∈{1,...,N}µi(ei).
Physical environment
For simplicity, we consider a class of environments E where there are two goods: a
consumption good and a numeraire good. The agents can consume only positive
quantities of the consumption good, so the consumption set is X = R+ × R. There
is a continuum of consumers in this economy of measure one. There are N types of
consumers in this economy, each of identical measure 1/N. A type i ∈{1, . . . , N}
8
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

has preferences deﬁned on X by a quasilinear utility function ui that satisﬁes for
x = (x1, x2) ∈X, that ui(x) = u1i(x1) + x2, and u1i is strictly increasing, concave, and continuous. Let F be the set of such functions and let wi ∈X be the
endowment of consumers of type i.
A speciﬁc environment is a realization of e ∈E that speciﬁes a proﬁle of quasilinear preferences for the types (ui)i∈{1,...,N} ∈F N and a proﬁle of endowments for
each type (w(i))i∈{1,...,N} ∈XN. Thus, e = (ui, w(i))i∈{1,...,N} and E = F N × XN.
A vector of net trades for all individuals is given by y ∈R2N. Let Y be the set
of feasible net trades, which satisﬁes
Y = {y = (yi)i={1,...,N} : ∑
i
yi = 0, yi + wi ∈X ∀i}.
In addition, we say an allocation mechanism (µ, M, g) is said to be non-coercive
(that is, satisﬁes the participation constraint) if any allocation implemented by the
mechanism always yields a higher utility than consuming the endowments. This
deﬁnition is stated formally below:
Deﬁnition 3. The mechanism (µ, M, g) is non-coercive (satisﬁes the voluntary participation constraint) if for each y ∈g(µ(e)) then u(wi + yi) ≥u(wi) for all i ∈
{1, . . . , N}.
4
The Competitive Allocation Mechanism
The competitive mechanism is a triple (µc, Mc, gc). The message space Mc is described by
Mc = {(p, y) ∈R2
++ × Y : py(i) = 0 ∀i}.
(1)
That is, under a perfectly competitive allocation mechanism, the message space
is the set of prices and net trades that preserve the budget balance of all consumers.
The competitive message correspondence consists of prices and allocations that
map the set of physical environments into messages that are utility maximizing
for each consumer; it consists of a message correspondence µi
c for each consumer
9
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

i:
µi
c(ei) = {(p, y) ∈Mc : y(i) ∈
argmax
y∈{z∈R2:pz=0}
ui(y)}.
(2)
The message correspondence for the competitive allocation mechanism µc is
the intersection of these correspondences:
µc(e) = ∩iµi
c(ei).
(3)
By construction, this message correspondence is privacy preserving. The outcome function gc just maps the message space into the set of net trades:
gc((p, y)) = y.
(4)
Thus, the reader can check that for an environment e ∈E, µc(e) yields the
competitive equilibrium allocation and prices: it speciﬁes prices and net trades
that maximize the utility of consumers and are feasible, and the set of "outcomes"
gc(µc(e)) describes the set of equilibrium net trades for the environment e. Thus,
if the competitive equilibrium exists for an environment e ∈E, then µc(e) and
gc(µc(e)) are non-empty.
In the competitive mechanism of the N-types economy, the message space includes only one price (as the price of the numeraire good is normalized to 1) and
N types of consumers minus one for market clearing. Therefore, we have the following lemma:
Lemma 1. The message space of the competitive mechanism Mc is N-dimensional in the
sense that it is diffeomorphic to an N-dimensional manifold.
Proof. See Appendix Subsection A.1
■
Jordan (1982) showed that, under regularity conditions and among the allocation mechanisms that satisfy the participation (non-coercive) constraint, the competitive mechanism is the unique informationally efﬁcient mechanism: it is informationally efﬁcient in the sense of minimizing the number of dimensions for a
mechanism that implements a Pareto efﬁcient allocation and he also showed that
10
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

informationally efﬁcient allocation mechanism that satisﬁes the participation constraint must be the competitive mechanism. Thus, the competitive mechanism will
serve as the benchmark to measure other mechanisms.
To visualize the dimensionality of the message space for the competitive mechanism, consider an economy with four types of consumers in Figure 1. The oracle
needs to communicate the relevant information about both prices and quantities.
There is one public price for the consumption good for all consumers to know, as
shown in Figure 1a, the price of the numeraire good can be normalized to one. For
the quantities, the oracle needs to tell each consumer the quantity of the consumption good to trade; the quantity of the numeraire is implicitly deﬁned by the budget
balance. Also, if we know the trades for all but one of the types, then marketclearing implies the trades for the last type. This is shown in Figure 1b. Adding
these necessary messages together, the dimensionality of the message space is 4:
one price and three quantities of the consumption good for the ﬁrst three types of
consumers.
Price
Public Price p
Consumer 1
Consumer 2
Consumer 3
Consumer 4
(a) Prices
y1
y3
y2
Market Clearing
Quantities Traded
Consumer 1
Consumer 2
Consumer 3
Consumer 4
Auctioneer
(b) Quantities
Mc = (p, y11, y21, y32)
(c) Message Space
Figure 1: Example Competitive Mechanism with N = 4
11
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

5
Informational Efﬁciency under the Market-maker
Mechanism
5.1
Frictionless Environment
Now suppose that, in addition to buyers and sellers (the consumers), there is a ﬁnite set J of "market-makers" in this economy. Market-makers are proﬁt-maximizing
(only attribute utility to the numeraire good) intermediaries that "make the market" by posting bid and ask prices for the consumption good and intermediate
trade between the consumers.7 Unlike the search mechanism, buyers and sellers
are not directly matched with each other. Instead, both buyers and sellers trade
through the market-makers. In this rather simple environment, buyers purchase
from the lowest-priced market-maker they have access to as long as it is lower than
their valuation, while sellers sell at the highest-priced market-maker as long as the
posted price is higher than their cost.
To make the competitive equilibrium unique in this section, we assume that
the utility function of the consumers for the consumption good is strictly concave. In this case, the utility function is strictly increasing, and thus demand is
single-valued, continuous, and strictly decreasing on price, which implies that the
competitive equilibrium price is a unique p∗.
Consider the case where consumers have costless access to all contracts posted
by all market-makers. We will show that this is equivalent to the competitive
mechanism through Bertrand competition. To see this, consider a market-maker
who posts a pair of bid and ask prices (pb, ps) ∈R2++ for the consumption good,
which are, respectively, higher and lower than the prices posted by all other marketmakers. In that case a consumer will either purchase the consumer good for ps or
sell the consumer good for pb.
Let Di(p) be the demand of a consumer of type i for the consumption good. As
there are bid and ask prices, consumers partition themselves into two groups: the
7. In our model, market-makers perform the same role as in Spulber (1996a, 1996b). We have a
ﬁnite number of market-makers, and consumers are matched with different a probability to each
market-maker.
12
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

types that have excess demand for the good and choose their demand according to
Di(ps) and the types who have excess supply who choose the quantity according to
Di(pb). Because demand is downward sloping, which means here Di(ps) < Di(pb)
if pb < ps, there might be some types i where Di(ps) ≤wi1 ≤Di(pb). In words,
some people may be net suppliers and some may be net demanders.
The market-maker chooses (pb, ps) to maximize proﬁts, which are
π(ps, pb) = (ps −pb) ×


∑
i:Di(pb)<wi1
[wi1 −Di(pb)]

,
(5)
subject to the market clearing constraint that the quantity brought from sellers is
equal to the quantity demanded by buyers:
∑
i:Di(pb)<wi1
wi1 −Di(pb) +
∑
i:Di(ps)>wi1
wi1 −Di(ps) = 0.
(6)
If the market-maker posts bid prices lower than some other market-maker, then
no seller will sell to it, and its proﬁts will be zero. If the maker posts bid prices
higher than all others but not the lowest ask prices, the market-maker has monopolized the supply, and proﬁts also satisfy 5 subject to the resource constraint
6.
Proposition 1. If at least two market-makers are operating, then there is only one Nash
equilibrium: for at least two market-makers to post a pair of bid-ask prices (pb, ps) =
(p∗, p∗); market-makers post the competitive equilibrium price.
Proof. See Appendix Subsection B.1
■
Proposition 1 states that this environment of strategic price determination by
market-makers implements the competitive equilibrium in a frictionless setting
with complete awareness. Moreover, the proposition says that if consumers have
perfect access to all market-makers then two market-makers are sufﬁcient to achieve
the competitive allocation, as in the model of Bertrand competition. 8
8. Note that the resources constraint prevents a market-maker from monopolizing the supply
13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

This simple strategic model of intermediation can explain perfectly competitive
markets, but as real markets exhibit many imperfections, we extend this model to
address imperfectly functioning markets over the rest of this section.
5.2
Frictions of Trading: Constrained Consideration Sets
We extend this market-maker model to incorporate frictions of trading, which allows it to yield results such as market power, price dispersion, and other features
(or "imperfections") of markets that do not exist in the idealized competitive market.
We represent the frictions of trading by the assumption that consumers have
constrained access regarding the market-makers that they can trade with.9 The description of an environment e ∈E includes the market-makers and the degree of
access among consumers regarding these market-makers. For each market-maker
j ∈J, let mj ∈(0, 1] be the fraction of consumers with access to market-maker
j. We assume that access is randomly and independently distributed, so a fraction mj of consumers of any type has access to market-maker j and the fraction of
consumers with access to market-makers j and j′ is mj × mj′. Independence also
implies that the fraction of consumers who are aware of the seller j conditional on
being aware of a competitor is mj. Like with valuations, consumers’ access to speciﬁc market-makers is private information, so market-makers cannot discriminate
against consumers based on their access.
In this environment, consumer types are also differentiated by accessibility. A
consumer type is deﬁned for preferences and accessibility: utility function ui and
and posting the monopoly price as an equilibrium: that would be part of an equilibrium if the
demand from the buyers were inelastic. In that case, a market-maker could make zero proﬁts by
posting a higher ask price than the competitive price and selling part of the supply at the (revenue
maximizing) monopoly price. However, in this case, the quantity supplied at a higher ask price
than the competitive price is strictly higher. In comparison, the quantity demanded is strictly lower;
there will be excess supply, so the market-maker would not satisfy the resource constraint (as we
do not allow excess supply in our market-clearing condition). This explains why our set of possible
equilibrium is restricted compared to Stahl (1988).
9. Other studies, such as Perla (2019), Guthmann (2021), McAfee (1994), Albrecht (2020), and
Armstrong and Vickers (2022), use terms such as "awareness," "availability rate," "choice set," "loyal
customers," and "consideration set" to indicate the subset of agents that buyers or sellers have access
to.
14
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

accessibility Ai ⊂J. Since access is independently distributed, if mj < 1, ∀j, then
there is a positive measure of consumers without access to any market-maker. Let
NA (for "no-access") be the index for the set of consumers ANA who do not have
access to any market-maker. The budget set for a consumer of type i includes all
pairs of prices from market-makers they have access to:
Bi = {y ∈X −wi : ∃j ∈Ai such that pj(y)y = 0},
(7)
where pj(y) are the prices posted by market-maker j conditional on net-trade y
(that is, if the consumer chooses a positive quantity of the consumption good, the
price is pb, if the consumer chooses a negative quantity the price is ps).
5.3
Market-maker Mechanism
Consumers’ valuations and access to market-makers are private information, so
market-makers are constrained to uniform pricing policies where there is no price
discrimination. In this case, each market-maker posts a pair of bid and ask prices
and the consumers choose the best prices among the market-makers they have
access to.
We describe a strategy of the market-makers by pricing function p that assigns
bid and ask prices for an α ∈[0, 1], which represents the fraction of the monopoly
proﬁt that can be extracted from the consumers. Let p(α) = (pb(α), ps(α)) and
note that (pb(1), ps(1)) = (pM
b , pM
s ), the monopoly price that maximizes a marketmaker’s proﬁts conditional on it being a monopoly (note they satisfy market-clearing
to be feasible). The proﬁts earned from the consumers from trades that are executed when there is a pair of bid and ask prices p(α) are a fraction α of the
monopoly proﬁts, which we denote by ΠM.
Access is independently and uniformly distributed. Therefore, the quantities
bought and sold by consumers in response to a pair of bid and ask prices are proportional to the access parameter mj, which means that in an economy with one
market-maker who posts p(α), then the proﬁts created by that market-maker are a
fraction α of the proﬁts under monopoly prices. In addition, independence implies
that for an economy populated by two market-makers j and j′, if j is playing prices
15
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

according to αj and j′ is playing αj′ with αj′ < αj—which implies consumers prefer
the prices by j′—then the proﬁts of j are mj(1 −mj′) × α × ΠM. Independence also
implies that if the prices posted by j imply feasible net trades under monopoly (so
the quantity supplied equals the quantity demanded) then if j loses consumers to
the competition of j’s proposed prices, that implies a proportional loss of quantity
supplied and demanded (in both cases equal to mj′ ∈(0, 1]), which means that
feasibility still holds.
A proﬁle of actions is described by a proﬁle of αj for each market-maker. A
mixed strategy proﬁle is a proﬁle of cumulative distribution functions {Pj}J
j=1 on
[0, 1] that for α ∈[0, 1] assigns a cumulative probability Pj(α) ∈[0, 1] of posting
bid and ask prices that yield lower proﬁts than (pb(α), ps(α)).
The solution concept used here is Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies. An
equilibrium is a proﬁle of mixed strategies {Pj}J
j=1 such that posting a pair of bid
and ask prices p(α) for α on the support of the distribution Pj is proﬁt-maximizing
for market-maker j. As stated in Proposition 2, given a proﬁle of access parameters m = (mj)j∈J such that there exists at most one market-maker of whom all
consumers are aware of, there is unique equilibrium strategy proﬁle {Pj}J
j=1 in
this environment. We now have the relevant notation to characterize equilibrium
pricing with uniform pricing strategies.
Proposition 2 (Market-maker Equilibrium). If m is such that mj < 1 for at least J −1
market-makers, then there is a unique equilibrium that consists of a proﬁle of mixed pricing
strategies {Pj}j∈J and a sharing rule: for a pair market-makers h and g, if mh < mg, then
consumers with access to both will trade with h if the posted prices are the same.
The proﬁle of equilibrium strategies deﬁned on [0, 1] features connected supports [αj, αj]
for each market-maker j ∈J, which share a common lower bound of the support α. The
distributions are continuous on [α, 1). For each j ∈J, for α ∈[αj, αj], Pj(α) satisﬁes
Pj(α) = mj
mj Pj(α),
where j is the market-maker with the largest awareness parameter m. The distribution Pj
16
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

pM
b
pb(α)
ps(α)
pM
s
p∗
0
1
P(α)
(P1
b , P2
b )
(P1
s , P2
s )
Figure 2: Example of cumulative distributions of bid and ask prices when there
are two market-makers 1, 2. Supports for bid and ask prices are the intervals
[pM
b , pb(α)], [ps(α), pM
s ] respectively, p∗is the competitive equilibrium price. One
of them post prices with positive probability mass at the pair of monopoly prices
(pM
b , pM
s ).
is given by
∏
j̸=j
(1 −mjPj(α))α = ∏
j̸=j
(1 −mj).
Proof. See Appendix Subsection B.2.
■
The equilibrium mixed strategy proﬁle described in Proposition 2 has the following properties: the distributions of prices posted by the market-makers are
non-degenerate and are continuous on the interior of the support, and the larger
market-makers (in terms of the mj) transact at higher proﬁt margins than smaller
market-makers in the sense that the distribution of margins between ask and bid
prices of the larger market-makers ﬁrst-order stochastically dominate those of the
smaller market-makers. The reason for this result is that (since access is uniformly
and independently distributed) it is less likely that buyers and sellers have access
to a competitor of a large market-maker than a competitor of a smaller marketmaker, so the larger market-maker loses fewer customers if the spread between
the buy and sell prices is increased.
After constructing the equilibrium strategies, it is easy to see that they converge
17
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

to the competitive equilibrium as consumers approach full access to at least two
market-makers.
Corollary 1 (Convergence to Competitive Equilibrium). Consider a sequence of access
parameter proﬁles mn for the market-makers. If, for at least two market-makers h, g, mh
n
and mg
n both converge to one, then the equilibrium pricing strategies {Pj, p}j∈J converge
in probability to a competitive equilibrium price p∗.
5.4
Allocation Mechanism
The mechanism, in this case, implements the allocation corresponding to a realization of the Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies. Note that if there is imperfect
access regarding almost all the market-makers (that is, if (mj)J
j=1 satisﬁes mj = 1
for at most one j), then for any market-maker the posted price for buying is strictly
smaller than for selling with probability one, and therefore proﬁts are strictly positive. Following Hurwicz (1977a), we can interpret the proﬁts of the market-makers
and the resulting deadweight losses to be both components of the "cost" of operating the allocation mechanism: the allocation implemented by the mechanism
features strictly negative net trades for the numeraire good among the consumers
in the economy.
The set of net trades incorporates the possibility of market-makers making profits by buying at lower prices than they sell. Let Ym be the set of net-trades in this allocation mechanism, which are deﬁned for each market-maker and each consumer
type. Let Yj be the set of net-trades for market-maker j is described by
Yj = {(yj
i){i=1,...,N} ∈R2N : ∑
i
(yj
i1, yj
i2) ∈(0, R−)}.
(8)
Note that if j ∈J, then the set of trade trades with j must be feasible (so the
quantity of the consumption good sold and brought must add up to zero).
As some consumers do not have access to any market-maker, let YNA corresponds to the net trades implemented by the mechanism to consumers without
access to any market-maker, where consumers cannot trade. In this case, only the
null-set is an element of the set of net-trades:
18
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

YNA = {(yNA
i
){i=1,...,N} = (0, 0)N}.
(9)
Then, the set of net trades Ym is described by
Ym = {{yj}j∈J∪{NA} : yj = (yj
i){i=1,...,N} ∈Yj}
where j is either a market-maker (so j ∈J) or j = NA, which indicates that a
market-maker is not available.
Given a realized proﬁle of prices pm = (pj
s, pj
b)j∈J, the message space is given
by
Mm = {(pm, y) ∈R2J
++ × Ym : ∀j ∈J, pjyi1 + yi2 = 0}.
To construct the privacy-preserving message correspondence we deﬁne the correspondences for each consumer type i, where µi
m : Ei ⇒Mm satisﬁes for any
(pm, y) ∈µi
m(ei) that the vector of net-trades for consumer i, (yi1, yi2), is utility
maximizing given the proﬁle of bid and ask prices that consumer of type i has
access to among market-makers in Ai, that is (yi1, yi2) ∈argmaxy∈Bi ui(wi + y).
Then, µm is a correspondence on E to Mm that satisﬁes
µm = ∩iµi
m(ei).
5.5
Informational Efﬁciency
In this case, the dimensional size of the message space incorporates the different
market-makers that make the market: if there are k market-makers then there are
2k different prices posted to the consumers, and there is a subset of consumers who
are not aware of any market-makers.
In this environment, the cardinality of the set of consumer types is N(k! + 1)
as consumers can have access to either any subset of the market-makers or none.
However, since consumers only trade with the market-maker in his accessibility
set that has the most favorable prices, then we can represent the set of consumer
types in the allocation mechanism by a coarser set of consumer types that only
19
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

describes his utility function and the market-maker that he trades with.10 Thus,
the set of types has cardinality N × k + 1, if a positive fraction of consumers lack
access to any market-maker, since all types of consumers that do not have access
to a market-maker have null net trades, and N × k if all consumers have access to
at least one market-maker.
Given a realization of prices of the equilibrium price-posting game among marketmakers, market-clearing of the consumer good among consumers who interact
with each market-maker implies that the message space corresponding to environments with N different utility functions for consumers is Z-dimensional, where Z
is equal to 2k + (N −1)k or 2k + (N −1)k + 1, if the subset of consumers who
are not aware of any market-makers is empty or non-empty, respectively. This is
so because there are bid and ask prices for the consumption good posted by each
market-maker (thus 2k prices), and net trades are deﬁned for either Nk or Nk + 1
types of consumers, and the net-trade implemented for each type of consumer
can be represented in one dimension as we know the price. Thus Z is equal to
2k + (N −1)k or 2k + (N −1)k + 1, if the subset of consumers who are not aware
of any market-makers is empty or non-empty, respectively.11 This implies the following proposition:
Proposition 3. As the number of types of preferences N increases to inﬁnity, the ratio of
the dimensional size of the message spaces of the market-maker mechanism to the competitive mechanism converges to k.
That is, the ratio of the size of the message spaces between the competitive
mechanism and the market-maker mechanism is approximately the number of
market-makers operating in the market. This result is intuitive since the competitive mechanism implicitly assumes a single monopolist market-maker called the
Walrasian auctioneer, whose bid and ask prices have zero spread.
10. That is, the computation of the dimensional size of the message-space does not need to include the information of which other market-makers the trader was aware aside from the one she
transacted with.
11. The net trade can be represented as a quantity of the consumer good and the quantity
paid/received by the consumer of the numeraire is implicitly implied by the budget constraint.
Formally it means we can construct a C∞- diffeomorphism between the message space and a euclidean space of either 2k + (N −1)k or 2k + (N −1)k + 1 dimensions.
20
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

5.6
Contestable Markets
The model of this section showed that the message space was approximately proportional to the number of market-makers. Thus, this model implies that to implement an approximation of the competitive allocation, it requires twice the amount
of information (an economy with two market-makers). We consider an extension
of the model into a dynamic environment with contestable market-making, which
allows the economy to approximate the informational efﬁciency of the competitive mechanism: Consider the case of a monopolist market-maker who can deter
the entry of other market-makers. If all consumers have access to the monopolist, the number of consumer types is N, but a pair of prices is realized instead of
one price in the case of the competitive mechanism. This case represents the most
informationally efﬁcient allocation mechanism in this class of market-maker environments: with informational size N + 1, it’s only one dimension more than the
competitive mechanism. This additional dimension reﬂects the proﬁt margin between purchase and sale to provide incentives for the market-makers to "produce"
the price mechanism.
In this environment, time is discrete, t = 0, 1, 2, . . ., and let β = 1/(1 + r) be
the discount factor. The consumption good is perishable, and consumers’ endowments can be interpreted as a constant stream of the perishable consumption good.
Accessibility Diffusion: Given a set J of market-makers, there is an accessibility proﬁle {mj
t}J
j=1 ∈(0, 1]J. Suppose accessibility regarding a market-maker
diffuses through the economy according to
mj
t+1 = (1 −δ)mj
t + M(mj
t, 1 −mj
t),
(10)
where M is a matching function that represents the diffusion of accessibility through
consumers who hitherto had access to the market-maker, and δ ∈[0, 1) is the rate
at which consumers lose access to a market-maker (i.e., accessibility depreciation
parameter).
In period zero, each market-maker chooses to post prices according to a sequence of distributions for each period. Since the choice of the pricing strategies
does not have any effect on the state of the market, the optimal strategy for each
21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

market-maker is to choose the proﬁt-maximizing pricing behavior in each period,
given the action proﬁle of the other market-makers in that period. Therefore, at
time t the prices practiced in the market are {Pj}j, described in Proposition 2 with
accessibility proﬁle {mj}j.
We are interested in the convergence of equilibrium prices and allocation to
the competitive equilibrium. Since the outcome of the equilibrium is stochastic
as the market-makers randomize their bid and ask prices, we use the notion of
convergence in probability. Let D be the probability that the prices consumers
have access to are posted from a distance ϵ > 0 from competitive equilibrium
prices. The economy converges to the competitive equilibrium when D converges
to zero.
Proposition 4 follows from Proposition 2, as the expected equilibrium margin
between buy and ask prices posted by the market-makers converges to zero if
lim mj
t = 1 for mj
t > 0 and J ≥2. Therefore, the accessibility of the consumers
regarding the market-makers operating converges to one as t →∞. This implies
that a measure converging to one of the consumers has access to buy and ask prices
that are converging in probability to the competitive price. Therefore, the equilibrium allocation converges in probability to the competitive allocation.
Proposition 4. If there are at least two market-makers and if the law of motion for accessibility diffusion (equation 10) implies that lim mj
t = 1 for mj
t > 0, then as t →∞the
equilibrium prices and the equilibrium allocation converge in probability to the competitive
equilibrium.
Entry and Exit
So far, we still need multiple market-makers to approximate the competitive equilibrium. To model a monopolist in a contestable market, we should introduce entry
and exit. To represent the possibility of entry, let a potential entrant be a marketmaker j with accessibility parameter mj
t = 0. This potential entrant can enter the
market incurring an entry cost E > 0, which is the cost of setting up an entry-level
accessibility parameter me ∈(0, 1) (which then can grow according to the law of
22
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

motion for accessibility 10).12
Contestable Market Equilibrium
We will now show how a single market-maker (N = 1) approximates the competitive outcome if the market is contestable in the sense of Baumol (1982). Suppose
that there are only two market-makers indexed by 1 and 2. Further, at a date, t = 0
suppose that m1
0 = 1, m2
0 = 0, that is, in period 0, market-maker 1 is a monopolist
that all consumers have access to and market-maker 2 is out of the market. However, 2 can decide to enter at any period. A monopoly deterrence equilibrium is a
situation where the incumbent market-maker 1 posts a pair of bid and ask prices
in each period such that the proﬁts of a prospective market-maker from offering
better prices to consumers are too low to compensate for the cost of entering the
market.
Deﬁnition 4. A monopoly deterrence equilibrium is an equilibrium where 1 chooses
a pricing schedule and, given this pricing schedule, 2 ﬁnds it optimal not to enter.
The pricing schedule is proﬁt-maximizing for two reasons. First, a higher selling–
buying margin that yields higher proﬁts for 1 would mean that 2 would enter
and undercut 1’s posted offers in every period. Second, the schedule is proﬁtmaximizing in the sense that it yields a higher discounted expected value of the
proﬁt stream for 1 than the expected value of the proﬁts in the equilibrium under
a duopoly if 2 also enters the market.
The proposition below states that if entry costs are high enough and accessibility diffusion is fast enough, then the unique equilibrium is for the monopolist
to deter entry. This is because the entry cost is higher than the expected proﬁts
that can be obtained in the duopoly competition process where market-maker 2
competes with the former monopolist. However, monopolist 1 must commit to a
12. Note that the law of motion for the diffusion of accessibility (equation 10) implies that if 1) M is
increasing and concave in both arguments, 2) me is not very large, and 3) the depreciation parameter
is not very large, then market-makers grow after entry (in the sense that mj
t is increasing over time).
This implies that incumbent market-makers are larger than entrants and therefore transact at higher
expected margins. This equilibrium property replicates the ﬁndings of Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Syverson (2008, 2016) that incumbents charge higher prices than entrants.
23
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

sequence of prices that still yields a low enough proﬁt to deter the entrant. The
unique equilibrium is the sequence of prices that makes 2 indifferent between entering and not entering but that maximizes the present value of 1’s proﬁt stream.
As the discount rate decreases, the present value of the gains from entering the
market increases. This implies that the buy and ask prices posted by the monopolist become closer to the competitive equilibrium price. Thus, as the discount rate
r converges to zero, the present value of any positive proﬁt stream diverges to inﬁnity, which implies that the monopoly deterrence equilibrium converges to the
competitive equilibrium as the discount rate converges to zero. Therefore, even
with a single active market-maker, when the discount rate is sufﬁciently low, competition "for the ﬁeld"—to borrow a phrase from Demsetz (1968)—is sufﬁciently
intense such that the equilibrium approximates the competitive equilibrium.
Proposition 5. If accessibility diffusion is fast enough, such that ∑∞
t=0(1 −m2
t ) ≤C
for some constant C conditional on market-maker 2’s entry, and the discount rate r is low
enough, then for an entry cost E equal or higher than C × πM, the unique equilibrium
is the monopoly deterrence: The monopolist commits to post prices p(π) that yield a perperiod proﬁt of
π = E/
 
∞
∑
t=0
βtm2
t
!
to deter entry. As r converges to zero, the deterrence monopoly equilibrium proﬁt ﬂow
π converges to zero, which means the posted buying and selling prices converge to the
competitive equilibrium prices p∗.
Proof. See Appendix Subsection B.3.
■
The entry costs for market-maker 2 are costs to build up accessibility and can
be interpreted as the costs of communicating information to the consumers in the
economy. If the costs of communicating additional information are higher than the
private beneﬁts, which are the proﬁts 2 obtains from entering the market, then it
does not occur in equilibrium.13
13. We have not performed a welfare analysis to check if the monopoly deterrence equilibrium
is more efﬁcient than the duopoly after 2’s entry. The social beneﬁt of 2’s entry would be the
24
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

In the monopoly deterrence equilibrium, the number of market-making ﬁrms
is N = 1, and because m1
0 = 1, the subset of consumers without access to a marketmaker is empty. Consider an example with two types of buyers and two types of
sellers; the oracle needs to communicate two prices, a price for buyers and one for
sellers, as shown in Figure 3a. The communication for the quantities is the same as
the competitive mechanism, except now the trades "go through" the market-maker
and not the Walrasian auctioneer, as shown in Figure 3b. The messages space Mm
is ﬁve-dimensional: two prices and three quantities.
Ask
Price
p1
s
Bid
Price
p1
b
Consumer 1
Consumer 2
Consumer 3
Consumer 4
(a) Prices
y1
y2
y3
Market Clearing
Consumer 1
Consumer 2
Consumer 3
Consumer 4
MarketMaker
(b) Quantities traded
Mm =
 p1
b, p1
s, y1, y2, y3

(c) Message Space
Figure 3: Example of the allocation mechanism of a monopolist market-maker
with N = 4
More generally, Subsection 5.5 implies that the dimensional size of the message
space of the allocation mechanism is N + 1, which is only one dimension more
than the competitive allocation mechanism, which is N. The added dimension is
reduction of the deadweight loss thanks to prices closer to perfect competition. The social beneﬁts
are different from the private beneﬁts of entry.
25
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

due to the fact that the market-maker posts a pair of prices instead of only a single
price. For completeness, we state it as a proposition.
Proposition 6. The message space of a monopoly deterrence equilibrium requires one more
dimension than the competitive equilibrium.
Proposition 6 is stated in terms of the difference in dimension size, unlike previous propositions, which were in terms of the ratio. Given that the competitive
allocation is the unique informationally efﬁcient (Jordan 1982), we have therefore
shown that the mechanism of the monopoly deterrence market-maker is a secondbest mechanism in terms of information. However, as we have argued above, the
market-maker model has the added beneﬁt of explicitly modeling a market microstructure with intermediaries that facilitate trade.
6
Informational Inefﬁciency without Intermediation
The competitive mechanism is meant to represent the frictionless limit of some
strategic process of price formation. We showed how the price formation mechanisms based on intermediation (where consumers trade through market-makers)
can approximate the informational efﬁciency of the competitive mechanism. In
this section, we consider the situation where consumers have to meet each other
and bargain over the terms of trade. While these models of random matching and
bargaining can arrive at the competitive allocation as frictions of trade decrease,
we will see that they cannot approximate the informational efﬁciency of the competitive mechanism. Therefore, our analysis suggests that intermediation plays a
vital role by allowing markets to achieve informational efﬁciency.
To understand the informational efﬁciency of a decentralized matching and
bargaining process, we need an explicit model. We use the model from Mortensen
and Wright (2002), which is a standard articulation of the modern random matching and bargaining modeling framework.
26
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

6.1
Description of the Matching Environment
Time is continuous. For tractability, we assume that in this environment, the types
of consumers can be partitioned into two types: buyers who are not endowed
with the consumption good and sellers who are endowed with one unit of the
consumption good. There are Nb > 0 types of buyers and Ns = N −Nb > 0 types
of sellers, buyer types ib are indexed by ib ∈{1 . . . , Nb} and seller types is are
indexed by is ∈{Nb + 1, . . . , N}.
We assume that consumers have unit demand, with means a consumer of type
i has a utility function ui(x1, x2) deﬁned for the consumption good x1 and the numeraire good x2. The utility function satisﬁes ui(x1, x2) = vix1 + x2 for x1 ∈[0, 1]
and ui(x1, x2) = vi + x2 for x1 > 1, we call vi the valuation of type i. Let F and G be
the cumulative distribution functions of valuations of buyers and sellers (the c.d.f.
F(x) is equal to the fraction of buyer types {i}i ∈{1, . . . , Nb} such that vi ≤x).
There is a ﬂow of buyers who can enter the market at the rate b > 0 and sellers
at the rate s > 0. Buyers (sellers) then can choose to "enter the market," which
means they can randomly meet sellers (buyers) and trade. Given populations of
buyers B > 0 and sellers S > 0 participating in the market, they meet according to
the matching function M(B, S). Let the buyer/seller ratio θ = B/S be the market
tightness parameter, m(θ) = M(B, S)/S be the rate a seller meets buyers, and
m(θ)/θ be the rate a buyer meets sellers. All agents discount future payoffs at the
rate r ≥0, and to participate in the matching process buyers have to incur a cost
cb ≥0, while sellers have to incur a cost cs ≥0.
When a buyer and a seller meet, one of the two, randomly chosen, announces
a take-it-or-leave-it price offer. Let ω ∈(0, 1) be the probability a seller makes the
offer. If the other party rejects the offer, they both continue searching as if they
had never met; if the other party accepts the offer, the exchange occurs, and both
exit the market. We study the steady-state search equilibrium where the ﬂows of
buyers and sellers exiting the market are equal to the ﬂows entering so that the
corresponding net trades in the competitive equilibrium have an analogous implementation in this environment. That means b times the probability the buyers
choose to enter is the ﬂow of entering buyers in the market, and this ﬂow of en27
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

tering buyers is equal to the ﬂow of matchings M(B, S) times the probability they
trade and exit. Note that as in the steady-state equilibrium, the ﬂow of sellers
entering the market is also equal to the ﬂow of trades, which means that supply
(sellers entering the market) is equal to demand (buyers entering the market).
Note that the bargaining protocol we use is equivalent to the generalized Nash
solution over the joint surplus where the sellers’ bargaining power is ω ∈(0, 1).
To see this, let Vb(x) be the value of a buyer with valuation x to participate in the
market and Vs(z) be the value of a seller with valuation z. A take-it-or-leave-it
offer to a buyer of one unit of the good for a price p is acceptable if and only if the
price generates a surplus equal to or higher than the value of continuing to search
for trading partners; thus, the offer, x −p ≥Vb(x), is acceptable to a seller if and
only if p −z ≥Vs(z). Thus the best strategy for one party is to offer the other
party’s reservation value; thus, the seller offers p = x −Vb(x), the buyer offers
p = z + Vs(z), and a transaction occurs if and only if x −Vb(x) ≥z + Vs(z). Since
the seller makes the offer with probability ω, the expected price of a transaction is
p(x, z) = ω(x −Vb(x)) + (1 −ω)(z + Vs(z)), which can be rearranged as
p(x, z) = z + Vs(z) + ω[x −z −Vb(x) −Vs(z)].
(11)
This is the price according to the generalized Nash solution if the seller captures a
fraction ω of the joint surplus given reservation values z + Vs(z) for the seller and
x −Vb(x) for the buyer.
Given the transaction prices, the values of participating in the market can be
described as follows: The expected value of participation in the market for a buyer
satisﬁes
rVb(x) = m(θ)
θ
Z
max{x −p(x, z) −Vb(x), 0}dΓ(z) −cb,
(12)
and the expected value of participation in the market for a seller satisﬁes
rVs(z) = m(θ)
Z
max{p(x, z) −z −Vs(z), 0}dΦ(x) −cs,
(13)
where Γ and Φ are the distributions of seller and buyer types participating in the
market. These distributions differ from the respective exogenous distribution of
28
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

potential seller and buyer entrants, G and F, as some types choose not to enter if
the expected value of entering is not positive.
Substituting the right-hand side of equation 11 into equations 12 and 13 yields
rVb(x) + cb = m(θ)(1 −ω)
θ
Z
max{x −z −Vb(x) −Vs(z), 0}dΓ(z)
(14)
and
rVs(z) + cs = m(θ)ω
Z
max{x −z −Vb(x) −Vs(z), 0}dΦ(x).
(15)
Equations 14 and 15 show that the value of participating in the market is strictly
increasing in the buyer’s valuations and strictly decreasing in the seller’s valuation. Because the participation values are monotonic, there exist marginal entrants.
The steady-state search equilibrium is deﬁned in terms of a pair of marginal types
of buyers and sellers (Rb, Rs) with Rb > Rs, where a buyer with valuation x enters
the market if and only if x > Rb, and the seller with valuation z enters if and only
if z < Rs. In a steady-state search equilibrium, the distribution of types participating in the market is stationary, which implies that: (1) The measure of entering
sellers and buyers must be the same, and therefore the pair of marginal valuations
(Rb, Rs) satisﬁes the condition sG(Rs) = b[1 −F(Rb)].14 (2) The distribution of
participating types is constant.
The steady-state search equilibrium is characterized by (Vb, Vs, Rb, Rs, Φ, Γ), the
value functions (Vb, Vs), cutoff valuations to participate in the market (Rb, Rs), and
the distributions of participating types (Φ, Γ) of buyers and sellers, respectively.
The Appendix section C provides the characterization of the search equilibrium.
We show that as search costs decrease to zero, the equilibrium distribution of prices
converges to the competitive price and the equilibrium allocation converges to the
competitive equilibrium allocation.
14. For steady-state equilibrium to exist we need to impose some conditions on the distribution of
buyer and seller types, for example assuming that s = b and that Nb = Ns are sufﬁcient conditions
so that we can ﬁnd pairs of marginal types that equate supply with demand.
29
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

6.2
The Allocation Mechanism in the Search Equilibrium
As shown in the Appendix section C, there exists a ˆr > 0 such that for a discount
rate r ≤ˆr all meetings result in trade. For simplicity, we focus on steady-state equilibrium with r ≤ˆr. In a steady-state equilibrium, there is a constant distribution
of types in the market. Therefore, the distribution of types leaving the market is
the same as the distribution of types entering the market. As all meetings result in
trade, these distributions are given by (F, G) with the cutoffs (Rb, Rs).
The allocation mechanism in the search equilibrium (µs, Ms, gs) is constructed
as follows:
As prices and allocations depend on who one matches with, the sets of types
now include all pairs of buyer types ib and sellers types is, (ib, is). Let y be a proﬁle
of net-trades for each possible pair of types of buyers and sellers (ib, is). Let y(ib, is)
be the net trade for buyer of type ib that matches sellers of type is and y(is, ib) is
the net trade of a seller of type is that matched with buyer of type ib. Let Y be the
set of feasible net trades. Then y ∈Y is a feasible proﬁle of net-trades if and only if
y(i,j) + wi ∈X, y(j,i) + wj ∈X and ∑(i,j) y(i,j) = (0, 0).
Note that as a steady-state equilibrium might feature Rb < min {x(ib)}Nb
ib=1 and
Rs > max {z(is)}Ns
is=Nb+1; all types of buyers and sellers participate in the market
message space of this allocation mechanism must specify a price for each possible
pairing of buyers and seller types, which means that there are Nb × Ns prices for
each pair of buyer-seller types (ib, is).
The message space is:
Ms = {(ps, y) ∈RNb
+ × RNs
+ × Y : ps(ib, is)y1(ib, is) + y2(ib, is) = 0 ∀(i, j)},
(16)
where ps(ib, is) is a price assigned for a pair of buyer and seller types. We
construct a message correspondence that is privacy preserving and implements
the allocation of the steady-state search equilibrium.
Let µi
s be a correspondence from the set of environments Ei (here constrained to
buyers and sellers with unit demand) to Ms that satisﬁes µi
s(ei) = {(ps, y) ∈Ms :
y(i) = ys(i)}, where ps(ib, is) is a price for a pair of buyer and seller types (ib, is)
30
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

and ys(i) is the net-trade in the steady-state search equilibrium. If i is a buyer of
type ib who meets seller is and wants to trade, which means vib > ps(ib, is), the net
trade for type i is given by ys(i) = (1, −ps(ib, is)). Otherwise, if vib < ps(ib, is) then
i does not enter the market, trade does no occur, and ys(i) = (0, 0).
Deﬁne the correspondence µs : E ⇒Ms by
µs(e) = ∩iµi(ei) ∩(ps(e) × Y),
(17)
where ps(e) is the proﬁle of prices determined by the steady-state search equilibrium in the environment e for the types that trade in equilibrium (so ps(e, (ib, is))
is the equilibrium price for a pair of buyer and seller types (ib, is)), for the types
that do not trade in equilibrium set ps(e, (i, is)) = Rb if i is a type of buyer who
does not participate in the market for any seller type is (note that vi < Rb so this
type does not trade), and ps(e, (ib, i)) = Rb if i is a type of seller who does not
participate in the market (note that vi > Rs so this type does not trade as well).
Note that since buyers and sellers meet randomly and the transaction price depends on the pair of valuations of buyers and sellers (p(x, z)), prices are not deterministic in the search equilibrium. However, the distribution of realized transaction prices is deterministic, as there is a continuum of consumers. Thus any search
equilibrium ps implies an equilibrium c.d.f. of prices P. Also, note that ps(i) > Rs
if ci ≤Rs and ps(i) < Rb if vi ≥Rb since prices must compensate for search costs,
while consumers who do not trade are the types with costs/valuations in (Rs, Rb).
Finally, let the outcome function gs satisfy gs(p, y) = y, it is a projection from
Ms to Y.
6.3
Informational Efﬁciency
As there is price dispersion in the steady-state search equilibrium, the proﬁle of
prices and the set of net trades is a higher dimensional object than under the competitive mechanism. To see this, consider an economy with an even number of N
types, with N/2 types of potential buyers and N/2 types of potential sellers. For
the matching and bargaining mechanism in this economy, we need to specify a different price for each pair of types (ib,s ), so there are (N/2)2 prices for the indivis31
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

ible good. For the quantities traded, once we have speciﬁed the quantity bought
by a buyer of type ib from a seller of type is, we have also deﬁned the quantity
sold by is to ib. The market clearing condition applies for each pair of trades in
the matching environment. Therefore, the message space is (N/2)2 for quantities
traded. Therefore, the matching mechanism message space Ms is 2(N/2)2 dimensional. Lemma 2 states the main result regarding information size in the matching
economy.
Lemma 2. The matching mechanism message space MN
s is a 2(N/2)2 dimensional.
Proof. See Appendix Subsection C.1
■
Combining Lemma 1, which shows that the competitive mechanism message
space is N dimensional, and 2, which shows that the matching mechanism message space is 2(N/2)2 dimensional, we can see that difference between the matching and competitive mechanisms diverges to inﬁnity as N increases. This is stated
as Proposition 7.
Proposition 7. As N →∞the ratio of the dimensional size of MN
s to MN
c diverges to
inﬁnity.
While Mortensen and Wright (2002) show that as the frictions of trade decrease,
the distribution of prices across transitions converges to the competitive price, so
the matching and bargaining allocation mechanism converges to the competitive
mechanism in terms of allocation. But it does not approximate it in terms of informational efﬁciency.
In other words, the matching and bargaining mechanism requires that each
market participant be aware of all types of participants operating in the market
to form expectations regarding payoffs from participating in the market and bargaining with the other participants. This is precisely the inverse of the intuition
regarding the informational efﬁciency of the market as articulated by the literature
on the informational efﬁciency of competitive markets: that each participant of the
market can use prices as an efﬁcient way to substitute for the information they
would otherwise require to allocate resources without access to market prices.
32
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

p(11)
p(21)
p(22)
p(12)
Buyer 1
Buyer 2
Seller 1
Seller 2
(a) Prices
y(11)
y(21)
y(22)
y(12)
Buyer 1
Buyer 2
Seller 1
Seller 2
(b) Quantities Traded
Ms = (p(1, 1), p(1, 2), p(2, 1), p(2, 2), y(1, 1), y(1, 2), y(2, 1), p(2, 2))
(c) Message Space
Figure 4: Example Matching Mechanism with N = 4 types of consumers
categorized as buyers and sellers.
To visualize why the message space is larger for a random matching and bargaining mechanism than the competitive mechanism, consider our previous example with four types of consumers, partitioned into two types of buyers and two
types of sellers. For the random matching and bargaining mechanism, the oracle
now needs to communicate a price for each pair of possible trades, as shown in
Figure 4a. She also needs to communicate the quantity traded for each pair, as
shown in Figure 4b. Combined, the message space for the search mechanism is
8-dimensional: four prices (one price for each possible pair of buyers and sellers)
and four quantities (the quantity sold by the seller to the buyer for each possible
pair).
7
Concluding Remarks
When evaluating the plausibility of different models and empirical relevance, we
argue that an important factor to consider is the degree of informational efﬁciency.
33
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

For example, one justiﬁcation for using competitive models is that people need
such little information to implement a competitive equilibrium.15
The size of the messages needed to implement an allocation is an elegant measure of the informational and computational burden placed on the agents in the
model. Economists have proved that the competitive allocation mechanism is the
only informationally efﬁcient allocation mechanism. However, as the model of
perfect competition assumes that prices are not set by rational agents but are determined as the prices that "equate supply with demand," models of strategic price
formation mechanisms are needed to provide strategic foundations for the concept
of competitive equilibrium.
Models that explain price formation should also explain how the message space
of the allocation mechanism that is implicit in the model approximates the main
feature of the competitive mechanism: that agents can take terms of trade as a
given without the need to "think" about how they are determined. Thus, in the
present paper, we studied informational efﬁciency in allocation mechanisms where
the terms of trade are set by strategic agents. We studied two such mechanisms:
an allocation mechanism with intermediation (market-maker model) and an allocation mechanism without intermediation (a random matching and bargaining
mechanism).
Models of random matching and bargaining have been extensively studied as
explanations for how competitive equilibrium allocations might be approximated
as frictions of trade decrease (for example, see Gale 2000). However, we show that
this class of models fails to approximate the informational efﬁciency of competitive
equilibrium: in particular, we show that when the number of types grows large,
the random matching allocation mechanism requires inﬁnitely more information
than the competitive mechanism. Therefore, a true random matching mechanism,
where everyone must be able to search across all the people in the economy to
ﬁnd trading partners, is extremely inefﬁcient in terms of information, as it requires
that each agent must have a complete model of the economy. That is one possible
15. The model also needs to ﬁt the data, which, for the competitive model, is most clearly seen
from experimental data (Smith 1982; Friedman 1984; Friedman and Ostroy 1995; Shachat and
Zhang 2017; Martinelli, Wang, and Zheng 2022; Al–Ubaydli, Boettke, and Albrecht 2022).
34
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

reason we do not often observe single buyers trading with single sellers in realworld economies.
In contrast, we proposed a strategic allocation mechanism where market-makers
intermediate trade. Such a mechanism has a few attractive features. First, the
market-maker mechanism better matches certain features of the data, such as exhibiting price dispersion and prices that depend on the tenure of ﬁrms in the market. The other attractive feature, which is the focus of this chapter, is that the
market-maker mechanism requires almost as little information as the competitive
allocation, even when it is used to explain deviations from the competitive allocation. This informational efﬁciency is one possible reason we observe intermediaries facilitating trade between individual original sellers and individual ﬁnal
buyers. It may be a puzzling result that an economy in which market-makers
intermediate trading for each good can be thought of as more informationally efﬁcient than markets where trading is highly decentralized, but it is an intuitive
result: if traders only need to be aware of a few intermediaries for each good they
purchase, the informational requirements are much smaller than if traders need to
form a model of the whole market before engaging in search and bargaining for
their consumption bundle.
Our market-maker model allows us to understand better the informational
efﬁciency of intermediating "platforms" which are just another term for marketmakers (Spulber 2019), and their growing role within the modern economy. Our
results suggest that the presence of platforms with large market shares, such as
Amazon, Google AdSense, and Uber, might economize on information (in addition to any other frictions they reduce) compared to industries with many agents
on both sides of the market. As the complexity of economic systems increases,
market-maker/platforms have an increasing informational advantage over an allocation system where each trader has to meet with other traders directly.
35
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

A
Competitive Mechanism Proofs
A.1
Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Using the conditions of market-clearing, ∑k
i=1 yi=0 and budged balance, py1 =
0, ∀i, implies that the function (p, y) →(p, ˜y) ∈R++ × RN−1
++ , where for 1 ≤
i ≤N −1, ˜yi1 = yi, is a C∞-diffeomorphism. Thus, Mk
c is a (N −1) + 1 = Ndimensional manifold.
■
B
Market-Maker Mechanism Proofs
B.1
Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Note that there exists at least one competitive equilibrium price p∗: as preferences are quasilinear and the utility for the consumption good is non-negative,
demand for the consumption good is downward sloping while supply is given by
the endowment. Therefore, for a price, p = 0, demand is at least as large as supply,
and if it is larger, as utility is continuous, demand is upper hemicontinous; thus,
supply and demand are equal for at least one price p∗.
To see that posting the competitive price is a Nash equilibrium, note that it
yields zero proﬁts. For any market-maker, a deviation either gives negative proﬁts
(if purchase prices are higher than p∗and for selling are lower than p∗) or zero
proﬁts (in the case the purchase prices are lower than p∗and for selling are higher
than p∗). Therefore, there is no proﬁtable deviation for a market-maker.
To see that this is the unique Nash equilibrium, suppose for a contradiction it
is not. There exists another Nash equilibrium where market-makers post prices
to make strictly positive proﬁts. Other market-makers could deviate and make
proﬁts by capturing the customers of competitor market-maker by posting more
attractive bid and ask prices. This logic is the same as deriving the Nash equilibrium of the standard Bertrand competition model.
■
36
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

B.2
Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. Part 1. Existence and characterization:
As accessibility is independent, the competitive equilibrium price p∗is also
the competitive equilibrium price for the subset of traders who have access to a
market-maker.
To construct the candidate equilibrium strategy proﬁle {Pj}j∈J, we consider
pricing strategies described by a pair (pb, ps) of offers to buy and sell the good
by the market-maker where pb ≤p∗≤ps. First, consider the monopoly prices
pM = (pM
b , pM
s ) which satisﬁes the monopolist market-maker problem (which
is to maximize proﬁts given by equation 5 subject to the constraint described in
equation 6). If there are multiple proﬁt-maximizing pairs of monopoly prices, let
(pM
b , pM
s ) be the pair of monopoly prices with the lowest difference between the
buying and selling price that clears the market.
Let j be the market-maker with the largest accessibility parameter: (mj = max{mj}j∈J).
Let
α = ∏
h̸=j
(1 −mh),
and let ΠM be the monopoly proﬁt (that is, the proﬁts of a market-maker posting
the monopoly prices in a situation of monopoly). Consider a function p : [0, 1] →
R2+ such that p(α) = (pb(α), ps(α)) is a pair of prices that satisﬁes
π(pb(α), ps(α)) = αΠM,
(18)
and satisﬁes market clearing constraint (described in equation 6).
That is, (pb(α), ps(α)) is the pair of prices that implements a feasible net trade
for a monopolist market-maker and yields a fraction α of the monopoly proﬁts.
In addition, if for some α ∈[0, 1] there is more than one such pair of prices, then
(pb(α), ps(α)) is the pair with the smallest difference between the buying and selling prices.
This is stated formally as follows: for each α ∈[0, 1], the prices (pb(α), ps(α))
37
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

satisfy
(pb(α), ps(α)) = arg min
(b,s){|ps −pb| : (ps, pb) satisﬁes equations 6, 18}.
The existence of at least one pair of prices that satisﬁes equations 6 and 18 follows from the continuity of consumer demand.
Note also that if a pair of prices is feasible for a monopolist market-maker, then
such a pair of prices is also feasible for a market-maker competing with other
market-makers. To see this, consider two market-makers in competition. Suppose each market-maker j ∈1, 2 posts a pair of bid and ask prices p(αj) for some
αj ∈[0, 1]. If α1 < α2, 1 is posting lower ask prices and higher bid prices, and
consumers who are aware of both market-makers prefer to trade with 1. Since
consumer’s preferences are independently distributed from consumer accessibility, the quantities supplied and demanded from 2 fall in the same proportion
(both supply and demand from market-maker 2 decreases by a fraction of m1),
so market-clearing still holds.
The candidate equilibrium strategy proﬁle {Pj}j∈J is a proﬁle of cumulative
distribution functions on [α, 1]; Pj(α) is the probability that buying (selling) prices
higher (lower) than pb(α)(ps(α)) and that satisﬁes the equal proﬁt condition
∏
h̸=j
(1 −Ph(α)mh)π(ps(α), pb(α)) = αΠM,
(19)
where pi(ps, pb) is given by 5. Note that
1 −mh
| {z }
Prob. h/∈Ai
+
[1 −Ph(α)]mh
|
{z
}
Prob.h∈Ai and (ph
b<pb(α) or phs >ps(α))
= 1 −Ph(α)mh,
(20)
is the probability that a consumer chooses to transact with the market-maker j over
competitor h and α
s ΠM is the proﬁt margin of a market-maker when posting prices
at the minimum proﬁtability level (lower bound for sales, upper bound for purchases), which means its selling (buying) prices undercuts (tops) all competitors’.
Also note that equation 19 implies that Ph(α) = 0 as [ps(α) −pb(α)]G[pb(α)] =
38
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

αΠM.
To check that this is an equilibrium, note that any prices not in the support
of equilibrium strategies P = {(pb(α), ps(α)) : α ∈[α, 1]} lead to strictly lower
proﬁts: If we consider prices (pb(α), ps(α)) that satisfy equations 18 and 6 deﬁned for α < α, proﬁts are strictly lower by construction. For prices (pb, ps) ∈
[pM
b , pb(α)] × [ps(α), pM
s ] ∩P, they either yield strictly lower proﬁts because they
are undercut by prices which would achieve similar proﬁtability in the case the
market-maker were a monopolist, or they are not feasible (that is, the marketmaker promises to sell more than it purchases).
Given the sharing rule, it is easy to check that proﬁts are constant on the support
of {Pj} for each j. If there is only one market-maker j with the largest accessibility
parameter mj, then the equal proﬁt condition (equation 19) implies that there is
an atom of probability in the mixed strategy of the largest market-maker at the
monopoly price, Pj(pM). The sharing rule implies that consumers always choose
to trade with h̸ = j if h posts the monopoly prices pM, hence its proﬁts do not fall
discontinuously on the support of the equilibrium strategy [α, 1] as p(α) →pM.
Part 2. Uniqueness:
Note that any feasible pricing strategy for the market-maker must be consistent
with market clearing. Note that by construction, the pricing strategies on the set
of pairs of prices {p(a) : a ∈[0, 1]} are weakly dominant, as any feasible pricing
strategy (pb, ps) yields the same proﬁts as a strategy p(a) for some a ∈[0, 1], then
sellers and buyers prefer the buying and selling prices p(a). Therefore, for any
market-maker posting a pair of prices (pb, ps) /∈{p(a) : a ∈[0, 1]} cannot be a best
response to a best response. Hence, any candidate for Nash equilibrium consists
of distributions over prices in {p(a) : a ∈[0, 1]}.
Because we are restricted in our candidate equilibrium strategies to prices in
{p(a) : a ∈[0, 1]}, the proof of uniqueness of equilibrium is a proof of uniqueness
over distributions on [0, 1]. Consider an equilibrium strategy proﬁle F, undercutting arguments imply that F = {Fj}j∈J is non-degenerate and the upper bound of
the support for at least a pair of market-makers must include the monopoly price
(otherwise it is a proﬁtable deviation to post the monopoly price). The union of
39
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

the supports for the strategies must be convex; otherwise, market-makers could
increase proﬁts by posting prices in the complement of the support. Additionally,
the supports for the mixed strategies of individual market-makers must be convex;
otherwise, the equal-proﬁt condition will be violated.
Note that there cannot be atoms at a lower bound of the support of equilibrium
price distributions; otherwise, other market-makers have the incentive to post a
more attractive pair of prices p(α) for α in the ϵ-neighborhood of the lower bound
of the support. If there are no atoms at the lower bound of the support of the distribution, the lower bound of the supports for any pair of market-maker must be the
same if the interiors of the supports overlap. This implies that equilibrium strategies for all seller types have convex supports (that is, the union of the supports is
its own convex hull).
As any equilibrium in this environment with mixed pricing strategies satisﬁes
the equal proﬁt condition, the discussion in the preceding paragraph implies that
equation 19 characterizes any equilibrium where the interiors of the supports of
the price distributions overlap. This implies this set of equilibria is unique. To
ﬁnish the proof that the equilibrium is unique, it remains to show that any equilibrium proﬁle of price distributions is such that the interiors of the supports overlap.
That is, for any pair of market-makers the interior of the support of mixed pricing
strategies must overlap.
To see that suppose, without loss of generality, that there is an equilibrium strategy proﬁle P such that there is a pair of market-makers j, j′ with the same accessibility parameter 0 < mj = mj′ < mk who compete against each other posting
prices according to a strategy that is described by pair of distributions Pj, Pj′ on
[0, 1] and the price posting function p that maps [0, 1] into pairs of buying and
selling prices. The distributions Pj, Pj′ have the same support [α∗, α∗] while all
other market-makers post prices according to distributions that have their supports in [α, 1] with α = α∗. In words, market-makers j and j′ compete by posting
strictly more attractive prices to buyers and sellers than all others. Let K be the
market-maker with largest accessibility parameter in the subset of market-makers
ˆJ = J −{j, j′}.
Let Πo(α) be the equilibrium proﬁts per unit of accessibility of market-maker o
40
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

in posting prices p(α); we call that o’s equilibrium "proﬁtability." Since α∗= α, the
proﬁtability of market-maker j of posting prices p(α∗) is
Πj(α∗)/mj = (1 −mj′)α∗ΠM.
(21)
If market-maker o̸ = j, j′ posts prices p(α), its equilibrium proﬁtability is
Πo(α) = (1 −mj′)(1 −mj)αΠM.
(22)
Note that α = α∗, and therefore the equal-proﬁt condition for j and equation 21
imply that
α∗= (1 −mj′)α.
(23)
Finally, equations 22 and 23 together imply that for market-maker o̸ = j, j′ that
its proﬁtability in posting prices p(α∗) satisﬁes
Πo(α∗) = α∗ΠM
(24)
= (1 −mj′)αΠM > (1 −mj′)(1 −mj)αΠM
(25)
= Πo(α).
(26)
The inequality 25 is a contradiction with P being an equilibrium. Therefore, in
equilibrium, the interior of the supports must overlap.
Hence, the pricing strategy described by {Pj}j∈J is the unique Nash equilibrium given the sharing rule that the market-maker with the smaller accessibility
parameter mj has priority in transactions to buyers and sellers in the case of a tie
in prices.
■
B.3
Proof of Proposition 5
Proof. As in the proof of proposition 2, let ΠM be the monopoly proﬁt rate. Consider a proﬁt rate π ∈(0, ΠM) (in slight abuse of notation), and suppose the incumbent 1 considers posting prices p(π) = (pb(π), ps(π)), which is the pair of bid
41
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

and ask prices with the smallest difference that satisﬁes π(pb(π), ps(π)) = π. The
pricing strategy, p(π), yields a payoff of π × mj, if j is a monopolist. We will say
a ﬁrm "undercuts" by posting a pair of bid and ask prices p( ˆπ) with ˆπ < π, thus
pb( ˆπ) > pb(π) and ps( ˆπ) < ps(π).
First, for simplicity, we consider the case where agents are myopic and only
care about present payoffs. Then, we extend the equilibrium to the case when
agents care about future payoffs.
Step 1: One period deterrence game
In this case, agents are myopic and only care about present payoffs so that the
discount factor β =
1
1+r = 0. In this case, the deterrence game has only one period.
For π ≤E/me, if the incumbent posts p(π), then the cost of entry E is higher than
the proﬁts 2 can make after entry by undercutting 1 with higher bid and lower ask
prices. Therefore, 2 does not enter if 1 posts p.
Therefore, if the incumbent posts p(π) for π = E/me (the highest proﬁt margin
that deters entry) and the entrant is playing "no entry," this is an equilibrium if
1 has no incentive to deviate. Clearly, 1’s proﬁts decrease with a lower bid-ask
spread than π = E/me, so there is no incentive for 1 to deviate by posting more
attractive prices to the consumers. While prices p(π′) for π′ > π = E/me imply
that 2 can make proﬁts higher than E/me if 2 enters and undercuts 1. Thus, 1 has
no incentive to deviate in pure strategies.
It remains to show that 1 ﬁnds it more proﬁtable to deter entry than to compete
with 2 in mixed strategies, as described in Proposition 2. Note that the proﬁt that
1 makes in the mixed strategy equilibrium with both market-makers operating is
(1 −me)πM. The proﬁt 1 makes with entry deterrence strategy is E/me, thus if the
entry cost E is high enough so that
E/me > (1 −me)πM
(27)
the market-maker 1 ﬁnds it proﬁtable to deter entry. Note also, that me(1 −me)πM
are the proﬁts of 2 if they enter and compete in mixed strategies with 1, thus if
E > me(1 −me)πM, 2 does not want to enter the market even if 1 plays the mixed
strategy of the equilibrium where both market-makers compete. If E ≤me(1−me),
42
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

2 ﬁnds it a best response to enter the market and compete with 1 if 1 is playing
the mixed strategy, and 1’s proﬁts in the mixed strategy equilibrium are equal or
higher than proﬁt π = E/me of the deterrence strategy.
Therefore, the deterrence strategy p(π) for π = E/me for 1 and 2 chooses to
not enter is the only equilibrium if and only if E > me(1 −me)πM.
Step 2: Inﬁnite horizon deterrence game
The logic of the one period case can be extended to the environment where
agents are not myopic and instead have a common discount factor β ∈(0, 1).
Then payoffs of 1 and 2 playing the mixed pricing strategies in the Markov perfect
equilibrium after entry are, respectively
U1
e =
∞
∑
t=0
βt(1 −m2
t )πM,
(28)
U2
e =
∞
∑
t=0
βtm2
t (1 −m2
t )πM,
(29)
where t is the number of periods after the entry. Therefore, {m2
t }t is the sequence
of accessibility parameters for 2 that satisﬁes equation 10 for t > 0 and m2
0 = me.
Suppose the monopolist can only choose a ﬁxed pricing schedule, posting p(π), π ∈
[0, πM] in every period. The present value of 2’s proﬁts conditional on entry when
1 is following its commitment p(π) is bounded above by
U2
d(π) =
∞
∑
t=0
βtm2
t π.
To deter entry, π must imply that U2
e (π) ≤E. Consider the proﬁt-maximizing
strategy of entry deterrence π that satisﬁes U2
e (π) = E, substituting for B.3 and
rearranging imply that π = E/
 ∑∞
t=0 βtm2
t

. Thus, payoffs for the deterrence strategy for 1 are
U1
d =
π
(1 −β) =
E
(1 −β)
 ∑∞
t=0 βtm2
t

(30)
In equilibrium with entry deterrence the monopolist must ﬁnd deterring entry
proﬁtable: U1
d ≥U1
e . Clearly, equation 30 implies that for an entry cost E high
43
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

enough U1
d > U1
e .
By assumption, m2
t converges to 1 at a fast enough rate so that
∞
∑
t=0
(1 −m2
t ) ≤C.
Now take a sequence {βn} such that lim βn = 1. Let (U1
d(βn), U2
d(βn), U1
e (βn), U2
e (βn))
be the corresponding payoffs for 1 and 2 in deterrence and in the equilibrium with
entry at the discount rate βn. Let {πn}n, with
πn = E/
 
∞
∑
t=0
βt
nm2
t
!
(31)
for each n, be the corresponding sequence of candidate deterrence equilibrium
proﬁt margins for the monopolist.
Set the entry cost E ≥C × πM. Then proﬁts of 1 and 2 if both enter and play the
mixed strategy equilibrium are bounded up by CπM, and so 2’s proﬁts are always
lower than the entry costs. Therefore, if 1 sets bid and ask prices πn, 2 ﬁnds it
optimal not to enter. Without entry, equation 30 implies that proﬁts for 1, U1
d(βn)
are greater than E. Thus, if E ≥C × πM, the unique equilibrium is for 1 to deter
entry, analogously to the one period case.
Note that ∑t(1 −m2
t ) ≤C and 31 imply that π →0 as β →1 and therefore p(π)
converges to ps = pb = p∗as the discount rate r falls to zero and the equilibrium
allocation must converge to the competitive equilibrium.
Finally, relax the restriction that the monopolist is restricted to posting the same
bid and ask prices for every period but chooses a sequence of bid and ask prices.
Then the overall situation is similar but with added tedious notation. The monopolist chooses a sequence of proﬁt shares {πt}∞
t=0 with corresponding sequence of
pairs of bid and ask prices p(πt). To deter entry the sequence {πt} must satisfy
∑βtm2
t πt ≥U2
e ,
(32)
44
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

the proﬁts of the monopolist under this strategy are
U1
d = ∑βtπt.
(33)
The proﬁt-maximizing strategy for the monopolist is to choose, out of the sequences that satisfy the deterrence condition 32, the one that maximizes equation 33. Given that m2
t →1 and is strictly increasing, there is a unique proﬁtmaximizing sequence {πt}, where the monopolist "frontloads" by extracting the
highest proﬁts in the early periods as the entrant’s proﬁts from undercutting are
relatively constrained by m2
t being smaller than in later periods from taking advantage of these higher margins. These proﬁts are strictly higher than the proﬁts from
the strategy to commit to constant prices (π/(1 −β)), and therefore the previous
arguments also apply in this case.
■
C
Characterization of the Equilibrium in the Random
Matching and Bargaining Economy
The equilibrium of the random matching and bargaining model approximates the
frictionless limit when search costs converge to zero (where the Law of One Price
holds). To see this, notice that as the discount rate r goes to zero, the left-hand side
of 14 does not depend on the buyer’s valuation x. Thus, the variation of the lefthand side with regard to x converges to zero as r →0, which implies that x −Vb(x)
converges to a constant as r →0. In particular, for the marginal buyer type Rb we
know that V(Rb) = 0; thus, this constant is Rb. Therefore, x −Vb(x) = Rb for
x ≥Rb when r = 0. Analogously for the seller case, y + Vs(z) = Rs for y ≤Rs,
which from equation 11 implies that p(x, z) is constant on x and y.
Thus, the Law of One Price holds when the discount rate is zero. That is, if
consumers do not discount future payoffs, their expected value in participating in
the market is the expected surplus from the future transaction, which varies by
the same amount as their valuation. An increase in ϵ > 0 in a buyer’s valuation
implies an increase in ϵ in their valuation from participating in the market, so x −
Vb(x) is constant, and prices are constant in regard to buyers and sellers valuations.
45
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

In the frictionless case, as the joint surplus from a meeting is constant
[x −z −Vb(x) −Vs(z)] = Rb −Rs.
(34)
Substituting this expression in equations 14 and 15 when r = 0 yields
cb = m(θ)(1 −ω)
θ
max{Rb −Rs, 0}
(35)
cs = m(θ)ω max{Rb −Rs, 0},
(36)
and so Rb > Rs. This means that among consumers in the market, any buyer’s valuation is higher than any seller’s valuation. Therefore, all meetings result in trade
since there is no point in searching for other trade opportunities since they are all
executed at the same price. In this case, the Law of One Price holds, and substituting equation 34 and y + Vs(z) = Rs into equation 11 we ﬁnd the equilibrium
price:
ˆp = ωRb + (1 −ω)Rs.
(37)
If search costs (cb, cs) converge to zero, then ˆp converges to the competitive price
and Rs, Rb both converge to the same value R, which is the competitive equilibrium price p∗. In terms of quantity traded, the search equilibrium allocation also
converges to sG(p∗), which is the quantity sold in competitive equilibrium.
As equations 14 and 15 are continuous on r, if search costs cb, cs are strictly positive and r is lower than some threshold ˆr > 0, then all meetings result in trade. This
implies that the steady-state equilibrium distribution of operating types (Φ, Γ) is
given by the densities of (F, G) on the types who participate (v ≥Rb, c ≤Rs). For
r ∈(0, ˆr), all meetings result in trade and there is price dispersion as p(x, z) varies
with x and y.
To solve for the equilibrium in this case, note that since all meetings result
in trade, which implies max{x −z −Vb(x) −Vs(z), 0} = x −z −Vb(x) −Vs(z).
If we substitute in equation 14 and differentiate with respect to x, we have that
V′
b(x) = (1 −ω)m(θ)/[rθ + (1 −ω)], which is constant. Therefore, Vb(x) is linear
and setting V′
b(Rb) = 0 yields the intercept. Using an analogous procedure, we can
solve for Vs(z). Therefore, we have
46
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

Vb =
(1 −ω)m(θ)
(1 −ω)m(θ) + rθ(x −Rb),
(38)
Vs =
ωm(θ)
ωm(θ) + r(Rs −z).
(39)
Substituting into equation 11 yields the equilibrium price for the transaction:
p(x, z) = ω
rθx + (1 −ω)m(θ)Rb
rθ + (1 −ω)m(θ)

+ (1 −ω)
ry + ωm(θ)Rs
ωm(θ) + r

.
(40)
To solve for the set of equilibria where all meetings result in trade, we need to
determine (ˆr, Rs, Rb). The market-clearing condition that Rs and Rb must satisfy is
G(Rs) = [1 −F(Rb)].
(41)
Finally, to ﬁnd Rs and Rb, substitute equation 38 into 14, which gives
cbθ
m(θ) = (1 −ω)
Z 
Rb −ry −ωm(θ)Rs
r + ωm(θ)

dΓ(z).
(42)
In the steady-state when all meetings result in trade, the distributions of participating types are Γ(z) = G(z)/G(Rs) and Φ(z) = F(x)/[1 −F(Rb)], and so
cbθ
m(θ) = (1 −ω)
Z 
Rb −ry −ωm(θ)Rs
r + ωm(θ)
 dG(z)
G(Rs).
(43)
Similarly, substituting equation 39 into 13 yields
cs
m(θ) = ω
Z 
−Rs −rθx + (1 −ω)m(θ)Rs
rθ + (1 −ω)m(θ)
 dF(z)
F(Rs).
(44)
These two equations combined with the market-clearing condition determines (θ, Rs, Rb).
Mortensen and Wright (2002) show that there is a unique ˆr such that every meeting results in trade if and only if r < ˆr. The condition that every meeting results in
trade keeps the model easily tractable with positive search costs and price dispersion in equilibrium.
47
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

As shown in Mortensen and Wright (2002), as the discount rate r and the search
costs (cb, cs) both converge to zero, then the search equilibrium prices all converge
to p∗and that the search equilibrium converges to the competitive equilibrium.
Then, as it is the same allocation mechanism as the competitive equilibrium (as
all trades occur at the competitive price), it is informationally efﬁcient at this frictionless limit. We are interested in the allocations implemented by this mechanism
away from the limit.
C.1
Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. With N/2 types of buyers and N/2 types of sellers, the price vector of the
steady-state search equilibrium has (N/2)2 dimensions (as prices are deﬁned for
pairs of buyers and sellers), while Ys has (N/2)2 dimensions. By analogous argument as for the competitive mechanism in Lemma 1, Ms is a 2(N/2)2-dimensional
manifold.
■
48
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

References
Al–Ubaydli, Omar, Peter Boettke, and Brian C Albrecht. 2022. “Testing the Hayek
hypothesis: Recent theoretical and experimental evidence.” PLOS ONE 17, no.
7 (July): e0270489–. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0270489.
Albrecht, Brian C. 2020. “Price Competition and the Use of Consumer Data.”
Armstrong, Mark, and John Vickers. 2022. “Patterns of Competitive Interaction.”
Econometrica 90 (1): 153–191. ISSN: 0012-9682. doi:10.3982/ECTA18937.
Baumol, William J. 1982. “Contestable Markets: An Uprising in the Theory of Industry Structure.” The American Economic Review 72 (1): 1–15.
Boehmer, Ekkehart, and Eric K Kelley. 2009. “Institutional Investors and the Informational Efﬁciency of Prices.” The Review of Financial Studies 22 (9): 3563–3594.
Caplin, Andrew, and Mark Dean. 2015. “Revealed preference, rational inattention,
and costly information acquisition.” American Economic Review 105 (7): 2183–
2203. ISSN: 00028282. doi:10.1257/aer.20140117.
Demsetz, Harold. 1968. “Why Regulate Utilities?” Journal of Law and Economics 11
(1): 55–65.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, ﬁrm
turnover, and efﬁciency: Selection on productivity or proﬁtability?” American
Economic Review 98 (1): 394–425.
. 2016. “The Slow Growth of New Plants: Learning about Demand?” Economica 84 (329): 91–129.
Friedman, Daniel. 1984. “On the Efﬁciency of Experimental Double Auction Markets.” The American Economic Review 74 (1): 60–72. doi:10.2307/1803308.
Friedman, Daniel, and Joseph M. Ostroy. 1995. “Competitivity in Auction Markets: An Experimental and Theoretical Investigation.” The Economic Journal 105
(428): 22–53.
49
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

Gale, Douglas. 1986a. “Bargaining and Competition Part I: Characterization.” Econometrica 54 (4): 785–806.
. 1986b. “Bargaining and Competition Part II: Existence.” Econometrica 54
(4): 807–818.
. 2000. Strategic Foundations of General Equilibrium. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Gehrig, Thomas. 1993. “Intermediation in Search Markets.” Journal of Economics &
Management Strategy 2, no. 1 (March): 97–120. doi:10.1111/j.1430- 9134.
1993.00097.x.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efﬁcient Markets.” The American Economic Review 70 (3): 393–408.
Guthmann, Rafael R. 2021. “Price Dispersion in Dynamic Competition.” Working
paper.
Hagiu, Andrei. 2009. “Merchant or Two-Sided Platform?” Review of Network Economics 6, no. 2 (November): 115–133. doi:10.2202/1446-9022.1113.
Hagiu, Andrei, and Julian Wright. 2015. “Marketplace or reseller?” Management
Science 61, no. 1 (January): 184–203. doi:10.1287/mnsc.2014.2042.
Hayek, Friedrich A. 1945. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” The American Economic Review 35 (4): 519–530. https://www.jstor.org/stable/1809376.
Hurwicz, Leonid. 1977a. “On informationally decentralized systems.” In Studies
in Resource Allocation Processes, edited by K J Arrow and L Hurwicz, 425–459.
Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press.
. 1977b. “On the dimensional requirements of informationally decentralized
Pareto-satisfactory processes.” In Studies in Resource Allocation Processes, edited
by K J Arrow and L Hurwicz, 413–424. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
50
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

Hurwicz, Leonid. 1977c. “Optimality and informational efﬁciency in resource allocation processes.” In Studies in Resource Allocation Processes, edited by K J Arrow and L Hurwicz, 393–412. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Jordan, James S. 1982. “The Competitive Allocation Process is Informationally Efﬁcient Uniquely.” Journal of Economic Theory 28 (1): 1–18.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. “Selection and Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica 50 (3):
25–43.
Kirzner, Israel M. 1973. Competition and Entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lauermann, Stephan, and Asher Wolinsky. 2016. “Search with Adverse Selection.”
Econometrica 84 (1): 243–315.
Li, Shengwu. 2017. “Obviously strategy-proof mechanisms.” American Economic
Review 107, no. 11 (November): 3257–3287. doi:10.1257/aer.20160425.
Ma´ckowiak, Bartosz, Filip Matˇejka, and Mirko Wiederholt. 2020. “Rational Inattention: A Review.” Working paper.
Makowski, Louis, and Joseph M. Ostroy. 1998. “Arbitrage and the Flattening Effect
of Large Numbers.” Journal of Economic Theory 78:1–31. doi:10.1006/jeth.
1997.2350.
Martinelli, Cesar, Jianxin Wang, and Weiwei Zheng. 2022. “Competition with indivisibilities and few traders.” Experimental Economics. ISSN: 1573-6938. doi:10.
1007/s10683-022-09772-9.
Maskin, Eric S. 2015. “Friedrich von Hayek and mechanism design.” Review of Austrian Economics 28 (3): 247–252. ISSN: 08893047. doi:10.1007/s11138- 0150310-3.
McAfee, R. Preston. 1994. “Endogenous Availability, Cartels, and Merger in an
Equilibrium Price Dispersion.” Journal of Economic Theory 62:24–47.
51
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

Mortensen, Dale T., and Randall Wright. 2002. “Competitive Pricing and Efﬁciency
in Search Equilibrium.” International Economic Review 43 (1): 1–20.
Mount, Kenneth, and Stanley Reiter. 1974. “The Informational Size of Message
Spaces.” Journal of Economic Theory 8 (2): 161–192.
Nisan, Noam, and Ilya R. Segal. 2006. “The communication requirements of efﬁcient allocations and supporting prices.” Journal of Economic Theory 129:192–
224.
Oprea, Ryan. 2020. “What Makes a Rule Complex?” American Economic Review 110
(12): 3913–3951. ISSN: 19447981. doi:10.1257/AER.20191717.
Perla, Jesse. 2019. “A Model of Product Awareness and Industry Life Cycles.”
Rust, John, and George Hall. 2003. “Middlemen versus Market Makers: A Theory
of Competitive Exchange.” The Journal of Political Economy 111 (2): 353–403.
Sato, Fumitaka. 1981. “On the informational size of message spaces for resource allocation processes in economies with public goods.” Journal of Economic Theory
24:48–69.
Segal, Ilya R. 2010. “Communication in economic mechanisms.” Chap. 6 in Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, 222–268. Cambridge University Press.
Selten, Reinhard. 2001. “What is bounded rationality?” In Bounded rationality: The
adaptive toolbox. Edited by Gerd Gigerenzer and Reinhard Selten, 13–36. Cambridge, MA, US: The MIT Press.
Shachat, Jason, and Zhenxuan Zhang. 2017. “The Hayek Hypothesis and Long-run
Competitive Equilibrium: An Experimental Investigation.” Economic Journal
127:199–228. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12249.
Smith, Vernon L. 1982. “Markets as Economizers of Information: Experimental Examination of the "Hayek" Hypothesis.” Economic Inquiry 20, no. 2 (April): 165–
179.
52
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed

Smith, Vernon L. 2015. “Discovery processes, science, and ‘knowledge–how:’ Competition as a discovery procedure in the laboratory.” Review of Austrian Economics 28 (3): 237–245.
Spulber, Daniel F. 1996a. “Market Making by Price-Setting Firms.” Review of Economic Studies 63:559–580. doi:10.2307/2297793.
. 1996b. “Market Microstructure and Intermediation.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 10:135–152.
. 2002. “Market microstructure and incentives to invest.” Journal of Political
Economy 110 (2): 352–381. ISSN: 00223808. doi:10.1086/338749.
. 2019. “The economics of markets and platforms.” Journal of Economics &
Management Strategy 28 (1): 159–172. doi:10.1111/jems.12290.
Stahl, Dale O. 1988. “Bertrand Competition for Inputs and Walrasian Outcomes.”
The American Economic Review 78 (1): 189–201. ISSN: 00028282. http://www.
jstor.org/stable/1814706.
Tian, Guoqiang. 2004. “A unique informationally efﬁcient allocation mechanism
in economies with consumption externalities.” International Economic Review
45:79–111.
Vives, Xavier. 1995. “Short-Term Investment and the Informational Efﬁciency of
the Market.” The Review of Financial Studies 8 (1): 125–160. doi:10.1093/rfs/8.
1.125.
Werner, Jan. 1987. “Arbitrage and the Existence of Competitive Equilibrium.” Econometrica 55 (6): 1403–1418. doi:10.2307/1913563.
53
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4860927
Preprint not peer reviewed
