 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000 
Market order ﬂows, limit order ﬂows and returns:
Theory and evidence*
Roman Kozhan
University of Warwick
Michael Moore
Warwick Business School
Richard Payne§
Cass Business School
March 26, 2018
Abstract
We study the relation between limit order ﬂow, market order ﬂow and returns.
We develop a model where market-makers face inventory risk and adverse
selection and show how prices depend on market and limit order ﬂows. In the
model, market-makers receive information through trade with customers and
optimally split their subsequent trading between market and limit orders so as
to exploit this information while controlling risk. Both types of order convey
information and impact prices. Empirically, we show that adding limit order
ﬂows to regressions of (FX and equity) returns on market order ﬂows greatly
improves explanatory power.
The price impact of limit orders is positive
and smaller than that of market orders. Omitting limit order ﬂows from the
regression causes a large downward bias in the price impact of market orders.
Thus there is evidence that traders speculate using a combination of limit
orders and market orders.
Keywords: Market order ﬂow, limit order ﬂow, price discovery.
JEL Classiﬁcation: F31, G12, G15.
*We would like to thank Martin Evans, Dagﬁnn Rime and Gideon Saar for their insightful comments, and seminar participants and discussants at the 5th EMG Workshop on the Microstructure
of Financial Markets at Cass Business School, the Warwick Business School Frontiers of Finance
conference, the Annual Central Bank Workshop on the Microstructure of Financial Markets and
the X Seminar on Risk, Financial Stability and Banking, Sao Paulo. All remaining errors are the
responsibility of the authors. The work was funded by a Leverhulme Trust Research Project grant,
RPG-2013-192: ”The Finance Microstructure Approach to the Economics of Exchange Rates”.
Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom, Email: Roman.Kozhan@wbs.ac.uk
Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom, Email: Michael.Moore@wbs.ac.uk
§Cass Business School, City, University of London, E-mail: richard.payne@city.ac.uk
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000 
1
Introduction
In recent years, market order ﬂow, deﬁned as net, signed trading activity in a security
or currency, has been shown to have a strong positive correlation with returns on
that security.1
This relation is often explained through there being asymmetric
information problems in markets, such that aggressive trading carries information,
and sometimes through dealers’ management of inventory risk.2 In this paper we
build a theoretical model which shows that to understand the manner in which
dealers respond to information and inventory shocks, to focus only on market order
ﬂows is inadequate. Dealers exploit their information and manage their risk using
both market and limit orders and thus both market and limit order ﬂows are relevant
for price determination. The implications of our model are then shown to have strong
support in three separate sets of equity and FX data where we show that limit order
ﬂows have signiﬁcant, positive price impacts, but smaller impacts than market order
ﬂows.
The theoretical foundation of the paper is an equilibrium model of how prices
react to market and limit order ﬂow when market makers have inventory and adverse
selection concerns. It embeds an optimal order choice problem for (a subset of)
traders and we solve for its linear rational expectations equilibrium in closed form.
In the model, some market makers receive information through trade with customers
and in their subsequent inter-dealer trading exploit this information and manage
inventory risk using an optimal mix of limit and market orders. Their counterparties
(uninformed market makers) can partially retrieve this information by observing the
market and limit orders ﬂows of the informed market makers but also take on some
1The research in this area spans inter-dealer trade in currencies (Evans and Lyons 2002; Payne
2003; Rime, Sarno, and Sojli 2010), equities (Hasbrouck and Seppi 2001; Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam 2002; Chordia and Subrahmanyam 2004; Dunne, Hau, and Moore 2010) and bonds
(Back and Crotty 2015).
2See Kyle (1985), Subrahmanyam (1991), Naik, Neuberger, and Viswanathan (1999), Evans
and Lyons (2002), Chordia and Subrahmanyam (2004), Back and Crotty (2015) among others.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000 
of the inventory risk. This leads to a positive price reaction to both types of orders.
The solution to the model generates a number of new testable results. First,
as one would expect, it is optimal for dealers to use both market and limit orders
when exploiting their information advantage. Second, as in the existing theoretical
literature, market order ﬂow is positively correlated with returns.3 Third, our model
predicts that net new limit order ﬂow from dealers should also be positively related
to returns. Net new limit order ﬂow (limit order ﬂow hereafter) is deﬁned as the
total quantity of limit buy orders posted by dealers less the total quantity of limit
sell orders.4
Fourth, in equilibrium, the model predicts that the price impact of
market orders will exceed that of limit orders and we characterize the fundamental
determinants of this price impact diﬀerential. Finally, due to the fact that both
market and limit order ﬂows impact prices and they are (almost always) correlated,
regressions of returns on market order ﬂows alone are mis-speciﬁed and the estimated
price impact of market order ﬂows from such regressions will be biased.
These theoretical predictions are conﬁrmed when our model is applied to three
separate sets of data using several diﬀerent sampling frequencies. We employ two
FX data sets (both obtained from Reuters Dealing systems) and a 3 month span
of intra-day UK equities data (also obtained from Thomson Reuters). We present
results at the daily, hourly and 30 minute sampling frequencies and in all cases the
main results of our model are veriﬁed. Limit order ﬂows usually greatly improve
the explanatory power of regressions of returns on market order ﬂows (e.g. in the
equities sample from less than 10% to over 50% on average). Also, as the model
predicts, the coeﬃcients on limit order ﬂows are signiﬁcantly positive and in most
cases signiﬁcantly smaller than those on corresponding market order ﬂows. Finally,
3For the remainder of the paper we use the term ‘market’ order ﬂow to signify what is normally
referred to as order ﬂow. This is to distinguish it from the novel concept of this paper i.e limit
order ﬂow.
4It is worth emphasizing that limit order ﬂow is not the buy/sell imbalance in the limit order
book. It is one component of the ﬁrst diﬀerence of order book imbalance.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

the empirical bias to the price impact of market order ﬂows created by omitting
limit order ﬂows from regressions is usually negative and is economically large. In
the equities data, for example, the true coeﬃcient is biased downwards by around
25% on average.
Our work builds on several contributions to equity microstructure theory that
study optimal order choice (i.e. market versus limit orders) in markets with riskneutral informed traders (see, for example Kumar and Seppi 1994; Chakravarty
and Holden 1995; Bloomﬁeld, O’Hara, and Saar 2005; Kaniel and Liu 2006; Goettler, Parlour, and Rajan 2007; Rosu 2009).5 In these papers, the informed agents
are essentially choosing between costly market orders with guaranteed execution and
cheaper limit orders that suﬀer from execution risk. Earlier theoretical contributions
that also examine optimal order choice include Parlour (1998), Foucault (1999) and
Foucault, Kadan, and Kandel (2005), but do so in settings with symmetric information. Rosu (2015) is closest in spirit to our analysis: he studies a dynamic limit order
book setting within which traders can choose between market and limit orders and
concludes that the price impact of limit orders is less than that of market orders. It
is worth noting, though, that unlike the model contained here, none of the papers
above present a framework in which dealers suﬀer from both adverse selection and
inventory management problems. Also, earlier papers model order submission as a
choice problem with a penalty for non-immediate execution of limit orders, while
in our paper this penalty arises endogenously via inventory risk and traders’ risk
aversion.6 Furthermore, unlike some papers in which the model requires a numerical
solution (see Kumar and Seppi 1994; Goettler, Parlour, and Rajan 2007), we provide
5Easley and O’Hara (1991), Harris (1994), Foucault (1999) also model an informed investor’s
optimal strategy for choosing between market and limit orders.
But all these models require
investors to choose one or the other – never both market and limit orders.
6For example, Rosu (2009) explicitly embeds the patience coeﬃcient ˜r into the expected utility
of a trader Et[Pτ −˜r(τ −t)], where τ is a random time of order execution and ¶τ is the price of
the asset obtained at time τ.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

an analytic solution for the equilibrium price impacts of market and limit orders.
Our paper also ﬁts into the literature that studies how time-series variation in
market conditions (e.g. spreads, depth and volatility) aﬀects limit order submissions
(e.g. Parlour 1998; Foucault 1999; Foucault, Kadan, and Kandel 2005; Goettler,
Parlour, and Rajan 2005, 2009; Rindi 2008; Rosu 2009, 2015). We contribute to this
literature by showing how changes in deep economic parameters, e.g. the quantity
of uninformed trading and the level of dealer risk aversion, aﬀect order submission
strategies which, in turn, change the market and limit order ﬂows and equilibrium
price impacts.
Empirical research on the informational content of limit orders is mixed. Several
papers show that the diﬀerence in the stocks of outstanding limit buys and sells
has positive predictive power for security returns while others show that net limit
order ﬂows also predict returns (Biais, Hillon, and Spatt 1995; Cao, Hansch, and
Wang 2009; Harris and Panchapagesan 2005; Kozhan and Salmon 2012; Latza and
Payne 2013). Kaniel and Liu (2006) ﬁnd evidence that informed traders use limit
orders more frequently than market orders and Beber and Caglio (2004) ﬁnd that the
direction of limit order ﬂow is correlated with news contained in corporate earnings
announcements. On the other hand, Griﬃths, Smith, Turnbull, and White (2000)
ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative price impact of non-marketable limit orders (i.e. prices
tend to fall after the submission of non-marketable limit buys).
There is also a
sizeable empirical literature that characterizes the relationship between limit order
submissions and changes in spreads, depth, volatility and other market conditions.
(e.g. Holliﬁeld and Miller 2004; Anand, Chakravarty, and Martell 2005; Ellul, Holden,
Jain, and Jennings 2007; Foucault, Moinas, and Theissen 2007; Lo and Sapp 2008;
Hasbrouck and Saar 2009; Menkhoﬀ, Osler, and Schmeling 2010).
Our ﬁndings
very strongly support the hypothesis that (signed, non-marketable) limit orders are
positively related to price changes i.e. more new buy than sell limit orders causes
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

prices to rise on average.
The area in which order ﬂow analysis has received most traction, though, is
in the microstructure approach to exchange rate determination, which has become
an important part of international ﬁnance. This approach is based on the robust
ﬁnding that FX market order ﬂow has strong explanatory power for exchange rate
returns at both high (e.g. minutely) and low (macroeconomically relevant) sampling
frequencies (Lyons 1995; Evans and Lyons 2002; Payne 2003; Bj¨onnes and Rime 2005;
Killeen, Lyons, , and Moore 2006; Lyons and Moore 2009; Kozhan and Tham 2012).
Our analysis reﬁnes and extends the research in this area by showing that focussing
only on market order ﬂows is misguided and that ignoring limit order ﬂows leads to
one’s assessment of the price impact of market order ﬂow being biased downwards
to an economically large degree.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a theoretical
model which generates empirical implications for the relation between price movements and order ﬂows. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 documents the empirical time-series links between returns and order ﬂow variables and tests the model’s
predictions. Section 5 concludes. An Appendix contains proofs of the propositions
laid out in Section 2.
2
Model
2.1
Basic setup
We extend the model of Naik, Neuberger, and Viswanathan (1999) by allowing
dealers to use limit orders alongside market orders in their trading. We consider a
two-tier dealership market with K + 2 identical market makers. All market-makers
are mean-variance optimizers with a risk aversion coeﬃcient θ and all possess zero
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

starting inventory.
Trading in a particular risky asset takes place in two stages. In the ﬁrst stage,
two market-makers trade with customers. One of the market-makers (we call him
MM0) receives a buy order for y shares from his customer base which contains some
information. MM0 demands a price p1 per share from the customer for the order of
y shares. A second dealer, MM1 also receives a customer order that is known to be
uninformed. MM1 charges the uninformed customer a price of ˜p1
In round two, MM0 trades with the other market makers in an inter-dealer
market. He can use market and limit orders to do so. Speciﬁcally, he trades DM
shares by market order, with the other side of these orders taken by the K dealers
who did not receive any customer order in round 1. These K market makers behave
competitively.
He also posts a limit order of size DL.
This limit order may be
executed by a market order coming from the dealer with uninformed customer order,
MM1. We assume that the probability of execution of the limit order is exogenous
and equal to q.7 The price at which both market and limit orders execute in the
second round is p2. A description of the model can be seen in Figure 1.
Insert Figure 1 about here
It is worth noting that one can re-interpret our model as a one-tier rather than
a two-tier framework. In the one-tier structure that is equivalent to our model, the
informative customer trade y received by MM0 can be re-imagined as an exogenously
given signal of fundamental value that MM0 observes. The uninformed customer
trade that MM1 receives can be interpreted as a pure inventory shock. Finally, what
we described above as trading round two becomes the only round of trading. All
of the equations of the model are unchanged under this alternative interpretation.
7Obviously, this probability will depend, in reality, on the likelihood that MM0’s limit order
and MM1’s market order match, which is turn is likely to depend on the correlation between their
customers’ orders. For tractability, we abstract from these considerations.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Thus one can think of the model as applicable to markets with both one and two
tier structures.
2.2
The informed market-maker’s optimization
MM0 receives a customer order (y) in round one from which he learns some information about the asset’s fundamental value (w). We assume that fundamental value
is normally distributed with a zero mean and a variance of σ2
w. The customer order
is the sum of two components x and u:
y = x + u,
where x is the informative component and u is a liquidity component. The component x is informative in that it is a noisy signal of fundamental value:
x = w + v.
MM0 observes x and hence knows more than is conveyed by the order size alone,
although his signal of fundamental value is still imprecise. We assume that v and u
are independent and normally distributed with zero mean and variances of σ2
v and
σ2
u respectively. They are also assumed to be independent of w.
Given the information structure of the problem outlined above, upon receiving
the customer order MM0 updates his belief regarding the value of the asset to
E [w|x] = φx = cov[w, x]
var[x] x =
σ2
w
σ2
w + σ2
v
x
and his assessment of the conditional variance of the true value of the asset given
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

his information is equal to
σ2
I = σ2
w −φ2σ2
x =
σ2
wσ2
v
σ2
w + σ2
v
.
We will use backwards induction to solve for a linear equilibrium of the model
and thus we begin by looking for equilibrium in the second stage of trading. We
assume that MM0 faces a price schedule from the other K market makers of the
following form:
p2 = α + βDM + δDL.
(1)
MM0 must then choose DM and DL to maximize
E [U(DM, DL)|x, u] = (DM + qDL) (φx−p2)+y(p1−φx)−1
2θσ2 (DM, DL, x, u) (2)
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side is the expected gain from MM0’s market
and (expected) limit order purchases at a price of p2, where we have accounted for
the fact that limit orders execute with probability q. For simplicity we assume that
the limit orders execute either in full, with probability q, or do not execute at all,
with probability 1 −q. The second term is the expected gain from his sale of y to
the customer at a price of p1.
The ﬁnal term on the right-hand side of equation (2) is the expected utility contribution from the risk of MM0’s position and the conditional variance σ2 (DM, DL, x, u)
is computed as follows. The inventory that MM0 is left with at the end of the second stage is either DM −y (if the limit orders do not execute), or DM + DL −y
(if the limit order executes).
Hence, inventory is a mixture of two Normal distributions with means µ1 = φx(DM + DL −y) and µ2 = φx(DM −y), variances
σ2
1 = σ2
I (DM + DL −y)2 and σ2
2 = σ2
I (DM −y)2 and where the mixing probability
equals q. The mean value of this mixture of Normals is µ = φx (DM + qDL −y) and
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

the variance is equal to
σ2 (DM, DL, x, u)
=
q
 (µ1 −µ)2 + σ2
1

+ (1 −q)
 (µ2 −µ)2 + σ2
2

(3)
=
φ2x2D2
L + σ2
I
 q (DM + DL −y)2 + (1 −q) (DM −y)2
.
Equation (4) shows that the risk associated with submitting market and limit
orders consists of two components. The ﬁrst component measures the opportunity
costs that MM0 faces due to non-execution of the limit orders. It is increasing with
(φx)2, that is, the higher is the expected value of the asset, the more MM0 will
miss out in the case of limit order non-execution. The second part measures the
inventory risk faced by MM0. This component is a probability-weighted average
of the squared inventory values in the cases where limit orders execute and do not
execute respectively.
Taking the ﬁrst order conditions of MM0’s expected utility with respect to DM
and DL and solving (see Appendix A.1 for details) yields
DL
=
(z1 −α) (βq −δ)

q(1 −q) (β + θσ2
I)2 −q (β −δ)2 −(1 −q)δ2 + θ (2β + θσ2
I) z2
,
(4)
DM
=
−α −DL (βq + δ + qθσ2
I) + z1
2β + θσ2
I
,
(5)
where z1 = φx+θσ2
Iy and z2 = φ2x2. At this point, we can say little about these
expressions as, for example, the signs of the coeﬃcients in the pricing equation (1)
are unknown. However, some features are noteworthy. First, limit order demand
is directly aﬀected by z1. Decomposing z1 we can see that it has two inﬂuences.
The term φx is MM0’s best guess of the fundamental value of the asset based on
the informative component of the trade (x). Thus this component is speculative
trading. The term θσ2
Iy is MM0’s risk aversion multiplied by the risk associated
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

with the total inventory of y that he has obtained via his customer trade. This
component is an inventory risk management term, where we would expect MM0,
due to his risk aversion, to try to follow a customer purchase from his inventory with
a purchase of his own to replenish inventory. The fact that speculative trading and
trading to manage inventory only ever appear in the equations above as part of z1
means that other traders cannot distinguish between the speculative and hedging
activities of MM0.
The numerator of the expression for the optimal market order also depends positively on z1 and, as such, is also driven by speculation and inventory management.
However it also depends negatively on DL. Thus MM0 substitutes between market and limit orders, optimally choosing the mix depending on factors such as the
probability of limit order execution (q) and the price impacts of limit and market
orders (β and δ). It is worth noting, though, that the sum of DL and DM is always
positively correlated with MM0’s signal, x, such that MM0’s desire to purchase the
asset is positively correlated with his signal of value.8
Inspection of the expression for DL shows that it depends on the square of x
through z2, and therefore so does DM. This term has the eﬀect of scaling the limit
order trade down when information is stronger (i.e. when x is further away from
zero). It arises due to dependence of the risk that MM0 bears on the execution
uncertainty of limit orders. This in turn leads MM0’s assessment of risk to depend
on a term involving the square of x and the square of DL (see equation (4)). So,
the solution for DL is such that when MM0’s information is particularly strong he
substitutes away from limit orders towards market orders so as to reduce risk.
Finally, it is worth noting that we have said nothing, at this point, about the
price that MM0 charges the customer (p1). We can solve for this by assuming that
all bargaining power resides with the customer due to potential competition among
8This result is proved in Appendix A.5.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

market-makers and equating the expected utility of MM0 to zero. Given our main
focus is in the second trading round (in the inter-dealer market) we leave this out
in the interest of space.
2.3
The optimization of the market-makers who receive no
customer trade
The remaining K market-makers do not receive a customer order in the ﬁrst stage
of trading and behave competitively in their trading in the inter-dealer market (i.e.
the second round). Therefore the price that is set in the inter-dealer market is based
on information that the dealers can extract from MM0’s market and limit order
ﬂow and imposes a zero expected utility condition (see Subrahmanyam 1991; Naik,
Neuberger, and Viswanathan 1999).
From observing the demands DM and DL the market makers cannot infer variables x and y directly. However, they can deduce variables z1 and z2 through knowledge of the parameters of the model and observation of the order ﬂows. One can
show that;
z1 = α + DM
 2β + θσ2
I

+ DL
 βq + δ + qθσ2
I

(6)
z2 = DL (βq −δ)2 −α (βq −δ) + z1
q(1 −q)θ (2β + θσ2
I) DL
−σ2
I.
(7)
We conjecture a linear pricing schedule of the following form:
E [w|DM, DL] = E [w|z1, z2] = ηz1 + ξz2.
(8)
Noting that the covariance between z1 and z2 is zero, we get
η = cov[w, z1]
var[z1]
=
σ2
w (φ + θσ2
I)
σ2
x (φ + θσ2
I)2 + (θσ2
I)2 σ2
u
,
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

ξ = cov[w, z2]
var[z2]
= φ2cov [w, x2]
var[z2]
= φ2E [w3] + 2φ2E [w2v] + φ2E [wv2]
var[z2]
= 0,
where the penultimate equality in the expression for ξ comes from noting that x =
w + v and w is zero mean. The ﬁnal equality is due to the fact that w has a zero
third moment and w and v are independent.
The market-makers who receive no customer orders are committed to absorb all
market orders submitted by dealer MM0. We assume that they share the market
order equally so that each of the K dealers absorbs a ﬂow of size DM/K.
The
equilibrium execution price is then set such that expected utility is zero:
DM
K (p2 −ηz1) −1
2θσ2
U
D2
M
K2 = 0,
(9)
where σ2
U = σ2
w −η2σ2
z1 is the uncertainty in the asset value from the perspective
of the uninformed dealers.
Using the expression for z1 in equation (6), we can
re-arrange equation (9) to give the optimal pricing rule
p2
=
θσ2
UDM
2K
+ ηz1 = θσ2
UDM
2K
+ ηα + ηDM
 2β + θσ2
I

+ ηDL
 βq + δ + qθσ2
I

=
ηα + DM

2βη + θησ2
I + θσ2
U
2K

+ DLη
 βq + δ + qθσ2
I

.
Comparing this expression to equation (1), and matching the corresponding coeﬃcients we get
α = ηα ⇒α = 0,
(10)
β = θ(σ2
U/K + 2ησ2
I)
2 (1 −2η)
,
(11)
δ = qη (β + θσ2
I)
1 −η
= qβ −qθσ2
U/K
2(1 −η)
(12)
Given these optimal pricing rule coeﬃcients, we show in Appendix A.1 that the
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

second order conditions of the informed investor are satisﬁed if
φσx
θσ2
I
< σy.
(13)

η < 1
2 and q ≤˜q

or

η < 1
2 and q > ˜q and (φx)2 > ˜x2(q)

,
(14)
where
˜q ≡
4(1 −η)2σ2
I (σ2
I + σ2
U)
(2(1 −η)σ2
I + σ2
U) (2(1 −η)σ2
I + (1 −2η)σ2
U)
and
˜x2(q) ≡q

q(1 −2η)σ4
U
4(1 −η)2 (σ2
I + σ2
U) −(1 −q)σ2
I

.
These are suﬃcient conditions for equilibrium to exist and can be interpreted as
follows. Inequality (13) is similar to the second-order conditions in Naik, Neuberger,
and Viswanathan (1999). It states that the market breaks down if the signal-to-noise
ratio in the ﬁrst stage of trading is too high. The left-hand side of the inequality
measures the standard deviation of the aggregate position that the market-maker
would take given his available private information (φx), risk aversion (θ) and the
expected variance of the fundamental value (σ2
I). The right-hand side measures the
standard deviation of the total order ﬂow in the ﬁrst stage and is thus related to
noise in customer order ﬂow.
The second-order condition (14) relates the existence of equilibrium to the execution risk of limit orders. Speciﬁcally, it says that the market breaks down if either
x2 is suﬃciently small or q is suﬃciently large. In both cases, the risk arising from
non-execution of limit orders is small. If q is very large then limit orders execute with
high probability and become very like market orders but with lower price impact
and this cannot be sustained in equilibrium. If, however, x2 is also large enough, the
opportunity costs associated with non-execution risk become larger and this allows
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

the equilibrium to exist.
2.4
The market-maker who receives an uninformed customer
order
Market-maker, MM1, receives an uninformed customer trade, for which he charges
price ˜p1 per unit. As we have seen, subsequently, he submits a market order to
MM0 which executes in full against MM0’s limit order with a probability of q and
fails to execute with probability 1 −q. Thus, MM1 may be left with some inventory
after inter-dealer trade but we assume that MM1 determines the price he charges his
customers (˜p1) to ensure that, overall, his expected utility is equal to zero. In order
to conserve space, and because it is tangential to the main message of the model,
we do not solve for the equilibrium value of ˜p1.
2.5
Empirical predictions and interpretation
In this section we present comparative statics of price impact coeﬃcients with respect
to primitive parameters of the model, discuss intuition behind these relations and
set up our empirical predictions. Proposition 1 summarizes the main implications
of the model.
Proposition 1: Whenever the equilibrium exists (i.e. when the second-order
conditions hold) we have:
1. Price impacts for market order ﬂows (β) and limit order ﬂows (δ) are positive;
2. The price impact of market order ﬂow is larger than the price impact of limit
order ﬂow (i.e. β > δ);
3. The ratio of the price impact of limit order ﬂow to that of market order ﬂow
is bounded above by q and approaches this limit as K →∞.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

4. The ratio of the price impact of limit order ﬂow to that of market order ﬂow
declines as dealer risk-aversion increases.
Proof: see the Appendix.
The main implication of the model is that due to the informed component of
MM0’s trade, his purchases (sales) via both market and limit order tend to drive
prices upwards (downwards). Thus, prices in round 2 depend on both the limit and
market orders submitted by MM0.
The diﬀerence between the impacts of market and limit order ﬂows has two
components. The ﬁrst is an information eﬀect. The informed dealer relies more
heavily on market orders as they are certain to execute, while limit orders run the
risk of non-execution. Thus market orders are more impactful than limit orders. This
can be seen by comparing equations (11) and (12) and noting the linear dependence
of δ on q while the equation for β shows no such dependence.
The second contributor to the diﬀerence is uninformed dealer risk-aversion. Execution of the market orders of MM0 pushes inventory onto other dealers who, as
they are risk averse, charge a premium for bearing this inventory. This premium is
smaller when the number of dealers is larger (as then each dealer suﬀers a smaller inventory shift) and smaller when those dealers are less risk averse. This risk aversion
channel does not eﬀect MM0’s limit order ﬂows as the counterparties to those ﬂows
are divesting themselves of inventory, rather than acquiring it. Again, comparing
equations (11) and (12), one can see that the limit order impact is reduced relative
to δβ by a term that reﬂects the inventory risk premium that uninformed dealers
demand for absorbing market orders.
In equilibrium, the ratio of the price impact of limit orders to that of market
orders is at most equal to the limit order execution probability, q, and, other things
equal, a rise in q will increase the ratio δ/β. So, because market and limit orders
execute at the same price, when their execution probabilities converge then so do
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

their price impacts. When limit orders bear some execution risk, however, their
impact will always be below that of market orders. The ratio δ/β approaches q
when the inventory management costs of MM0 disappear, either because dealer risk
aversion declines towards zero (so that all trading by MM0 is information motivated)
or when the size of the uninformed dealer crowd, K, becomes large (as then the
inventory implication of MM0’s trade for each counterparty is trivial).
The ratio δ/β is also aﬀected by the precision of MM0’s signal and the noise in
the round-one customer order. Figure 2 plots δ/β as a function of σ2
u for diﬀerent
values of θ, σ2
w and σ2
v.
Insert Figure 2 about here
The price impact of market orders increases relative to the price impact of limit
orders as the informational content of MM0’s demand declines (i.e. as σ2
u, the variance of the noise component of MM0’s customer order (y) increases). An increase
in σ2
u has two eﬀects on β and δ. On one hand, it decreases the value of η (the
information content of the combined ﬂow variable z1 from perspective of the outside
dealers) and hence reduces the price impacts. On the other hand, an increase in σ2
u
increases the conditional variance of the fundamental value from the perspective of
the uninformed dealers (σ2
U). As the risk they face increases, they charge higher risk
premia and hence increase price impacts. The latter eﬀect dominates the determination of the price impact of market orders and hence the ratio of δ/β declines with
σ2
u.
Given that we can now characterize the relative price impacts of market and limit
orders, we can return to analysis of the optimal choice of limit and market orders
by the informed dealer and how these choices depend on the signal MM0 receives.
In the Appendix we show that the covariance of limit order ﬂow and the expected
fundamental value of the asset is always positive: cov[DL, x] > 0 Thus, the more
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

positive the signal received by the informed dealer, the more positive is the limit
order he submits.
This is, however, not necessarily the case with the optimal market order trade.
The covariance between market orders and the expected fundamental value can be
positive or negative depending on the model parameter. For example, when the
informational advantage of MM0 becomes extremely large (i.e., σ2
u is large), the
price impact of market orders becomes substantially bigger than that of limit orders
(see Figure 2) and MM0 optimally decides to substitute limit orders for market
orders.
Second, the covariance between market orders and the expected fundamental
value also depends on the probability of execution, q. The higher q is, the smaller
the execution risk the informed dealer faces when submitting limit orders. Hence,
for large enough values of q, increases in x trigger increase in demand for limit orders
and decrease in demand for market orders.
In order to more clearly demonstrate how the covariance between market and
limit order ﬂow is determined, we compute it numerically for a large set of possible
parameter values and display the results in Figure 3. It is worth noting that the
covariance tends to be positive when the variance of the noise component of the
customer trade that MM0 receives is small and also when the execution probability
of limit orders is small. Negative values of the covariance between DM and DL tend
to arise when either the execution probability of MM0’s limit orders is very large
and also when the variance of the noise component of the customer trade that MM0
receives is large.
Insert Figure 3 about here
The fact that the correlation between market and limit order ﬂows is, in general,
non-zero, means that our model has an important empirical implication. It implies
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

the existence of an omitted variable bias when the limit order ﬂow variable is not
included as an explanatory variable in a regression model of return determination.
This bias can become economically very large, especially when the execution probability of limit orders is large. Figure 5 plots the magnitude of the bias from a
simple regression of returns on market order ﬂows only as a function of the model
parameters.
Insert Figure 4 about here
The bias in linear in the correlation between market and limit order ﬂows and
can thus be positive or negative. The magnitude of the bias increases sharply with
the probability of execution. When q is high, the bias becomes negative and reaches
almost −100%. Thus ignoring limit order ﬂow in the return-order ﬂow relation can
lead to a substantial underestimation of the price impact coeﬃcient of market order
ﬂow. In the next section we provide empirical analysis which allows us to estimate
the size of the omitted variable bias.
3
Data sources and variable deﬁnitions
In this section we describe the datasets we use to test our hypotheses. In order
to show that the predictions of the model are general enough to apply to diﬀerent
markets, we perform our empirical tests using data from both FX and equity markets.
3.1
FX sample
Our sample includes tick by tick data from the Reuters Dealing 3000 trading system.
As Reuters is the dominant inter-dealer trading platform for sterling-related pairs,
these data genuinely represent a sizeable fraction of total inter-dealer trading activity.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

We use two diﬀerent samples of FX data. The ﬁrst sample consists of two currency pairs: US dollar per pound sterling and pound sterling per euro (hereafter
GBP/USD, and GBP/EUR, respectively) and the sample period runs from January
2, 2003 to December 30, 2004. The data analyzed consist of a continuous 24 hour
record of transactions and orders. Each limit order has a unique identiﬁer and price,
size and direction are all available. Order events (e.g. cancellations or executions)
are timed to the hundredth of a second and can be linked back to the original order
entry. The minimum trade size in Dealing 3000 is 1 million units of the base currency. This extremely detailed data set makes it possible to continuously reconstruct
the limit order book and both market and limit order ﬂows. We exclude weekends
(between 21:00 GMT Friday until 21:00 GMT Sunday) and the following holidays:
US Independence Day (July 4 2003 and July 5 2004), Christmas (December 24-26)
and New Years (December 31-January 2).
We also remove moving holidays like
Good Friday, Easter Monday, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving and the day after and
Labor Day from our sample. We aggregate the data to daily and hourly levels.
We denote by pt the log of the closing level of the exchange rate at 21:00 GMT
on day t for daily data and the last traded price during the corresponding hour for
hourly data. The exchange rate return, ∆pt, is calculated as the diﬀerence in log
midquotes from time t −1 to t, expressed in basis points. Market order ﬂow mot
from period t −1 to t is measured as the aggregated diﬀerence between the trade
quantities initiated by buyers and the trade quantities initiated by sellers. We deﬁne
limit order ﬂow lot as follows. Net new limit order ﬂow is deﬁned as the sum of all
bid order quantities arriving between time t −1 and t at the best price (either price
improving or best price matching) minus the sum of all oﬀer order quantities at the
best price over the corresponding period. Next, net cancellation ﬂow is computed
as the sum of all bid order cancellations between time t −1 and t at the best price
minus the sum of all oﬀer order cancellations at the best price over the corresponding
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

period. Note that cancellations do not include orders that have been executed. Then
lot is net new limit order ﬂow minus net cancellation order ﬂow.9
Clearly our net limit order ﬂow measure must be related to the dynamics of
order book depth.
Buy and sell depth refer to the stocks of limit buy and sell
orders outstanding on an order book at a point in time. The order book depth
imbalance is usually deﬁned as the diﬀerence between buy and sell depth. Changes
in imbalance can come from submission of new orders, cancellation of existing orders
or executions of existing orders. Our limit order ﬂow measure reﬂects the ﬁrst two
of these components and thus it is closely related to (but not identical to) changes
in imbalance (the diﬀerence between them being due to traded volume).
The second sample contains a wider cross-section of exchange rates and longer
time period. We use Thomson Reuters tick history data covering the period from
January 2, 2003 to February 28, 2014 (excluding weekends as deﬁned previously)
for the following currency pairs: AUD/USD, CAD/USD, EUR/CHF, EUR/NOK,
EUR/SEK, EUR/USD, GBP/USD, GBP/EUR, HKD/USD, JPY/USD, MXN/USD,
NZD/USD, SGD/USD, and ZAR/USD. The data consist of intra-day information
on transactions with the direction of trade plus best bid and ask quotes from Dealing
3000. It should be noted that these data do not contain the quantities traded or the
depth at the best quotes and, therefore, we cannot measure either our daily market
or limit order ﬂow variables precisely.
For this sample we construct a proxy for daily market order ﬂow simply by
counting the number of market buys on a day and subtracting the count of that
day’s market sells. Previous research has demonstrated that order ﬂows based on
the number of trades carries much the same information as market order ﬂow based
9In our shorter sample we observe the entire limit order book and thus limit orders submitted
and cancelled outside of the best bid and ask prices.
We have experimented with using these
subsidiary limit orders to contribute to our limit order ﬂow measure. If we include them in limit
order ﬂows our results do not change in any qualitative way.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

on trade sizes (Rime, Sarno, and Sojli 2010). Measuring limit order ﬂow is less easy.
Without depth information, we resort simply to computing lot as the number of
best price (either bid or ask) increases that are not due to a transaction minus the
number of best price decreases between time t−1 and t. This measure is clearly not
perfectly correlated with limit order ﬂows at the best price as it only counts those
ﬂows that change the quote, not those that add to or subtract depth at a given price.
Our main regression analysis is conducted at daily and hourly frequencies and it
is worth spending a little time justifying the choice of these frequencies. First, we
are interested in the eﬀects of microstructure variables at sampling frequencies that
begin to matter to macroeconomists. We are not concerned with the dynamics of
individual order placements and executions and market reactions to those events.
Both of these points suggest that we should not look at our data at the highest
frequency but at some aggregated level. Given the time-series span of our data, a
daily sampling frequency would seem to ﬁt the bill. However, it is worth thinking
about the three trading rounds structure of our model and how that might map
onto a typical dealer’s activity.
Thus, we also apply the model to hourly data.
Indeed, given the speed of trading in modern markets, we feel that the model is
most appropriate in the hourly context.
Insert Table 1 about here
Table 1 contains descriptive statistics on exchange rate returns and order ﬂow
variables for our data at daily frequency. The average change in the log exchange
rate is 1.614 bp for the GBP/EUR and 3.454 bp for the GBP/USD (see Panel A).
The average daily log return over the longer sample varies from -1.547 bp to 1.300 bp.
Average market order ﬂow for both currency pairs in Panel A is positive, while mean
limit order ﬂow is negative. During the long sample (see Panel B), market order ﬂow
is positive on average (aside from JPY/USD) and limit order ﬂow is predominantly
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

negative (except JPY/USD and MXN/USD).10
Panel A of Table 2 shows a statistically signiﬁcant positive correlation between
changes in log exchange rates and both market and limit order ﬂows for both currency pairs. The correlation between market and limit order ﬂow is negative and
statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level. Similar results hold for the long sample (see
Panel B of Table 2). The correlation between market and limit order ﬂow is negative
and signiﬁcant in 13 of the 14 cases. In the model, a negative correlation arises when
either the execution probability is large or when the variance of the noise component
of the customer trade is large. Given that, in our data, average execution probabilities are moderate, we conclude that the negative sign of the correlation between
market and order ﬂow variables provides evidence that customer trade with dealers
contains a large uninformed component.
Insert Table 2 about here
3.2
Equity sample
Our equity data comprise three months worth of tick data on the FTSE-100 stocks
from the ﬁrst quarter of 2015. The data come from Thomson Reuters TRTH and
consist of trades and order book data from the London Stock Exchange. We have
the ﬁrst two levels of the order book, i.e. the best bid and oﬀer prices and the second
best prices on each side, with associated quantities. For trades we have prices and
sizes. Trade directions are inferred by matching (by time stamp, price and quantity)
the trade information to the updates in the order book data. We remove the opening
and closing periods from the data and aggregate the data to a 30 minute sampling
10We also compute execution probabilities for limit orders from our detailed FX sample. Given
that our model requires a reasonably predictable execution probability, it is worth checking this in
the data. The average probability of limit order execution was 0.362 for the GBP/USD and 0.274
for GBP/EUR. The daily variation in these numbers is small, suggesting that traders can estimate
execution probabilities with some precision.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

frequency.
The variables used in our analysis are as in the FX sample.
The dependent
variable is the return on a stock over a 30 minute interval, measured in basis points.
We measure market order ﬂow in a half-hour period in units of 100,000s of shares
and it is equal to the number of shares executed against resting limit sell orders less
the number of shares executed against resting limit buys. As with the ﬁrst sample
of FX data, we measure limit order ﬂow within a 30 minute period as the net new
limit order ﬂow minus net limit order cancellation ﬂow.
As we are studying 102 stocks, we do not present summary statistics on ∆pt,
mot and lot separately for each stock. They are however available on request. In the
analysis that follows we do not present stock-by-stock results, but average results
within terciles of our stock universe where the terciles are constructed on the basis
of total trading activity in the stocks.11
Panel C of Table 2 shows (average) correlations between returns and ﬂows for our
stock terciles. As with the FX data, market order ﬂows and returns are signiﬁcantly
positively correlated, as are limit order ﬂows and returns. Limit and market order
ﬂows are negatively correlated with each other on average.
4
Empirical results
Our model provides us with two testable hypotheses. These are:
Hypothesis 1: Price impacts of market and limit orders are positive and statistically signiﬁcant.
Hypothesis 2: The price impact of market order ﬂow is larger than the price
impact of limit order ﬂow.
11Speciﬁcally, we rank stocks according to the total amount traded, in GBP, during our sample
period, and allocate the least heavily traded third of the universe to Tercile 1, the most heavily
traded third to Tercile 3 and the remainder to Tercile 2.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

4.1
FX tests
We begin testing the Hypothesis 1 by estimating the following regression model:
∆pt = β0 + βir∆irt + βmomot + βlolot + ut
(15)
Table 3 presents the results from estimating this equation by OLS for the shorter
sample (Panel A) and longer sample (Panel B) using daily data. Across the two
Panels, The price impact of market order ﬂow is positive and statistically signiﬁcant,
as expected. When we include the limit order ﬂow variable, the coeﬃcients for both
order ﬂow variables are always positive and statistically signiﬁcant, as predicted by
the model. Averaging across exchange rates, the price impact of market order ﬂow
(when limit orders are omitted from the regression) is 253.2 basis points for a one
billion base currency order. This value increases to 281.3 basis points once limit
orders are included into the model. The price impact of limit orders is 108.2 basis
points which means that empirically the δ/β ratio is 0.38.
The price impact of market orders tends to increase substantially when limit
order ﬂow is included in the model.
This suggests that, as discussed in Section
2.5, a regression in which exchange rates are determined by market order ﬂow only
is misspeciﬁed and, due to an omitted variable bias, substantially underestimates
the price impact of market order ﬂow. This downward bias is consistent with the
negative correlations between market and limit order ﬂows shown in Table 2. We
discuss the magnitudes of this bias later in Section 4.3 after we summarize the equity
results. Finally, explanatory power, as measured by adjusted R2, tends to increase
substantially and signiﬁcantly with the inclusion of limit order ﬂow.
Insert Table 3 about here
We repeat the same exercise at an hourly frequency (see Table 4). All of the
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

conclusions reported above remain unchanged. The average price impact of market
order ﬂow is 314.5 basis points per billion of base currency traded while the price
impact of limit orders is 156.2 basis points. Thus the estimated value for δ/β is 0.50.
As before, the price impact of market order ﬂow is biased downwards when limit
orders are omitted from the regression.
Insert Table 4 about here
Our regressions might suﬀer from endogeneity problems.
Within an interval,
ﬂows of new and cancelled limit orders and price changes are likely to be simultaneously determined. Evans and Lyons (2002) argue that market orders do not
suﬀer from such a problem, however. In order to correct for potential endogeneity
we re-estimate the model using instrumental variables. We identify instruments by
estimating ﬁrst-stage regressions of limit order ﬂows on lags (up to ﬁfth order) of
limit and market order ﬂows and price changes from both exchange rates. We keep a
variable as an instrument if it is signiﬁcant at a 5% level in the ﬁrst-stage regressions.
Insert Table 5 about here
As shown in Table 5 the daily IV estimation results are qualitatively similar to the
OLS results. The price impacts of market orders are always statistically signiﬁcant
at the 1% level, while the price impacts of limit orders are positive and statistically
signiﬁcant at least at the 10% level for the majority of the currency pairs (the
exceptions are EUR/USD, NZD/USD and SGD/USD in Panel B). Price impacts of
market orders are again larger when limit orders are included in the regression. We
also report the Cragg-Donald test for weak instruments along with the Stock and
Yogo size levels (see Stock and Yogo 2005). Given that Stock and Yogo size levels
are around 5% to 30%, the results suggest that our instruments are indeed weak
for majority of currency pairs. We also perform the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test for
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

regressor endogeneity based on the diﬀerences of J statistics (see Hausman 1978).
Its null hypothesis is that the limit order ﬂow variable is exogenous and we cannot
reject this null for most of the exchange rates. The only exception is EUR/NOK
where we reject the null hypothesis at 10% level. This leads us to favor the OLS
results over the IV analysis.
We repeat the same exercise at an hourly frequency (see Table 6) and the same
qualitative results emerge. For the short sample, however, our instruments are weak
in the hourly data as well - Stock and Yogo size levels are 20% for the GBP/USD
exchange rate and 10% for GBP/EUR. But, for the longer sample most of our
instruments pass the test at the 1% level. We reject the null hypothesis of exogeneity
of the limit order ﬂow variable at 5% level only for EUR/CHF, MXN/USD and
SGD/USD exchange rates.
Insert Table 6 about here
To test Hypothesis 2, we perform a Wald t-test of the following null hypothesis:
H0 :
βmo = βlo vs. H1 :
βmo > βlo.
(16)
Results are given in the ﬁnal column of Tables 3 to 6. In the vast majority of cases,
the empirical evidence supports the prediction we derive from our theoretical model.
The OLS test results are very strong and the IV results slightly less so. The daily
test results, especially using IV, are slightly stronger than their hourly counterparts.
Overall, though, empirical evidence is strongly supportive of Hypothesis 2.
4.2
Equity tests
Finally, Tables 7 and 8 present results from our equity sample, where the sampling
frequency is 30 minutes. The speciﬁcation is a little simpler here, as we omit the
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

interest rate diﬀerential from the model for equities. Thus the model is
∆pt = β0 + βmomot + βlolot + ut
(17)
Table 7 presents average OLS estimates of this model for each of our stock terciles.
It also contains estimates for the simpler model which excludes limit order ﬂows. The
implications of the results are in broad agreement with those derived from our FX
data. All price impact coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant (on average) and in each tercile the
average market order ﬂow coeﬃcient is around 25% larger than the average limit
order ﬂow coeﬃcient. The Wald tests indicate that one can decisively reject the null
that the market and limit order price impacts are the same. Finally, comparing the
results of the full speciﬁcation with that of the speciﬁcation containing only market
order ﬂows on the right-hand side, one can see that (as one would expect given the
correlation structure between ﬂows) omitting limit order ﬂows causes the market
order ﬂow coeﬃcient to be biased towards zero.
Insert Tables 7 and 8 about here
Moving to an IV estimator, where we instrument possibly endogenous limit order
ﬂow with up to 10 lags of each ﬂow variable, does not change the preceding conclusions at all. The t-statistics drop a little, but all price impacts are still signiﬁcant. It
is still the case that the average market order price impact is above the average limit
order impact, although in the IV results the average market order ﬂow coeﬃcient is
around 50% larger than the average limit order ﬂow coeﬃcient.
4.3
Magnitude of omitted variable bias
Our results have important methodological implications for measuring price impact
of order ﬂow using return-order ﬂow regressions. The majority of microstructure
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

work on ﬂows and some of the empirical asset pricing literature estimate the price
impacts of market order ﬂows from univariate regressions. Our results clearly demonstrate that ignoring limit order ﬂow biases the estimator of the market order price
impact. This bias is statistically signiﬁcant as indicated above. More importantly,
the bias is economically large. Figure 5 demonstrates this bias for both FX (see
Panel A) and equity (Panel B) samples in absolute and percentage change terms.
Insert Figure 5 about here
As expected from our model, the bias is on average negative. When limit order
ﬂow is ignored in the return-order ﬂow regression, the market order ﬂow price impact
is underestimated by an average of 28.05 basis points per billion traded for the FX
sample. In percentage terms, the average price impact of order ﬂow is about 12.89%
higher when limit order ﬂow is included. For the equity sample, the bias is 15.77
basis points per 100,000 shares trades or 24.03% in percentage terms.
5
Conclusions
We build a model in which market-makers face both adverse selection and inventory
risk and we allow them to use both via limit and market orders in inter-dealer
trading. We show that informed dealers optimally split trading between both order
types and thus equilibrium returns depend on both market order ﬂows and limit
order ﬂows. The equilibrium is such that the price impacts of both market and limit
orders are positive, but the price impact of market orders is greater than that of limit
orders. The ﬁrst prediction is due to the fact that both order ﬂows carry fundamental
information due to informed trading. The second prediction comes from the fact that
the informed market maker relies more heavily on market orders as they are certain
to execute as compared to limit orders. Furthermore, market orders are typically
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

absorbed by other risk averse market makers who charge a premium for bearing
this inventory, while limit orders execute against counterparties who are typically
divesting themselves of excess inventory.
We test these propositions using three data sets: two years of detailed interdealer FX order data drawn from the Reuters Dealing 3000 platform for GBP/USD
and GBP/EUR, thirteen years of FX data also from Dealing 3000 for 14 major exchange rates and 3 months of equity data from the London Stock exchange covering
102 stocks. Our empirical tests are consistent with the theoretical predictions. Coeﬃcients on market and limit order ﬂows are always positive. In almost all cases
price impacts of limit order ﬂows are smaller than those on market order ﬂows.
More importantly, limit order ﬂows add signiﬁcant explanatory power to all of our
regressions. Finally, we show that univariate regressions of returns on market order
ﬂows lead to market order ﬂow price impact coeﬃcients being downward biased by
between 20% and 50%.
From a microstructure perspective, this paper can be viewed as supporting the
recent literature, which argues that traders use limit orders as well as market orders to exploit private information (Bloomﬁeld, O’Hara, and Saar 2005; Kaniel and
Liu 2006; Rosu 2009, 2015) and reinforcing empirical work that investigates the information content of limit order data (Cao, Hansch, and Wang 2009; Harris and
Panchapagesan 2005; Kozhan and Salmon 2012; Latza and Payne 2013). Our analysis underscores the importance of limit order ﬂow as a measure of trading activity,
and emphasizes the impact of microstructure eﬀects on short-horizon returns. From
a practical standpoint, our results suggest that access to information about limit
order ﬂow could be valuable for designing trading strategies. From an international
ﬁnance/macroeconomics perspective, the paper provides robust evidence that another key microstructure variable, limit order ﬂow, can explain exchange rates at
the relatively low frequencies that are typically of most interest to macroeconomists.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

References
Anand, A., S. Chakravarty, and T. Martell, 2005, “Empirical evidence on the evolution of liquidity: choice of market versus limit orders by informed and uninformed
traders,” Journal of Financial Markets, 8, 288–308.
Back, K., and K. Crotty, 2015, “The informational role of stock and bond volume,”
Review of Financial Studies, 28, 1381–1427.
Beber, A., and C. Caglio, 2004, “Order submission strategies and information: empirical evidence from the NYSE,” Working paper.
Biais, B., P. Hillon, and C. Spatt, 1995, “An empirical analysis of the limit order
book and the order ﬂow in the paris bourse,” Journal of Finance, 50, 1655–1689.
Bj¨onnes, G., and D. Rime, 2005, “Dealer behavior and trading systems in foreign
exchange markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 75, 571–605.
Bloomﬁeld, R., M. O’Hara, and G. Saar, 2005, “The ’make or take’ decision in an
electronic market: evidence on the evolution of liquidity,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 75, 165–199.
Cao, C., O. Hansch, and X. Wang, 2009, “The informational content of an open
limit order book,” Journal of Futures Markets, 29, 16–41.
Chakravarty, S., and C. Holden, 1995, “An integrated model of market and limit
orders,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 4, 213–241.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2002, “Order imbalance, liquidity, and
market returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 65, 111–130.
Chordia, T., and A. Subrahmanyam, 2004, “Order imbalance and individual stock
returns: theory and evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 72(3), 485–518.
Dunne, P., H. Hau, and M. Moore, 2010, “International order ﬂows: explaining
equity and exchange rate returns,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
29(2), 358–386.
Easley, D., and M. O’Hara, 1991, “Order form and information in security markets,”
Journal of Finance, 47, 577–606.
Ellul, A., C. Holden, P. Jain, and R. Jennings, 2007, “Order dynamics: recent
evidence from the NYSE,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 14, 636–661.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2002, “Order ﬂow and exchange rate dynamics,” Journal
of Political Economy, 110(1), 170–180.
Foucault, T., 1999, “Order ﬂow composition and trading costs in a dynamic limit
order market,” Journal of Financial Markets, 2, 99–134.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Foucault, T., O. Kadan, and E. Kandel, 2005, “The limit order book as a market
for liquidity,” Review of Financial Studies, 18, 1171–1217.
Foucault, T., S. Moinas, and E. Theissen, 2007, “Does anonymity matter in electronic limit order markets?,” Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1707–1747.
Goettler, R., C. Parlour, and U. Rajan, 2005, “Equilibrium in a dynamic limit order
market,” Journal of Finance, 60, 2149–2192.
, 2007, “Microstructure eﬀects and asset pricing,” Working paper.
, 2009, “Informed traders and limit order markets,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 93, 67–87.
Griﬃths, M., B. Smith, A. Turnbull, and R. White, 2000, “The costs and determinants of order aggressiveness,” Journal of Financial Economics, 56, 65–88.
Harris, L., 1994, “Minimum price variations, discrete bid-ask spreads and quotation
sizes,” Review of Financial Studies, 7, 149–178.
Harris, L., and V. Panchapagesan, 2005, “The information content of the limit order
book, evidence from NYSE specialist trading decisions,” Journal of Financial
Markets, 8, 25–67.
Hasbrouck, J., and G. Saar, 2009, “Technology and liquidity provision: the blurring
of traditional deﬁnitions,” Journal of Financial Markets, 12, 143–172.
Hasbrouck, J., and D. Seppi, 2001, “Common factors in prices, order ﬂows, and
liquidity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 59(3), 383–411.
Hausman, J., 1978, “Speciﬁcation tests in econometrics,” Econometrica, 46(6), 1251–
1271.
Holliﬁeld, B., and P. S. Miller, 2004, “Empirical analysis of limit order markets,”
Review of Economic Studies, 71, 1027–1063.
Kaniel, R., and H. Liu, 2006, “What orders do informed traders used?,” Journal of
Business, 79, 1867–1913.
Killeen, W., R. Lyons, , and M. Moore, 2006, “Fixed versus ﬂexible: lessons from
EMS order ﬂow,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 25, 551–579.
Kozhan, R., and M. Salmon, 2012, “The information content of a limit order book:
the case of an FX market,” Journal of Financial Markets, 5(1), 1–28.
Kozhan, R., and W. Tham, 2012, “Execution risk in high-frequency arbitrage,”
Management Science, 58(11), 2131–2149.
Kumar, P., and D. Seppi, 1994, “Limit and market orders with optimizing traders,”
Working paper.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Kyle, A., 1985, “Continuous auctions and insider trading,” Econometrica, 53, 1315–
1335.
Latza, T., and R. Payne, 2013, “The information content of high-frequency limit
order ﬂows,” Working paper.
Lo, I., and S. Sapp, 2008, “The submission of limit orders or market orders: The role
of timing and information in the Reuters D20002 system,” Journal of International
Money and Finance, 27, 1056–1073.
Lyons, R., 1995, “Tests of microstructural hypotheses in the foreign exchange market,” Journal of Financial Economics, 39, 321–351.
Lyons, R., and M. Moore, 2009, “An information approach to international currencies,” Journal of International Economics, 79(2), 211–221.
Menkhoﬀ, L., C. Osler, and M. Schmeling, 2010, “Limit-order submission strategies
under asymmetric information,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 34, 2665–2677.
Naik, N., A. Neuberger, and S. Viswanathan, 1999, “Trade disclosure regulation in
markets with negotiated trades,” Review of Financial Studies, 12(4), 873–900.
Parlour, C., 1998, “Price dynamics in limit order markets,” Review of Financial
Studies, 11, 789–816.
Payne, R., 2003, “Information transmission in inter-dealer foreign exchange transactions,” Journal of International Economics, 61, 307–329.
Rime, D., L. Sarno, and E. Sojli, 2010, “Exchange rate forecasting, order ﬂow and
macroeconomic information,” Journal of International Economics, 80(1), 72–88.
Rindi, B., 2008, “Informed traders as liquidity providers: anonymity, liquidity and
price formation,” Review of Finance, 12, 497–532.
Rosu, I., 2009, “A dynamic model of the limit order book,” Review of Financial
Studies, 22, 4601–4641.
, 2015, “Liquidity and information in order driven markets,” Working paper.
Stock, J., and M. Yogo, 2005, “Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression,”
in Identiﬁcation and inference for econometric models: essays in honor of Thomas
Rothenberg, ed. by D. Andrews, and J. Stock. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 485–518.
Subrahmanyam, A., 1991, “Risk Aversion, Market Liquidity and Price Eﬃciency,”
Review of Financial Studies, 4, 417–441.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Model timeline
Round 1: customerdealer trade
Round 2: interdealer trade
Trade between uninformed customer and
MM1 (price = ˜p1)
Trade between informed customer and
MM0 (price = p1)
MM0 submits market
orders that execute against
limit orders from K
other dealers (price = p2)
MM0 posts limit order
that executes against
MM1’s market order with
probability q (price = p2)
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Figure 2: Ratio of δ/β.
The ﬁgure plots ratio of δ/β as a function of σ2
u for diﬀerent parameter values σ2
w, σ2
v and θ. All
plots are based on the probability of execution q = 0.5.
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 10
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 10
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 10
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 10
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 10
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Figure 3: Covariance between market and limit order ﬂow.
The ﬁgure plots combinations of parameter values corresponding to positive covariance between
market and limit order ﬂows cov(DM, DL) > 0 (dark gray) and negative covariance between market
and limit order ﬂows cov(DM, DL) < 0 (light gray) based on our model’s predictions. In each plot,
the horizontal axis gives the probability of execution q and vertical axis corresponds to the variance
of the fundamental value σ2
w. All plots are based on a risk aversion coeﬃcient of θ = 5.
σ2
v = 0.2, σ2
u = 0.2
σ2
v = 0.2, σ2
u = 0.5
σ2
v = 0.2, σ2
u = 1
σ2
v = 0.2, σ2
u = 5
σ2
v = 0.2, σ2
u = 10
σ2
v = 0.5, σ2
u = 0.2
σ2
v = 0.5, σ2
u = 0.5
σ2
v = 0.5, σ2
u = 1
σ2
v = 0.5, σ2
u = 5
σ2
v = 0.5, σ2
u = 10
σ2
v = 1, σ2
u = 0.2
σ2
v = 1, σ2
u = 0.5
σ2
v = 1, σ2
u = 1
σ2
v = 1, σ2
u = 5
σ2
v = 1, σ2
u = 10
σ2
v = 5, σ2
u = 0.2
σ2
v = 5, σ2
u = 0.5
σ2
v = 5, σ2
u = 1
σ2
v = 5, σ2
u = 5
σ2
v = 5, σ2
u = 10
σ2
v = 10, σ2
u = 0.2
σ2
v = 10, σ2
u = 0.5
σ2
v = 10, σ2
u = 1
σ2
v = 10, σ2
u = 5
σ2
v = 10, σ2
u = 10
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Figure 4: Relative bias of β estimator.
The ﬁgure plots the relative bias of β coeﬃcient when DL is omitted from the return-order ﬂow
regression. We compute this bias as δ
β
cov[DM,DL]
var[DM]
as a function of σ2
u for diﬀerent parameter values
σ2
w, σ2
v and q. All plots are based on the coeﬃcient of risk aversion θ = 5.
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 0.2, σ2
v = 10
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 0.5, σ2
v = 10
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 1, σ2
v = 10
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 5, σ2
v = 10
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 0.2
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 0.5
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 1
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 5
σ2
w = 10, σ2
v = 10
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Figure 5: Magnitude of omitted variable bias.
The ﬁgure plots histogram of the magnitude of the bias in market order ﬂow coeﬃcient when
limit order ﬂow variable is ignored in the return-order ﬂow regressions. Speciﬁcally, we estimate
∆pt = β1
0 + β1
momot + ut and ∆pt = β2
0 + β2
momot + β2
lolot + ut OLS regressions independently for
each asset in our sample. Left hand side plots present histograms of β1
mo −β2
mo (in basis points)
while the right hand side plots present histograms of (β1
mo −β2
mo)/β2
mo (in percent).
Panel A
corresponds for the both FX samples, while Panel B uses equity sample.
Panel A: FX sample
Panel B: Equity sample
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Table 1: Summary statistics
This table presents descriptive statistics for on exchange rate returns and order ﬂow variables at the daily frequency.
Panel A describes variables for GBP/USD and GBP/EUR currency pairs from January 2, 2003 to December 30, 2004;
Panel B describes variables for AUD/USD, CAD/USD, EUR/CHF, EUR/NOK, EUR/SEK, EUR/USD, GBP/USD,
GBP/EUR, HKD/USD, JPY/USD, MXN/USD, NZD/USD, SGD/USD and ZAR/USD currency pairs from January
2, 2003 to February 28, 2014. ∆pt (bp) is the change in log exchange rates measured in basis points; market order
ﬂow mot is the aggregated diﬀerence between the trade quantities initiated by sellers and the of trade quantities
initiated by buyers for the foreign (base) currency over the day; limit order ﬂow lot is net new limit orders less net
cancelled orders at the best over the day. Both order ﬂow variables are measured in billions of the base currency. q
is the probability of limit order execution which is deﬁned as the ratio of the total quantity of limit orders executed
during the day to the total quantity of limit orders submitted during the same day.
Panel A: 2003-2004 sample
∆pt
mot
lot
GBP/USD
3.464 [56.80]
0.077 [0.285]
-0.079 [0.351]
GBP/EUR
1.614 [46.05]
0.046 [0.266]
-0.102 [0.317]
Panel B: 2003-2014 sample
∆pt
mot
lot
AUD/USD
0.805 [89.80]
0.059 [0.354]
-0.021 [0.128]
CAD/USD
-0.647 [63.06]
0.079 [0.240]
-0.020 [0.115]
EUR/CHF
-1.547 [72.99]
0.001 [0.011]
-0.005 [0.055]
EUR/NOK
0.595 [48.93]
0.010 [0.087]
-0.102 [0.389]
EUR/SEK
-0.206 [46.04]
0.021 [0.087]
-0.009 [0.403]
EUR/USD
1.259 [64.88]
0.021 [0.112]
-0.022 [0.113]
GBP/USD
0.215 [59.70]
0.042 [0.227]
-0.024 [0.123]
GBP/EUR
0.279 [50.28]
0.039 [0.181]
-0.008 [0.125]
HKD/USD
-0.061 [3.360]
0.009 [0.061]
-0.004 [0.030]
JPY/USD
0.216 [71.53]
-0.002 [0.038]
0.005 [0.074]
MXN/USD
-0.295 [76.52]
0.040 [0.154]
0.037 [0.467]
NZD/USD
1.300 [90.90]
0.024 [0.126]
-0.001 [0.102]
SGD/USD
-1.058 [35.23]
0.029 [0.096]
-0.022 [0.066]
ZAR/USD
0.878 [118.0]
0.057 [0.118]
-0.012 [0.381]
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Table 2: Correlations
This table presents descriptive statistics for returns and order ﬂow variables.
Panel A describes variables for
GBP/USD and EUR/GBP currency pairs from January 2, 2003 to December 30, 2004, sampled daily; Panel
B describes variables for AUD/USD, CAD/USD, EUR/CHF, EUR/NOK, EUR/SEK, EUR/USD, GBP/USD,
GBP/EUR, HKD/USD, JPY/USD, MXN/USD, NZD/USD, SGD/USD and ZAR/USD currency pairs from January 2, 2003 to February 28, 2014, again at a daily sampling. Panel C is constructed from our FTSE-100 stock data
covering the ﬁrst quarter of 2015 and uses a 30 minute sampling frequency. We present average results for three
turnover-based terciles of the stock universe. ∆pt is the change in log exchange rates; market order ﬂow mot is the
aggregated diﬀerence between the trade quantities initiated by sellers and the trade quantities initiated by buyers;
limit order ﬂow lot is net new limit orders less net cancelled orders at the best over the day. For the currency data
order ﬂow variables are measured in billions of the base currency while for the equity data they are in 10,000s of
shares. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: 2003-2004 sample
corr(∆pt, mot) corr(∆pt, lot)
corr(mot, lot)
GBP/USD
0.389∗∗∗
0.475∗∗∗
-0.350∗∗∗
GBP/EUR
0.286∗∗∗
0.425∗∗∗
-0.516∗∗∗
Panel B: 2003-2014 sample
corr(∆pt, mot) corr(∆pt, lot)
corr(mot, lot)
AUD/USD
0.536∗∗∗
-0.054∗∗∗
-0.389∗∗∗
CAD/USD
0.518∗∗∗
0.096∗∗∗
-0.295∗∗∗
EUR/CHF
0.121∗∗∗
0.272∗∗∗
-0.076∗∗∗
EUR/NOK
0.509∗∗∗
0.080∗∗∗
0.054∗∗∗
EUR/SEK
0.464∗∗∗
0.063∗∗∗
-0.047∗∗
EUR/USD
0.563∗∗∗
0.191∗∗∗
-0.204∗∗∗
HKD/USD
0.453∗∗∗
0.037∗
-0.178∗∗∗
GBP/USD
0.559∗∗∗
-0.025
-0.339∗∗∗
GBP/EUR
0.399∗∗∗
0.048∗∗
-0.195∗∗∗
JPY/USD
0.246∗∗∗
0.334∗∗∗
-0.090∗∗∗
MXN/USD
0.302∗∗∗
0.077∗∗∗
0.038∗
NZD/USD
0.475∗∗∗
0.092∗∗∗
-0.301∗∗∗
SGD/USD
0.514∗∗∗
0.108∗∗∗
-0.395∗∗∗
ZAR/USD
0.506∗∗∗
0.034
-0.040∗
Panel C: Equity data sample (30 minute sampling)
corr(∆pt, mot) corr(∆pt, lot)
corr(mot, lot)
Tercile 1
0.267∗∗∗
0.668∗∗∗
-0.107∗∗∗
Tercile 2
0.280∗∗∗
0.637∗∗∗
-0.134∗∗∗
Tercile 3
0.254∗∗∗
0.602∗∗∗
-0.167∗∗∗
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Table 3: Daily regressions of FX returns on market and limit order ﬂows: OLS
Estimation
This table presents OLS estimation results of the return-order ﬂow regression ∆pt = β0 + βir∆irt + βmomot + ut
and then the model ∆pt = β0 + βir∆irt + βmomot + βlolot + ut based on daily data for diﬀerent exchange rates.
Here ∆pt is the change in log exchange rates (in basis points), mot is market ﬂow deﬁnes as the aggregated diﬀerence
between the number of trades initiated by sellers and the number of trades initiated by buyers (oﬀer minus bid) for
the foreign (base) currency over the day (in billions), lot is limit order ﬂow deﬁnes as the net number of new limit
orders less the net number of cancelled orders at the best price over the day (in billions), ∆irt is the changes in
corresponding interest rate diﬀerential (coeﬃcients β0 and βir are not reported for brevity and are available upon
request). Panel A presents estimation results for the two sterling exchange rates using shorter but more detailed
sample from January 2, 2003 to December 30, 2004; Panel B presents estimation results for broader cross-section
of currency pairs using longer sample from January 2, 2003 to February 28, 2014. Panel C presents averages of
the coeﬃcient estimates and R2s over both samples. T-statistics are given in parentheses and are computed based
on standard errors are adjusted for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity. The Wald test column presents t-test
statistics and p-values (in squared brackets) for the null that the coeﬃcients on market and limit order ﬂow are the
same.
Panel A: 2003-2004 sample
mot
¯R2
mot
lot
¯R2
Wald test
GBP/USD
76.53 (9.35)
14.80%
125.2 (20.1)
112.3 (22.2)
57.61%
1.98 (0.02)
GBP/EUR
49.23 (6.57)
8.22%
119.2 (19.0)
113.3 (21.6)
52.89%
1.03 (0.15)
Panel B: 2003-2014 sample
mot
¯R2
mot
lot
¯R2
Wald test
AUD/USD
137.2 (25.9)
29.56%
151.8 (23.5)
106.1 (3.63)
31.47%
1.21 (0.11)
CAD/USD
137.1 (26.8)
27.18%
158.3 (26.6)
143.9 (7.54)
33.42%
0.44 (0.33)
EUR/CHF
937.1 (5.83)
5.16%
999.9 (6.50)
122.5 (5.81)
7.22%
5.88 (0.00)
EUR/NOK
283.9 (20.9)
27.17%
282.5 (20.7)
6.17 (2.62)
27.37%
19.2 (0.00)
EUR/SEK
242.8 (17.5)
21.93%
244.8 (17.7)
12.68 (3.65)
22.77%
16.6 (0.00)
EUR/USD
322.2 (28.4)
31.55%
358.5 (32.1)
177.0 (11.7)
40.70%
10.4 (0.00)
GBP/USD
126.7 (31.3)
33.37%
140.3 (35.7)
73.7 (7.32)
36.27%
6.67 (0.00)
GBP/EUR
96.72 (16.8)
16.09%
103.3 (17.4)
50.09 (4.30)
17.78%
4.72 (0.00)
HKD/USD
24.99 (13.4)
21.96%
26.2 (13.4)
14.14 (3.35)
23.48%
3.12 (0.00)
JPY/USD
444.5 (8.20)
5.89%
503.7 (9.76)
343.3 (12.9)
18.42%
3.17 (0.00)
MXN/USD
140.4 (11.4)
8.84%
138.8 (11.2)
12.43 (2.93)
9.44%
9.56 (0.00)
NZD/USD
347.1 (21.7)
22.95%
408.6 (26.1)
237.3 (10.6)
29.41%
7.80 (0.00)
SGD/USD
182.9 (17.8)
25.73%
234.9 (21.9)
192.2 (10.7)
36.95%
3.14 (0.00)
ZAR/USD
502.6 (19.0)
25.69%
504.8 (19.2)
13.85 (2.60)
25.86%
17.8 (0.00)
Panel C: Averages
mot
¯R2
mot
lot
¯R2
Average
253.2
20.38%
281.3
108.19
29.44%
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Table 4: Hourly regressions of FX returns on market and limit order ﬂows: OLS
This table presents OLS estimation results of the return-order ﬂow regression ∆pt = β0 + βir∆irt + βmomot + ut
and then the model ∆pt = β0 + βir∆irt + βmomot + βlolot + ut based on hourly data for diﬀerent exchange rates.
Here ∆pt is the change in log exchange rates (in basis points), mot is market ﬂow deﬁnes as the aggregated diﬀerence
between the number of trades initiated by sellers and the number of trades initiated by buyers (oﬀer minus bid) for
the foreign (base) currency over the hour (in billions), lot is limit order ﬂow deﬁnes as the net number of new limit
orders less the net number of cancelled orders at the best price over the hour (in billions), ∆irt is the changes in
corresponding interest rate diﬀerential (coeﬃcients β0 and βir are not reported for brevity and are available upon
request). Panel A presents estimation results for the two sterling exchange rates using shorter but more detailed
sample from January 2, 2003 to December 30, 2004; Panel B presents estimation results for broader cross-section
of currency pairs using longer sample from January 2, 2003 to February 28, 2014. Panel C presents averages of
the coeﬃcient estimates and R2s over both samples. T-statistics are given in parentheses and are computed based
on standard errors are adjusted for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity. The Wald test column presents t-test
statistics and p-values (in squared brackets) for the null that the coeﬃcients on market and limit order ﬂow are the
same.
Panel A: 2003-2004 sample
mot
¯R2
mot
lot
¯R2
Wald test
GBP/USD
90.36 (50.5)
17.80%
140.8 (98.1)
113.9 (95.3)
53.12%
17.9 [0.00]
GBP/EUR
69.53 (41.0)
12.40%
130.8 (82.3)
103.6 (77.8)
41.73%
18.3 [0.00]
Panel B: 2003-2014 sample
mot
¯R2
mot
lot
¯R2
Wald test
AUD/USD
194.7 (77.7)
30.19%
217.6 (80.7)
198.1 (40.5)
34.84%
3.98 [0.00]
CAD/USD
182.6 (76.0)
27.79%
209.6 (80.5)
215.3 (44.9)
36.35%
-1.25 [0.21]
EUR/CHF
1105.4 (7.31)
6.33%
1171.9 (7.92)
234.7 (8.47)
8.66%
6.16 [0.00]
EUR/NOK
356.0 (62.0)
23.73%
355.1 (61.7)
13.08 (11.6)
24.10%
58.4 [0.00]
EUR/SEK
311.3 (61.7)
24.19%
312.3 (61.9)
13.24 (7.00)
24.67%
55.9 [0.00]
EUR/USD
345.5 (82.1)
24.02%
372.3 (91.0)
283.5 (72.4)
42.22%
15.1 [0.00]
GBP/USD
159.3 (75.8)
25.94%
180.5 (81.9)
168.5 (48.9)
35.48%
3.51 [0.00]
GBP/EUR
122.9 (47.7)
14.41%
132.1 (50.4)
146.1 (38.0)
20.71%
-3.39 [0.00]
HKD/USD
34.63 (49.9)
22.96%
38.55 (45.3)
28.19 (18.2)
26.49%
8.19 [0.00]
JPY/USD
489.4 (20.2)
4.33%
543.3 (23.7)
405.8 (59.3)
20.72%
5.69 [0.00]
MXN/USD
244.9 (17.3)
14.83%
242.2 (17.1)
21.63 (8.16)
16.63%
15.2 [0.00]
NZD/USD
406.9 (62.2)
18.89%
484.0 (70.5)
349.6 (48.0)
28.17%
15.8 [0.00]
SGD/USD
245.6 (70.0)
26.86%
291.6 (60.5)
178.3 (15.7)
32.68%
12.8 [0.00]
ZAR/USD
673.6 (62.8)
24.30%
676.4 (62.8)
25.49 (11.4)
24.73%
59.8 [0.00]
Panel C: Averages
mot
¯R2
mot
lot
¯R2
Average
314.5
19.94%
343.7
156.2
25.79%
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Table 5: Daily regressions of FX returns on market and limit order ﬂows: IV GMM
This table presents estimation results of the return-order ﬂow regression ∆pt = β0 +βir∆irt +βmomot +βlolot +ut
based on daily data. Here ∆pt is the change in log exchange rates (in basis points), mot is market ﬂow deﬁnes
as the aggregated diﬀerence between the number of trades initiated by sellers and the number of trades initiated
by buyers (oﬀer minus bid) for the foreign (base) currency over the day (in billions), lot is limit order ﬂow deﬁnes
as the net number of new limit orders less the net number of cancelled orders at the best price over the day (in
billions), ∆irt is the changes in corresponding interest rate diﬀerential (coeﬃcients β0 and βir are not reported for
brevity and are available upon request). The models are estimated using the instrumental variable GMM approach.
We use up to ﬁve lags of market and net new limit order ﬂow variables across all markets, which are statistically
signiﬁcant in the ﬁrst-stage regressions at the 5% level. Panel A presents estimation results for the two sterling
exchange rates using shorter but more detailed sample from January 2, 2003 to December 30, 2004; Panel B presents
estimation results for broader cross-section of currency pairs using longer sample from January 2, 2003 to February
28, 2014. Panel C presents averages of the coeﬃcient estimates and R2s over both samples. T-statistics are given
in parentheses and are computed based on standard errors are adjusted for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity.
The Weak instruments test row presents the Cragg-Donald test statistics along with the Stock and Yogo size levels.
The row labelled Endogeneity test presents values of the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test statistic (based on diﬀerences
of J statistics) and corresponding p-values of the regressor endogeneity test for the limit order ﬂow variable. The
null hypothesis is that the lo variable is exogenous. The Wald test column presents t-test statistics and p-values (in
squared brackets) for the null that the coeﬃcients on market and limit order ﬂow are the same.
Panel A: 2003-2004 sample
mot
lot
¯R2
Weak instr.
test
Endogeneity
test
Wald test
GBP/USD
115.12 (5.12)
88.17 (1.65)
55.33%
6.63 [0.25]
0.16 [0.69]
0.83 [0.20]
GBP/EUR
145.67 (4.64)
156.22 (3.14)
46.30%
5.28 [0.25]
0.80 [0.19]
-0.54 [0.30]
Panel B: 2003-2014 sample
mot
lot
¯R2
Weak instr.
test
Endogeneity
test
Wald test
AUD/USD
167.35 (11.0)
178.10 (2.02)
33.41%
7.56 [0.20]
0.39 [0.53]
-0.14 [0.44]
CAD/USD
164.78 (13.0)
161.30 (1.93)
36.15%
5.33 [0.30]
0.02 [0.88]
0.05 [0.48]
EUR/CHF
916.93 (5.05)
137.70 (2.00)
7.03%
10.5 [0.20]
0.25 [0.62]
4.21 [0.00]
EUR/NOK
280.19 (16.0)
30.15 (2.20)
25.33%
31.2 [0.05]
2.74 [0.10]
11.0 [0.00]
EUR/SEK
266.26 (12.3)
27.79 (2.20)
22.65%
24.5 [0.05]
2.05 [0.15]
10.4 [0.00]
EUR/USD
349.93 (8.30)
40.87 (0.24)
34.95%
5.03 [0.30]
0.49 [0.48]
2.39 [0.02]
GBP/USD
155.71 (13.5)
144.70 (2.34)
35.21%
7.77 [0.20]
1.26 [0.26]
0.21 [0.83]
GBP/EUR
110.41 (10.5)
101.97 (1.78)
15.61%
8.56 [0.20]
0.80 [0.19]
-0.54 [0.30]
HKD/USD
32.62 (9.30)
36.79 (1.69)
20.76%
10.9 [0.10]
0.90 [0.34]
-0.21 [0.42]
JPY/USD
514.14 (7.40)
349.39 (2.31)
14.73%
9.15 [0.20]
0.04 [0.85]
1.21 [0.11]
MXN/USD
137.00 (6.16)
40.09 (1.72)
7.28%
15.7 [0.10]
0.64 [0.43]
2.98 [0.00]
NZD/USD
382.67 (8.99)
182.97 (1.17)
25.08%
7.55 [0.20]
0.01 [0.94]
1.68 [0.05]
SGD/USD
200.74 (7.31)
44.12 (0.57)
33.82%
8.38 [0.20]
1.40 [0.24]
2.88 [0.00]
ZAR/USD
495.63 (15.4)
48.84 (2.15)
25.09%
14.3 [0.10]
1.18 [0.14]
13.6 [0.00]
Panel C: Averages
mot
lot
¯R2
Average
277.2
110.6
27.42%
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Table 6: Hourly regressions of FX returns on market and limit order ﬂows: IV GMM
This table presents estimation results of the return-order ﬂow regression ∆pt = β0 +βir∆irt +βmomot +βlolot +ut
based on hourly data. Here ∆p is the change in log exchange rates (in basis points), mot is market ﬂow deﬁnes
as the aggregated diﬀerence between the number of trades initiated by sellers and the number of trades initiated
by buyers (oﬀer minus bid) for the foreign (base) currency over the day (in billions), lo is limit order ﬂow deﬁnes
as the net number of new limit orders less the net number of cancelled orders at the best price over the day (in
billions), ∆ir is the changes in corresponding interest rate diﬀerential (coeﬃcients β0 and βir are not reported for
brevity and are available upon request). The models are estimated using the instrumental variable GMM approach.
We use up to ﬁve lags of market and net new limit order ﬂow variables across all markets, which are statistically
signiﬁcant in the ﬁrst-stage regressions at the 5% level. Panel A presents estimation results for the two sterling
exchange rates using shorter but more detailed sample from January 2, 2003 to December 30, 2004; Panel B presents
estimation results for broader cross-section of currency pairs using longer sample from January 2, 2003 to February
28, 2014. Panel C presents averages of the coeﬃcient estimates and R2s over both samples. T-statistics are given
in parentheses and are computed based on standard errors are adjusted for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity.
The Weak instruments test row presents the Cragg-Donald test statistics along with the Stock and Yogo size levels.
The row labelled Endogeneity test presents values of the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test statistic (based on diﬀerences
of J statistics) and corresponding p-values of the regressor endogeneity test for the limit order ﬂow variable. The
null hypothesis is that the lo variable is exogenous. The Wald test column presents t-test statistics and p-values (in
squared brackets) for the for the null that the coeﬃcients on market and limit order ﬂow are the same.
Panel A: 2003-2004 sample
mot
lot
¯R2
Weak instr.
test
Endogeneity
test
Wald test
GBP/USD
132.49 (12.2)
93.98 (3.90)
52.13%
9.21 [0.20]
0.54 [0.46]
2.81 [0.00]
GBP/EUR
119.84 (4.98)
85.06 (2.09)
40.81%
16.51 [0.10]
0.21 [0.65]
2.05 [0.02]
Panel B: 2003-2014 sample
mot
lot
¯R2
Weak instr.
test
Endogeneity
test
Wald test
AUD/USD
225.32 (41.2)
264.65 (6.46)
34.36%
318.1 [0.01]
2.75 [0.10]
-1.08 [0.28]
CAD/USD
208.01 (41.1)
204.14 (5.77)
36.38%
355.7 [0.01]
0.10 [0.75]
0.12 [0.90]
EUR/CHF
1510.0 (6.29)
858.17 (3.26)
0.00%
12.44 [0.10]
8.95 [0.00]
1.86 [0.06]
EUR/NOK
345.32 (58.4)
9.78 (1.65)
25.15%
493.7 [0.01]
0.96 [0.33]
38.4 [0.00]
EUR/SEK
282.87 (54.4)
12.38 (54.4)
24.76%
615.2 [0.01]
1.62 [0.20]
36.7 [0.00]
EUR/USD
373.59 (81.0)
298.62 (15.5)
44.51%
185.0 [0.01]
0.56 [0.45]
4.12 [0.00]
GBP/USD
176.28 (41.4)
142.07 (4.68)
35.26%
161.4 [0.01]
0.75 [0.39]
1.28 [0.20]
GBP/EUR
131.98 (38.3)
168.56 (5.25)
24.70%
108.3 [0.01]
0.30 [0.58]
-1.22 [0.22]
HKD/USD
35.91 (13.3)
12.15 (0.56)
25.35%
87.44 [0.01]
0.67 [0.41]
1.24 [0.22]
JPY/USD
549.66 (22.1)
432.71 (4.38)
23.80%
39.04 [0.05]
0.04 [0.83]
1.32 [0.19]
MXN/USD
221.30 (48.1)
7.02 (1.67)
16.97%
1647.9 [0.01]
11.1 [0.00]
32.8 [0.00]
NZD/USD
529.19 (16.0)
544.09 (3.76)
25.35%
36.17 [0.05]
1.83 [0.18]
-0.13 [0.89]
SGD/USD
319.71 (32.3)
301.34 (8.70)
30.25%
229.3 [0.01]
10.6 [0.00]
0.71 [0.48]
ZAR/USD
649.40 (58.5)
16.22 (2.10)
25.03%
507.5 [0.00]
1.48 [0.22]
44.4 [0.00]
Panel C: Averages
mot
lot
¯R2
Average
363.2
215.7
29.05%
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Table 7: Half-hourly regressions of equity returns on market and limit order ﬂows:
OLS
This table presents OLS estimation results of the return-order ﬂow regression ∆pt = β0 + βmomot + ut and then
the model ∆pt = β0 + βmomot + βlolot + ut based on data aggregated to a 30 minute level individually for our 102
stocks. Here ∆pt is the change in log stock price (in basis points), mot is market ﬂow deﬁned as the aggregated
diﬀerence between the number of shares traded initiated by sellers and the number of shares traded initiated by
buyers (oﬀer minus bid), lo is limit order ﬂow deﬁnes as the net number of new limit orders less the net number
of cancelled orders at the best price over the day. Both ﬂow measures are expressed in units of 100,000 shares.
T-statistics are given in parentheses and are computed based on standard errors are adjusted for autocorrelation
and heteroscedasticity. The Wald test column presents average t-test statistics for the null that the coeﬃcients on
market order ﬂow minus that on limit order ﬂow is zero. We split stocks into turnover-based terciles and present
average results separately for the three groups.
mot
¯R2
mot
lot
¯R2
Wald test
Tercile 1
89.6 (6.05)
8.48%
109.4 (9.87)
86.9 (21.6)
56.92%
3.26
Tercile 2
69.0 (6.13)
8.56%
87.5 (10.9)
61.8 (23.1)
55.01%
4.63
Tercile 3
27.1 (5.71)
6.92%
36.3 (10.7)
26.5 (21.9)
49.84%
4.23
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Table 8: Half-hourly regressions of equity returns on market and limit order ﬂows:
IV GMM
This table presents estimation results of the return-order ﬂow regression ∆pt = β0 + βmomot + βlolot + ut based
on data aggregated to a 30 minute level. Here ∆pt is the change in log stock price (in basis points), mot is market
ﬂow deﬁned as the aggregated diﬀerence between the number of shares traded initiated by sellers and the number
of shares traded initiated by buyers (oﬀer minus bid), lo is limit order ﬂow deﬁnes as the net number of new limit
orders less the net number of cancelled orders at the best price over the day. Both ﬂow measures are expressed in
units of 100,000 shares. The models are estimated using IV with robust standard errors individually for our 102
stocks. We allow up to 10 lags of the ﬂow variables to be used as instruments. The Wald test column presents
average t-test statistics for the null that the coeﬃcients on market order ﬂow minus that on limit order ﬂow is zero.
We split stocks into turnover-based terciles and present average results separately for the three groups.
mot
lot
¯R2
Wald test
Tercile 1
99.1 (7.83)
64.3 (4.53)
51.42%
3.30
Tercile 2
81.8 (8.36)
50.8 (4.12)
48.39%
4.03
Tercile 3
31.6 (7.19)
18.7 (3.66)
41.64%
4.17
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

A
Proofs and additional derivations
A.1
Solving the informed trader’s problem
The ﬁrst-order condition of the expected utility expression with respect to DM is
φx −α −2βDM −δDL −qβDL −θσ2
I (DM + qDL −y) = 0
(18)
and the ﬁrst-order condition with respect to DL is
qφx −δDM −qα −qβDM −2qδDL −θq
 (1 −q)φ2x2DL + σ2
I (DM + DL −y)

= 0.
(19)
Combining the ﬁrst order conditions gives equations (4) and (5). The second-order
conditions are
2β + θσ2
I > 0
and
(20)
 2β + θσ2
I
  2qδ + qθσ2
I + θx2σ2
I

>
 qβ + δ + qθσ2
I
2 .
(21)
Once the optimal pricing rule coeﬃcients α, β and δ have been determined, we can
substitute equations (10) – (12) into the second order conditions (18) and (19) to
yield
η < 1
2
(22)
and
q(1 −q)σ2
I (σ2
I + σ2
U)
(1 −2η)
−
q2σ4
U
4 (1 −η)2 + φ2x2 (σ2
I + σ2
U)
(1 −2η)
> 0.
(23)
From here we can see that, once inequality (22) holds, inequality (23) holds as well
as long as either x2 is suﬃciently large or q is suﬃciently small. More speciﬁcally,
deﬁne
˜q ≡
4(1 −η)2σ2
I (σ2
I + σ2
U)
(2(1 −η)σ2
I + σ2
U) (2(1 −η)σ2
I + (1 −2η)σ2
U)
(24)
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

and
˜x2(q) ≡q

q(1 −2η)σ4
U
4(1 −η)2 (σ2
I + σ2
U) −(1 −q)σ2
I

.
(25)
Then, the second-order condition can be rewritten as

η < 1
2 and q ≤˜q

or

η < 1
2 and q > ˜q and (φx)2 > ˜x2

.
(26)
Finally, substituting the expression for η into (22) gives equation (13) in the text.
A.2
Determining the covariance between z1 and z2
To show that the covariance between z1 and z2 is zero, we have
cov [z1, z2]
=
E [z1z2] = φ3E

x3
+ φ2θσ2
IE

yx2
=
φ3E

x3
+ φ2θσ2
IE

x3
+ φ2θσ2
IE

ux2
= 0.
A.3
Proof of Proposition 1
1) The statement is a trivial implication of the second order conditions.
2) Let us ﬁnd the conditions for which the following ratio is less than one;
δ
β = θqη(σ2
U/K + 2σ2
I(1 −η))
2(1 −2η)(1 −η)
×
2(1 −2η)
2θησ2
I + θσ2
U/K = qη(σ2
U/K + 2σ2
I(1 −η))
(1 −η)(σ2
U/K + 2ησ2
I)
(27)
Given that 0 < η < 1
2, this is equivalent to
2ησ2
I (1 −η) (1 −q) + (1 −qη −η) σ2
U/K > 0.
(28)
The second order condition η < 1
2 and the fact that q is a probability, and
thus is less or equal than one, imply 1 −qη −η = 1 −η(1 + q) > 0 and hence,
47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

subsequently (28).
3) First note that we can write the ratio of price impacts as;
δ
β = q
ησ2
U/K + 2σ2
Iη(1 −η)
(1 −η)σ2
U/K + 2σ2
Iη(1 −η) ≤q.
(29)
The ﬁnal inequality holds as the second terms in both numerator and denominator are identical while, given that in equilibrium η < 1
2, the ﬁrst term in the
numerator is smaller than the ﬁrst term in the denominator.
From equation (29) it is easy to see that as K →∞, the ﬁrst terms in the
numerator and denominator vanish such that the fraction tends to unity and
thus the entire expression tends to q.
4) Note, that η is a decreasing function of θ. Indeed, ∂η
∂θ = −
σ2
wσ2
I(σ2
z1+2θφσ2
Iσ2
u)
σ4z1
< 0.
Moreover, η goes to zero as θ goes to inﬁnity.
Furthermore, σ2
U = σ2
w −
σ4
w
σ2x+
σ4
I σ2u
(φ/θ+σ2
I )2
, which is increasing with θ and goes to
σ2
w(σ2
v+σ2
u)
σ2w+σ2v+σ2u as θ goes to
inﬁnity. As a result, as θ goes to inﬁnity, the numerator of the right-hand
side of equation (29) goes to zero and the denominator is ﬁnite so the entire
expression tends to zero.
A.4
The covariance between DM and DL
Substituting expressions (10)-(12) for α, β and δ into equations (4) and (5) yields
DM = −qDL
2 (1 −η) σ2
I + σ2
U
2 (1 −η) (σ2
I + σ2
U) +
(1 −2η)
θ (σ2
I + σ2
U)z1 = −ADL + Bz1
(30)
DL =
z1
θ

2(1−q)σ2
I(σ2
I+σ2
U)(1−η)
σ2
U(1−2η)
−
qσ2
U
2(1−η)

+
2θ(σ2
I+σ2
U)(1−η)
qσ2
U(1−2η)
z2
=
z1
C + Dz2
,
(31)
48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

and hence,
Cov [DM, DL] = −A Var [DL] + B Cov [DL, z1]
(32)
where
Var [DL]
=
E
"
z1
C + Dz2
2#
−E

z1
C + Dz2
2
=
 φ + θσ2
I
2 E

x2
(C + Dφ2x2)2

+
 θσ2
I
2 σ2
uE

1
(C + Dφ2x2)2

(33)
and
Cov [DL, z1]
=
E

z1 ×
z1
C + Dz2

−E

z1
C + Dz2

E [z1]
=
 φ + θσ2
I
2 E

x2
C + Dφ2x2

+
 θσ2
I
2 σ2
uE

1
C + Dφ2x2

. (34)
Here we have used the facts that variables u and x are independent and E [x] =
E [u] = 0. Note, that the parameters C and D are always positive, as long as the
second order conditions (20) and (21) are satisﬁed, hence the expectations in (33)
and (34) always exist.
A.5
The covariance between DM + DL and z1
Equation (30) implies that DM + DL = (1 −A)DL + Bz1, where
1 −A = 1 −q 2 (1 −η) σ2
I + σ2
U
2 (1 −η) (σ2
I + σ2
U) = 1 −q + q
σ2
U (1 −2η)
2 (1 −η) (σ2
I + σ2
U) > 0
and
B =
(1 −2η)
θ (σ2
I + σ2
U) > 0.
49
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000

Equation (31) together with the fact that under the second order conditions the
parameters C and D are always positive imply that
Cov [DL, x]
=
E

x ×
z1
C + Dz2

−E

z1
C + Dz2

E [x]
=
 φ + θσ2
I

E

x2
C + Dφ2x2

> 0
(35)
and
Cov [z1, x] =
 φ + θσ2
I
  σ2
w + σ2
v

> 0.
(36)
Hence,
Cov [DM + DL, x] = (1 −A)Cov [DL, x] + BCov [z1, x] > 0.
(37)
50
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2403000
