 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
1 
 
 
MiFID II: regulating high frequency trading, other 
forms of algorithmic trading and direct electronic 
market access 
 
Danny Busch1 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
On 6 May 2010 the US financial markets were briefly thrown into a state of panic. In the 
space of just 36 minutes the Dow Jones Index lost almost a tenth of its value, only to rebound 
immediately as though nothing had happened. This event is commonly referred to as the 
‘flash crash’. Very soon, the high frequency traders (HFTs or flash traders) came under 
suspicion for having caused this sudden market correction through their computer-controlled, 
algorithmic trading strategies. Both the US Department of Justice and the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission (CFTC) instituted investigations. Four years later, a CFTC-authorised 
investigation concluded that the high frequency traders  
 
‘did not cause the flash crash, but contributed to it by demanding immediacy ahead of other 
market participants. Immediacy absorption activity of HFTs results in price adjustments that 
are costly to all slower traders, including the traditional market makers.’2 
 
Less than a year later, on 21 April 2015, the U.S. Department of Justice announced that they 
had arrested British stock market trader Navinder Singh Sarao for his role in the flash crash. 
Operating though his company Nav Sarao Futures, Sarao had apparently been engaged for 
many years in a method of market manipulation known as spoofing. According to the CFTC, 
Sarao had earned  over 40 million US dollars in the previous five years by manipulating emini S&P 500 futures on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), the largest futures market 
in the United States. He operated from his parents’ home in Hounslow, a London suburb. 
Sarao’s market manipulation  was not confined to the day of the flash crash. According to the 
CFTC, he had used spoofing techniques on at least 400 trading days. A specially developed 
layering algorithm enabled him to place and cancel orders at lightning speed. In this way he 
aimed to trick the market into believing that the prices were about to fall. He did this by 
creating a strong ceiling in the market in the form of many or very large sell orders just under 
the best available price. As these orders were visible to other traders, they created the illusion 
that prices were about to fall. This caused downward pressure on the market, which prompted 
an actual fall in prices. Sarao then bought in cheaply. Afterwards he cancelled the original sell 
orders, thereby removing the ceiling and allowing prices to rise again. At that moment Sarao 
seized his chance and sold his futures at a profit. According to the CFTC, Sarao’s activities 
led to the flash crash. On the afternoon in question he had used a number of exceptionally 
                                               
1 Professor Dr Danny Busch, LLM (Utrecht), MJur (Oxon), Chair for Financial Law and Director of the Institute 
for Financial Law (IFL), University of Nijmegen, the Netherlands. E-mail: d.busch@jur.ru.nl. Website IFL: 
http://www.ru.nl/ifl/.  
2 See A. Kirilenko, A.S. Kyle, M. Samadi and T. Tuzun, The Flash Crash: The Impact of High Frequency 
Trading 
on 
an 
Electronic 
Market 
(5 
May 
2014), 
p. 
1 
(downloadable 
from  
http://www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@economicanalysis/documents/file/oce_flashcrash0314.pdf). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
2 
 
aggressive and persistent spoofing tactics.3 Spoofing has now been banned in the U.S. and 
constitutes market manipulation in Europe. The new European Market Abuse Regulation 
(MAR) explicitly prohibits this technique. In brief, MAR prohibits a number of strategies 
carried out by algorithmic trading (AT), in particular high frequency trading (HFT), which are 
not intended to result in the actual execution of a transaction but instead (i) disrupt the 
functioning of the trading system through the placing of a large volume of orders; (ii) make it 
more difficult for other traders to identify genuine orders; or (iii) create a false or misleading 
signal about the supply of, or demand for, a particular financial instrument.4 Nonetheless, 
market commentators believe that traders can still manipulate the market, despite the stricter 
regulatory provisions.5 
 
The conclusion that Sarao could have caused the flash crash on his own has been greeted with 
some scepticism in the market. For example, Albert Menkveld, Professor of Finance at the 
VU University Amsterdam, opined in the Dutch financial daily Het Financieele Dagblad that 
something more would have been needed to cause a price correction of the magnitude of the 
flash crash. Professor Menkveld believes that technological problems may have allowed what 
is known as the ‘latency’ to rise. This is the time it takes for the prices of financial instruments 
on different markets to even out. This is a phenomenon of which HFTs make use in their 
trading techniques. According to Menkveld, the HFTs probably acted in good faith in taking 
futures positions in the E-mini S&P 500 futures market with a view to selling them again in 
another market (the Spider market). As Professor Menkveld points out, if the speed of the 
connections slows HFTs can do this only at very low prices. If this is correct, it seems to 
endorse the CFTC’s conclusion in 2014 that although the HFTs may not have caused the flash 
crash, they did contribute to it. Moreover, Sarao himself was a kind of amateur HFT, because 
he availed himself of a specially built algorithm that enabled him to place and cancel orders 
automatically at lightning speed.  
 
So is flash trading good or bad for the market? Michael Lewis, in his recent book Flash Boys 
– Cracking the Money Code, paints a far from positive picture of high frequency trading.6 
Flash traders use such advanced techniques that the rest of the market is left trailing in their 
wake. But, as was to be expected, not everyone agrees with his analysis.7 The Markets in 
                                               
3 See United States Department of Justice, Futures Trader Charged With Illegally Manipulating Stock Market, 
Contributing 
to 
the 
May 
2010 
Market 
‘Flash 
Crash’ 
(21 
April 
2015) 
(downloadable 
at 
http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/futures-trader-charged-illegally-manipulating-stock-market-contributing-may2010-market-flash); CFTC, CFTC Charges UK Resident Navinder Singh Sarao and His Company Nav Sarao 
Futures Limited PLC with Price Manipulation and Spoofing (21 April 2015) (downloadable at 
http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/pr7156-15). 
4 See Article 12(2)(c) Regulation (EU) No. 596/2014, OJ L 173, 12 June 2014, pp. 1-61 (Market Abuse 
Regulation or MAR). As regards the position in the U.S., see Section 747 Dodd-Frank Act (www.dodd-frankact.us/Dodd_Frank_Act_Text_Section_747.html). In Article 3(1)(1) MAR, ‘financial instrument’ is defined by 
reference to the definition of ‘financial instrument’ in Article 4(1)(15) in conjunction with Section C of Annex I, 
Directive 2004/39/EC, OJ L 145, 30 April 2004, pp. 1-47 (MiFID I). As soon as the MiFID II/MiFIR package 
becomes binding on the financial sector, ‘financial instrument’ will be defined by reference to the definition of 
‘financial instrument’ in Article 4(1)(15) in conjunction with Section C of Annex I, MiFID II. See n 8 and 23 
below. 
5 John Bates, ‘Post Flash Crash, Regulators Still Use Bicycles To Catch Ferraris: Blaming the Flash Crash on a 
UK man who lives with his parents is like blaming lightning for starting a fire’ (24 April 2015), Traders 
Magazine Online News. 
6 Michael Lewis, Flash Boys – Cracking the Money Code, Penguin Books Ltd., London 2015. 
7 See, for example, the various reactions published by the Futures Industry Association (FIA): ‘Debunking the 
Myths of High Frequency Trading – Opinions published in response to Michael Lewis’ Flash Boys and recent 
comments made by NY Attorney General Eric Schneiderman’ (http://www.futuresindustry.org/ptg/downloads/ 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
3 
 
Financial Instruments Directive II (MiFID II), which will become binding on the financial 
sector in the EU/EER as per 3 january 2018,8 adopts a middle course: it does not prohibit high 
frequency trading, but it does subject it and other forms of algorithmic trading to specific 
supervision as they entail specific risks.9 See recital 59 of MiFID II: 
 
‘The use of trading technology has evolved significantly in the past decade and is now 
extensively used by market participants. Many market participants now make use of 
algorithmic trading where a computer algorithm automatically determines aspects of an order 
with minimal or no human intervention. Risks arising from algorithmic trading should be 
regulated.’ 
 
High frequency trading and other forms of algorithmic trading are not alone in being 
subjected to a supervision regime in MiFID II. What is now the fairly common practice of 
investment firms in providing their clients with direct electronic access (DEA) to perform 
transactions is also subjected to a specific form of supervision. Providers of DEA are now 
required to ensure that this access complies with the appropriate systems and risk controls.10 
The link between high frequency trading and other forms of algorithmic trading on the one 
hand and DEA on the other is dealt with later in this article.11 
 
                                                                                                                                                   
Debunking_the_Myths_of_HFT.pdf). But see also Lewis’s response to them, Lewis (2015) (see n 6), pp. 273285 (afterword). 
8 The MiFID II regime comprises Directive 2014/65/EU, OJ L 173, 15 May 2014, pp. 349-496 (MiFID II),  
Regulation (EU) No. 600/2014, OJ L 173, 15 May 2014, pp. 84-148 (MiFIR) and a truly impressive number of 
implementing measures, commonly referred to as level 2 legislation. For analysis and discussion of the new 
MiFID II regime, see: D. Busch and G. Ferrarini (eds), Regulation of EU Financial Markets: MiFID II, Oxford, 
Oxford University Press 2016. MiFID II/MiFIR currently stipulates that the new legislation will become binding 
on the financial sector as per 3 January 2017 (see Art. 93(1), second paragraph, first part, MiFID II and Art. 55, 
second paragraph, MiFIR; subject to the qualification that some rules become binding at a later stage, see Art. 
93(1), second paragraph, second part (3 September 2018), and Art. 95(1) MiFID II (3 July 2020); Art. 55, fourth 
paragraph, MiFIR (3 January 2019)). However, on 10 February 2016, the Commission has proposed a one year 
extension to the entry into application of the MiFID II regime. The new proposed deadline is 3 January 2018 
(subject to the qualification that some MiFID II/MiFIR rules become binding at a later stage, i.e. 3 September 
2019, 3 July 2021 and 3 January 2020). The reason for the extension lies in the complex technical infrastructure 
that needs to be set up for the MiFID II package to work effectively. The European Securities and Markets 
Authority (ESMA) has to collect data from about 300 trading venues on about 15 million financial instruments. 
To achieve this result, ESMA must work closely with national competent authorities and the trading venues 
themselves. However, the European Commission was informed by ESMA that neither competent authorities, nor 
market participants, would have the necessary systems ready by 3 January 2017. In light of these exceptional 
circumstances and in order to avoid legal uncertainty and potential market disruption, an extension was deemed 
necessary. See http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-265_en.htm?locale=en. See for the proposed 
amendments: 
COM(2016) 
56 
final 
(MiFID 
II) 
and 
COM(2016) 
57 
final 
(MiFIR), 
see 
http://ec.europa.eu/finance/securities/isd/mifid2/index_en.htm. On 18 May 2016, the Permanent Representatives 
Committee (Coreper) approved, on behalf of the Council, an agreement with the European Parliament on a oneyear delay. Provisional agreement was reached with the European Parliament on 2 May 2016. See 
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/05/18-markets-financial-instruments/ 
9 See also on the MiFID II AT and HFT rules: P.-H. Conac, Chapter 17 - Algorithmic Trading and High 
Frequency Trading, in: D. Busch and G. Ferrarini (eds), Regulation of EU Financial Markets: MiFID II, Oxford, 
Oxford University Press 2016. See on the MiFID II HFT rules from a U.S. perspective: M. B. Fox, Chapter 18 – 
MiFID II and Equity Trading Regulation: A U.S. View, in: D. Busch and G. Ferrarini (eds), Regulation of EU 
Financial Markets: MiFID II, Oxford, Oxford University Press 2016. 
10 Recital 66 MiFID II. 
11 See § III.4, last paragraph. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
4 
 
These are all important regulatory innovations as high frequency trading and other forms of 
algorithmic trading and DEA are not subjected to specific rules of supervision in MiFID I.12 
Nonetheless, the rules in MiFID II are not entirely new. To a large extent they are based on 
and amplify the ESMA13 Guidelines entitled Systems and controls in an automated trading 
environment for trading platforms, investment firms and competent authorities.14 However, as 
the rules have been formalised through inclusion in MiFID II, the supervision of flash trading 
and other forms of algorithmic trading now figures more prominently on the agenda of the 
supervisory authorities.  
 
II. BENEFITS AND RISKS 
 
The benefits and risks of flash trading and other forms of algorithmic trading, in the opinion 
of the European legislator, are apparent from the preamble to MiFID II. The technology of 
high frequency trading is said to have provided benefits to the market and market participants 
generally, such as wider participation in markets, increased liquidity, narrower spreads, 
reduced short-term volatility and the means to obtain better execution of orders for clients.15  
 
Yet, according to MiFID II, this trading technology also give rise to potential risks, such as an 
increased risk of the overloading of the systems of trading venues due to large volumes of 
orders, risks of algorithmic trading generating duplicative or erroneous orders or otherwise 
malfunctioning in a way that may create a disorderly market. There is also the risk of 
algorithmic trading systems overreacting to other market events which can exacerbate 
volatility if there is a pre-existing market problem. Finally, algorithmic trading or highfrequency algorithmic trading techniques can, like any other form of trading, lend themselves 
to certain forms of behaviour which are prohibited under the Market Abuse Regulation. Highfrequency trading may also, because of the information advantage provided to high-frequency 
traders, prompt investors to choose to execute trades in venues where they can avoid 
interaction with flash traders.16 
 
All in all, MiFID II considers it appropriate to subject high frequency algorithmic trading 
techniques to particular regulatory scrutiny. Although this mainly concerns techniques  which 
rely on trading on own account, such scrutiny should also apply, according to MiFID II, 
where the execution of this technique is structured in such a way as to avoid the execution 
taking place on own account, such as through the transmission of orders between entities 
within the same group.17  
 
But what do academic studies say about the benefits and risks of high frequency trading? In 
recent years, the liquidity of the stock market has undoubtedly increased. This development 
                                               
12 The MiFID I regime (which became binding on the financial sector on 1 November 2007) comprises Directive 
2004/39/EC, OJ L 145, 30 April 2004, pp. 1-47 (MiFID I); Directive 2006/73/EC, OJ  L 241, 2 September 2006, 
pp. 26-58 (MiFID I Implementing Directive); and Regulation (EC) No 1287/2006, OJ L 241, 2 September 2006, 
pp. 1-25 (MiFID I Implementing Regulation).  
13 European Securities and Markets Authority. 
14ESMA/2012/122, 23 February 2012 (downloadable from https://www.esma.europa.eu). See also recital 63 
MiFID II. Cf. also the IOSCO report ‘Regulatory issues raised by the impact of technological changes on market 
integrity and efficiency’, October 2011, FR90/11 (downloadable from http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD361.pdf). 
15 Recital 62 MiFID II. 
16 Recital 62 MiFID II. 
17 Recital 62 MiFID II. See also Article 19(3) and recital 24,  Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 
2398 final, 25 April 2016 (downloadable from http://ec.europa.eu/finance/securities/isd/mifid2/index_en.htm). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
5 
 
has coincided with the advent of HFT firms. But whether the HFT firms have significantly 
contributed to the increased liquidity is not certain. Although the effects of HFT on liquidity 
have been found to be predominantly positive, the findings of some studies suggest the 
opposite, especially due to the lack of any clear definition of market quality.18 Moreover, HFT 
can lead to what is known as ghost liquidity. This means that HFT orders can make it difficult 
to get a clear idea of the real depth of the order book. In the case of some HFT arbitrage 
strategies, for example, the liquidity previously shown completely disappears as soon as the 
relevant orders of the arbitrage trade have been executed on one of the trading venues. 
Although this may not necessarily be manipulative, it does have a disruptive effect and creates 
the illusion that the market is more liquid than it is in reality.19  
 
The picture that emerges from the academic literature on the effect of HFT on volatility is 
also incomplete and inconsistent. For example, some research shows that HFT reduces 
volatility in normal circumstances, but other findings suggest that it can exacerbate volatility 
in stress situations, such as the flash crash. 20  
 
Finally, recent research by Van Kervel and Menkveld indicates that flash traders benefit 
mainly from institutional investors that take a long time to execute their order. Pension funds, 
insurers and asset managers which spread a large buy or sell order over several hours are in 
due course confronted by the activities of flash traders who ‘go with the order’, as a result of 
which – in the case of a buy order – the institutional investor sees the price rise. In this way 
the execution of an order can become up to 64% more expensive. According to Van Kervel 
and Menkveld, the transactions of private investors are generally so small that they are not 
directly troubled by the unwanted attentions of flash traders.21 
 
The benefits and risks of DEA are not explicitly mentioned in the preamble to MiFID II, but 
they can be guessed at. A benefit of DEA is that it enables clients to ‘get behind the controls 
themselves’, without being dependent on an intermediary in the form of an investment firm. 
But this is also precisely the risk posed by DEA, namely the absence of an expert 
intermediary in the form of an investment firm, with all the risks that this entails.   
  
III. DEFINITIONS 
 
1. 
General 
 
For the sake of legal certainty22, MiFID II contains definitions of the terms ‘algorithmic 
trading’, ‘high frequency algorithmic trading’ and ‘direct electronic access’.  
 
2. 
Algorithmic trading 
                                               
18 R.H. Maatman, P.B. Teeboon and B. Verschoor, High frequency trading, Ondernemingsrecht (2012), pp. 663671, p. 668. See for a recent academic study suggesting that HFT contributed to increased market liquidity: B. 
Biais, F. Declerck and S. Moinas, Who Supplies liquidity, how and when? (BIS Working Papers No 563) (May 
2016) (downloadable from https://www.bis.org/publ/work563.htm).   
19 Maatman, Teeboom & Verschoor, Ondernemingsrecht (2012) (see n 18), p. 669. 
20 Maatman, Teeboom & Verschoor, Ondernemingsrecht (2012) (see n 18), p. 669. 
21 See V. van Kervel and A.J. Menkveld, High-Frequency Trading around Large Institutional Orders (18 June 
2015) (downloadable from  http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ papers.cfm?abstract_id=2619686). See for a recent case 
analysis of HFT strategies: Dutch regulator Stichting Autoriteit Financiële Markten (AFM), ‘A case analysis of 
critiques 
on 
high-­‐frequency 
trading’ 
(2 
June 
2016) 
(downloadable 
from 
https://www.afm.nl/nlnl/professionals/nieuws/2016/jun/onderzoek-handelsstrategieen-hft). 
22 Cf. Recital 20, Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
6 
 
 
‘Algorithmic trading’ (AT) is defined as trading in financial instruments23 where a computer 
algorithm automatically determines individual parameters of orders such as (a) whether to 
initiate the order, the timing, price or quantity of the order or (b) how to manage the order 
after its submission, with limited or no human intervention.24 A system is considered as 
having no or limited human intervention where, for (i) any order or quote generation process 
or (ii) any process to optimise order-execution, an automated system makes decisions at any 
of the stages of initiating, generating, routing or executing orders or quotes according to predetermined parameters.25 
 
The definition of AT does not include any system that is only used (i) for the purpose of 
routing orders to one or more trading venues26 or (ii) for the processing of orders involving no 
determination of any trading parameters or (iii) for the confirmation of orders or the posttrade processing of executed transactions.27  
 
The exception referred to at (i) relates only to automated order routing (AOR), not to smart 
order routing (SOR). In the case of AOR only the routing of the orders to one or more trading 
venues takes place automatically, so that the other trading parameters are not determined 
automatically. In the case of SOR, however, trading parameters other than the routing of the 
order to one or more trading venues are also determined automatically. In particular, SOR is 
able to split the parent order into smaller child orders or determine when the child orders 
should be submitted. As SOR therefore comes within the definition of AT, the relevant 
provisions of MiFID II (see below) are then applicable. 28 
 
3. 
High frequency trading  
 
High frequency trading (HFT) can be seen as a species of the algorithmic trading genus. Here 
a trading system analyses data or signals from the market at high speed and then sends or 
updates large numbers of orders within a very short space of time in response to that analysis. 
In particular, HFT may contain elements such as order initiation, generation, routing and 
execution, which are determined by the system without human intervention for each 
individual trade or order, a short time-frame for establishing and liquidating positions, a high 
daily portfolio turnover, a high order-to-trade ratio intraday and ending the trading day at or 
close to a flat position. HFT is characterised, among others, by high message intra-day rates 
which constitute orders, quotes or cancellations. In determining what constitutes high message 
intra-day rates, the identity of the client ultimately behind the activity, the length of the 
observation period, the comparison with the overall market activity during that period and the 
                                               
23 The term ‘financial instrument’ is a fairly broad concept. It includes not only equities and bonds but also 
interest rate swaps and many other derivative products, and emission allowances. See Article 4(1)(15) in 
conjunction with Section C of Annex I, MiFID II. 
24 Article 4(1)(39), first part, MiFID II. 
25 See Article 18 and recital 21, Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016 
(downloadable from http://ec.europa.eu/finance/securities/isd/mifid2/index_en.htm). Cf. ESMA/2014/1569, 
Final Report – ESMA’s Technical Advice to the Commission on MiFID II and MiFIR (19 December 2014), p. 
338 (no. 1(i) and (ii)). 
26 The term ‘trading venue’ means a regulated market, a multilateral trading facility ( MTF) or an organised 
trading facility (OTF) (Article 4(1)(24) MiFID II). MiFID II provides further definitions of these terms. 
27 Article 4(1)(39), second part, MiFID II. 
28 Recital 22, Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016; ESMA/2014/1569, 
Final Report – ESMA’s Technical Advice to the Commission on MiFID II and MiFIR (19 December 2014), p. 
343 (no. 4, at (i) and (ii)). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
7 
 
relative concentration or fragmentation of activity should be taken into account. HFT is 
typically carried out by traders using their own capital to trade and, rather than being a 
strategy in itself, is usually the use of sophisticated technology to implement more traditional 
trading strategies such as market making or arbitrage.29   
 
Pursuant to the above, MiFID II contains a definition of high frequency algorithmic trading 
technique. This means an algorithmic trading technique is characterised by:  
(a) infrastructure intended to minimise network and other types of latencies, including at least 
one of the following facilities for algorithmic order entry: (i) co-location, (ii) proximity 
hosting or (iii) high-speed direct electronic access;  
(b) system-determination of order initiation, generation, routing or execution without human 
intervention for individual trades or orders; and 
(c) high message intraday rates which constitute orders, quotes or cancellations.30 
 
The requirement at (c) of ‘high message intraday rates’ is naturally rather vague and provides 
the market with little legal certainty. The Commission therefore requested and obtained 
technical advice from ESMA. In the market consultations conducted by ESMA prior to the 
provision of this technical advice, the opinions on the definition of this term vary quite 
considerably. ESMA advised the Commission to choose from various options.31 In the Draft 
Commission Delegated Regulation of 25 April 2016, the Commission has opted for the 
approach that a ‘high message intraday rate’ consists of the submission on average of any of 
the following: (a) at least 2 messages per second with respect to any single financial 
instrument traded on a trading venue; (b) at least 4 messages per second with respect to all 
financial instruments traded on a trading venue.32  
 
Since the use of HFT is predominantly common in liquid financial instruments, only 
instruments for which there is a ‘liquid market’ should be included in the calculation of ‘high 
message intraday rates’.33 
 
Finally, as HFT is typically done by traders using their own capital to implement more 
traditional trading strategies such as market making or arbitrage through the use of 
sophisticated technology, only messages introduced for the purposes of dealing on own 
account, and not those introduced for the purposes of receiving and transmitting orders or 
executing orders of behalf of clients, should be included in the calculation of high intraday 
message rates. However, messages introduced through other techniques than those relying on 
trading on own account should be included in the calculation of high intraday message rate 
where, viewed as a whole and taking into account all circumstances, the execution of the 
technique is structured in such a way as to avoid the execution taking place on own account, 
such as through the transmission of orders between entities within the same group.34 
                                               
29 Recital 61 MiFID II. 
30 Article 4(1)(40) MiFID II. 
31 ESMA/2014/1569, Final Report – ESMA’s Technical Advice to the Commission on MiFID II and MiFIR (19 
December 2014), p. 338-339 (no. 2). 
32 See Article 19(1), Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016.   
33 See Article 19(2), first sentence, and recital 24 Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 
25 April 2016, in conjunction with the definition of ‘liquid market’ pursuant to Article 2(1)(17) MiFIR. 
34 See recital 24 and Article 19(2)-(3), Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 
2016. As for the calculation of high message intraday rate in relation to direct electronic access (DEA) providers 
engaged in HFT, messages submitted by their DEA clients must be excluded from the calculations (see Article 
19(4) and recital 24, Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016). See on DEA 
§ III.4 below. Trading venues must make available to the HFT firms concerned, on request, estimates of the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
8 
 
  
 
 
 
4. 
Direct electronic access 
 
Finally, MiFID II contains a definition of ‘direct electronic assess’ (DEA). This is an 
arrangement where a member or participant or client of a trading venue (referred to below as 
a participant) permits a person to use its trading code so the person can electronically transmit 
orders relating to a financial instrument directly to the trading venue and includes 
arrangements which involve the use by a person of the infrastructure of the member or 
participant or client, or any connecting system provided by the member or participant or 
client, to transmit the orders (direct market access) and arrangements where such an 
infrastructure is not used by a person (sponsored access).35 The participant itself is an 
investment firm or a bank. 
 
The essence of DEA is that a participant of a trading venue has the ability, regardless of the 
technology used, to exercise discretion regarding the exact fraction of a second of order entry 
and the lifetime of the orders within that timeframe (i.e. when the order expires).36  
 
Systems that allow clients to transmit buying or selling orders to an investment firm in an 
electronic format (on-line brokerage) are outside the scope of DEA as long as the client does 
not have the ability to determine the fraction of a second where the order should enter the 
order book or react to incoming market data within those timeframes.37 
 
DEA is, in principle, separate from AT and HFT. DEA is not a high frequency algorithmic 
trading technique, and instead merely relates to the manner in which access can be gained to a 
trading venue. DEA is used by a multitude of market participants. Investment firms that 
engage in AT but not in HFT will often use DEA because they themselves are not 
participants. Investment firms that engage in HFT are often themselves a member of a trading 
venue, as this causes less delay. They therefore have a trading code and need not use anyone 
else’s trading code, as required by the definition of DEA. Naturally, a provider of DEA can 
itself be an investment firm which uses AT or HFT. Situations occur in practice in which 
algorithms are made available as part of DEA to the person obtaining direct access through 
DEA. The obvious example is smart order routing systems (SORs). As noted above38, SORs 
are a form of AT and the client thus avails itself of the AT technology.39 Finally, if an 
                                                                                                                                                   
average of messages per second on a monthly basis two weeks after the end of each calendar month taking into 
account all messages submitted during the preceding 12 months (see Article 19(5), Draft Commission Delegated 
Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016).  
35 Article 4(1)(41) MiFID II. See also recital 25, Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 
25 April 2016.   
36 See Article 20(1) Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016. See also 
ESMA/2014/1569, Final Report – ESMA’s Technical Advice to the Commission on MiFID II and MiFIR (19 
December 2014), p. 343 (no. 2). 
37 See recital 25-26 and Article 20(1), Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 
2016. See also ESMA/2014/1569, Final Report – ESMA’s Technical Advice to the Commission on MiFID II and 
MiFIR (19 December 2014), p. 343 (no. 3). 
38 § III.2. 
39 See Article 20(2) and recital 27, Draft Commission Delegated Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016. 
See also ESMA/2014/1569, Final Report – ESMA’s Technical Advice to the Commission on MiFID II and 
MiFIR (19 December 2014), p. 343 (no. 4 at (i)). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
9 
 
investment firm receives orders from clients through on-line brokerage and actually places 
these orders using SORs, this constitutes AT although there is admittedly no DEA.40  
 
IV. SCOPE 
 
Before discussing the substantive rules, I would like to make a few observations about the 
parties subject to them. To start with, these are naturally the investments firms that use AT 
and HFT. These traders are often market makers, i.e. persons who hold themselves out on the 
financial markets on a continuous basis as being willing to deal on own account by buying 
and selling financial instruments against their proprietary capital at prices defined by them.41 
In this way market makers inject liquidity into the market. Investors can thus be more or less 
certain of finding a counterparty for their transactions, namely the market maker who makes 
the market in the relevant financial instrument. Traders dealing on own account other than 
market makers may also use AT and HFT and actually do so in practice. In addition, 
investments firms may naturally also use AT and HFT if they act on behalf of a client (in the 
context of execution only, investment advice or portfolio management).  
 
As is the case under MiFID I, certain parties who deal on their own account are exempted 
from MiFID II. Under MiFID II, however, traders dealing on own account who apply HFT 
are not entitled to make use of these exemptions.42 In so far as they could claim an exemption 
under MiFID for dealing on own account, this is no longer the case under MiFID II. They 
must, after all, apply for an authorisation and comply with the applicable MiFID II rules. 
Please note that traders who deal on own account and use AT (not being HFT) appear, at least 
in theory, to still be able to claim an exemption. 
 
There are also rules for the trading venues to which traders who use AT and HFT are 
connected. This may be a regulated market, a multilateral trading facility (MTF) or an 
organised trading facility (OTF).43 It is possible that a trader who applies AT or HFT is itself 
the  operator of the trading venue in question. In such a case, there is a greater risk of conflicts 
of interest. 
 
Whatever the case, MiFID II requires both categories (traders and trading venues) to take joint 
measures to ensure that AT and, in particular, HFT do not create a disorderly market and 
cannot be used for abusive purposes.44 The same is true of DEA. The rules apply not only to 
the investment firms that offer this service to their clients but also to the trading venues which 
can reach the client through DEA without the medium of an investment firm. 
 
V. TRADERS 
 
1. 
General 
 
MiFID II (i) introduces requirements to be met by investments firms that apply AT and HFT 
in relation to internal systems and controls; (ii) imposes duties regarding information and  
                                               
40 ESMA/2014/1569, Final Report – ESMA’s Technical Advice to the Commission on MiFID II and MiFIR (19 
December 2014), p. 343 (no. 3). 
41 See the definition of ‘market maker’ in Article 4(1)(8) MiFID; Article 4(1)(7) MiFID II. 
42 Cf. Article 2(1)(d), (i), (k) and (l) MiFID with Article 2(1)(d) and (j) MiFID II. 
43 See for definitions of these terms Article 4(1)(21)-(23) MiFID II. 
44 Recital 64 MiFID II. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
10 
 
records on these parties, and (iii) imposes specific requirements on investment firms that 
apply AT and HFT as market makers.    
 
2. 
Requirements for internal systems and controls 
 
First, MiFID II introduces requirements for internal systems and controls to be met by 
investment firms that engage in AT and HFT. The rules refer only to AT. However, as HFT is 
a form of AT, these rules also apply to investment firms engaged in HFT.   
 
1. The internal systems and controls of the investment firm must be such that it ensures that 
the firm’s trading systems: (a) are resilient, (b) have sufficient capacity, (c) are subject to 
appropriate trading thresholds and limits, and prevent (d) the sending of erroneous orders or 
(e) the systems otherwise functioning in a way that may create or contribute to a disorderly 
market.45  
 
2. The internal systems and controls of the investment firm must also ensure that the trading 
systems cannot be used for any purpose that is contrary to the Market Abuse Regulation or to 
the rules of a trading venue to which it is connected.46 
 
3. The business continuity arrangements must be capable of dealing with any failure of the 
investment firm’s trading systems. 47 
 
4. The investment firm must ensure that its systems are fully tested and properly monitored to 
guarantee that they meet the requirements laid down at 1-3 above.48 
 
The requirements to be met by the internal systems and controls have been set out in detail by 
ESMA in draft regulatory technical standard 6 (RTS 6).49 It contains requirements relating to 
(i) governance, (ii) the role of the compliance staff in the governance process, (iii) staff 
policies, (iv) staff training on order entry, (v) staff understanding of market abuse and 
disorderly trading conditions, (vi) IT outsourcing and procurement. It also introduces 
requirements for the resilience of trading systems of investment firms, which involves (a) 
testing the algorithms, (b) monitoring and, where necessary, changing the algorithms used, (c) 
annual stress testing, (d) incorporating a kill functionality so that all resting orders can be 
cancelled in the event of an emergency, (e) monitoring for the prevention and identification of 
potential market abuse, (f) carrying out pre-trade controls on order entry, (g) carrying out 
post-trade controls (e.g. periodic reconciliations between its own data and that of other parties 
concerned). It is also evident from RTS 6 that the investment firm should determine by means 
of a self-assessment whether the above requirements for internal systems and controls have 
been fulfilled. Such a self-assessment should at least include the requirements set out in RTS 
6.50 
 
3. 
Duties regarding information and records 
 
                                               
45 Article 17(1), first sentence, MiFID II. 
46 Article 17(1), second sentence, MiFID II. 
47 Article 17(1), third sentence, first part, MiFID II. 
48 Article 17(1), third sentence, second part, MiFID II. 
49 ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 
September 2015), pp 201-246. 
50 ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 
September 2015), pp 201-246, p. 203, recital 11. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
11 
 
Second, investment firms that engage in AT and HFT have certain duties regarding 
information and records. 
 
1. An investment firm that engages in AT and HFT in a Member State must notify this to the 
competent authorities (a) of its home Member State and (b) of the trading venue at which the 
investment firm engages in algorithmic trading as a member or participant of the trading 
venue.51 
 
2. The competent authority of the home Member State of the investment firm may require the 
investment firm to provide, on a regular or ad-hoc basis, (a) a description of the nature of its 
AT and HFT strategies, (b) details of the trading parameters or limits to which the system is 
subject, (c) a description of the key compliance and risk controls that it has in place to ensure 
the conditions listed in § V.2 above are satisfied and (d) information about the testing of its 
systems. The competent authority of the home Member State of the investment firm may, at 
any time, request further information from an investment firm about its AT and HFT and the 
systems used for that trading.52 The fact that competent authority can request information 
about AT and HFT strategies is bound to lead to debate in practice. The algorithms designed 
by an investment firm form the core of its business model and there will be a natural wish, for 
reasons of competition, to keep the source codes secret as far as possible. Although the 
competent authority is naturally not a competitor, the more people know about the source 
codes the greater the risk that they will sooner or later be divulged to competitors. Needless to 
say, this interest must be sacrificed to the public interest in ensuring that the financial markets 
do not descend into chaos, but the question is whether a competent authority will always have 
sufficient expertise to fathom the algorithms. In fact, the national competent authorities can 
achieve the correct level of knowledge and expertise only through far-reaching cooperation 
and the exchange of information, not only among themselves (both in Europe and 
internationally) and with ESMA, but also and above all with the sector itself.  
 
3. The information referred to in point 2 above may naturally also be important for the 
competent authority of the trading venue at which the investment firm concerned is engaged 
in trading. This is why MiFID II provides that the competent authority of the home Member 
State of the investment firm should, at the request of the competent authority of the trading 
venue, communicate the information ‘without undue delay’.53 
 
4. The investment firm must arrange for records to be kept in relation to the matters referred 
to in point 2 above, and ensure that those records are sufficient to enable its competent 
authority to monitor compliance with the rules.54 
 
5. MiFID II specifically provides that investment firms that engage in HFT must store in an 
approved form accurate and time sequenced records of (a) all its placed orders, including 
cancellations of orders, (b) executed orders and (c) quotations on trading venues. They must 
make them available to the competent authority upon request.55 Nonetheless, investment firms 
that engage in AT (other than HFT) must also keep their transaction data. This is a 
                                               
51 Article 17(2), first paragraph, MiFID II. 
52 Article 17(2), second paragraph, MiFID II. 
53 Article 17(2), third paragraph, MiFID II. 
54 Article 17(2), fourth paragraph, MiFID II. 
55 Article 17(2), fifth paragraph, MiFID II. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
12 
 
consequence of the general provisions on the obligation to maintain records.56 If a competent 
authority requests the transaction data for a particular period, it will be engulfed by an 
unimaginable quantity of data. If the authority is to analyse these data in a meaningful 
manner,  great demands will be made on both the knowledge and expertise of its staff and on 
the capacity and speed of the computer systems it uses. And here too, the correct level of 
knowledge and expertise can in fact be achieved by the competent authorities only through 
far-reaching cooperation and the exchange of information not only among themselves (both in 
Europe and internationally) and with ESMA, but also and above all with the sector itself.  
 
 
 
 
4. 
Specific requirements for market makers 
 
MiFID II introduces specific requirements for investment firms engaged in AT and HFT in 
pursuance of a market making strategy.57 When the following requirements are applied, 
account must be taken of the liquidity, scale and nature of the specific market and the 
characteristics of the instrument traded.58 
 
1. The investment firm must carry out this market making continuously during a specified 
proportion of the trading venue’s trading hours in order to provide liquidity on a regular and 
predictable basis to the trading venue.59 After all, it is precisely in poor market conditions that 
it is important for the market maker to continue providing liquidity and not to suddenly 
withdraw from the market. Nonetheless, the obligation to make public bid and offer prices on 
a continuous basis is not absolute. In exceptional circumstances the market maker is no longer 
obliged to do so.60 It is ESMA’s task to develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify 
situations constituting exceptional circumstances.61 MiFID II gives ESMA an indications of 
the types of circumstances it could specify, namely: (a) circumstances of extreme volatility, 
(b) political and macroeconomic issues, (c) system and operational matters, and (c) 
circumstances which contradict the investment firm’s ability to maintain the prudent risk 
management practices required by MiFID II (see § V.2 above). A draft elaborating this in 
detail has been published (RTS 8).62  
 
It is therefore being made more difficult for market makers to withdraw in tricky market 
conditions. This is only logical because it is precisely in such market conditions that market 
makers can prove their worth. On the other hand, these risks may prompt some market makers 
to withdraw entirely from the market, thereby reducing the liquidity of the market. Indeed, 
this may already be happening, albeit for other reasons as banks have to set aside so much 
                                               
56 Article 25 MiFIR and Article 16(6) MiFID II. See also ESMA/2014/1570, Consultation Paper MiFID 
II/MiFIR (19 December 2014), at p. 349 under no. 13. 
57 An investment firm that engages in algorithmic trading is considered to be pursuing a market making strategy 
when, as a member or participant of one or more trading venues, its strategy, when dealing on own account, 
involves posting firm, simultaneous two-way quotes of comparable size and at competitive prices relating to one 
or more financial instruments on a single trading venue or across different trading venues, with the result of 
providing liquidity on a regular and frequent basis to the overall market. See Article 17(4) MiFID II. 
58 Article 17(3) and opening words, MiFID II. 
59 Article 17(3)(a) MiFID II. 
60 Article 17(3)(a) MiFID II. 
61 Article 17(7)(c) MiFID II. 
62 ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 
September 2015), pp 275-283. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
13 
 
capital for their market making activities that they may no longer be profitable.63 Moreover, 
dealing on own account is also being regulated in other ways in some jurisdictions (including 
the United Kingdom),64 and there is a Commission Proposal for a Europe-wide ban on dealing 
on own account by certain banks.65 
 
2. The investment firm must enter into a binding written agreement with the trading venue on 
which it engages in AT. The agreement must at least specify the obligations of the investment 
firm in accordance with point 1.66 
 
3. The investment firm must have in place effective systems and controls to ensure that it 
fulfils its obligations under the agreement referred to in point 2 at all times.67 
 
It is ESMA’s task to develop draft regulatory technical standards elaborating the above 
requirements in detail.68 A draft has been published (RTS 8).69 
 
VI. PROVIDERS OF DEA 
 
1. 
General 
 
MiFID II (i) imposes requirements on the internal systems and controls of investment firms 
that provide DEA, (ii) imposes requirements on the relationship with the client, and (iii) 
imposes obligations on these parties as regards information and records.  
 
2. 
Requirements regarding internal systems and controls 
 
An investment firm may provide DEA only if its internal systems and controls meet the 
following requirements. 
 
1. The investment firm has in place effective systems and controls which ensure (a) a proper 
assessment and review of the suitability of clients using the service, (b) that clients using the 
                                               
63 See recently on the point that new banking regulations make it more difficult and costly for banks to engage in 
proprietary trading, and that this might also reduce market liquidity: B. Biais, F. Declerck and S. Moinas, Who 
Supplies liquidity, how and when? (BIS Working Papers No 563) (May 2016) (downloadable from 
https://www.bis.org/publ/work563.htm).   
64 In the UK dealing on own account may generally not be performed in the entity responsible for carrying on the 
core activities (section 142D Banking Reform Act). An obvious example of a core activity is holding savings 
deposits for private clients and SMEs. For a description of the UK approach, see, for example, K. Alexander, 
Regulating the Universal Model Banking in Europe, in: D. Busch and G. Ferrarini (eds.), European Banking 
Union, Oxford, Oxford University Press 2015, pp. 475-499, § 14.03 - § 14.30, in particular § 14.11 and § 14.15.  
65 Commission Proposal of 29 January 2014 for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on 
structural measures improving the resilience of EU credit institutions, COM (2014) 43 final. On this point see, 
for example, Alexander (2015) (see n 64), § 14.31 - § 14.47, in particular, § 14.33 - § 14.35. 
66 Article 17(3)(b) MiFID II; recital 113 MiFID II. The competent authorities are not obliged to approve or 
examine the content of the written agreement between the trading venue and the investment firm which is 
required due to the participation in a market making scheme. Nor, however, are they prevented from doing so, in 
so far as any such approval or examination is based only on compliance with their obligations under Article  48 
MiFID (regulated markets) in conjunction with Article 18(5) (MTFs and OTFs) MiFID II, see recital 114 MiFID 
II. This provision imposes requirements on regulated markets regarding systems resilience, circuit breakers and 
electronic trading. See also § VII.2 below. 
67 Article 17(3)(c) MiFID II. 
68 Article 17(7) MiFID II. 
69 ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 
September 2015), pp 275-283. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
14 
 
service are prevented from exceeding appropriate pre-set trading and credit thresholds, (c) that 
trading by clients using the service is properly monitored, and (d) that appropriate risk 
controls prevent trading that may create risks to the investment firm itself or that could create 
or contribute to a disorderly market.70 
 
2. The investment firm’s effective systems and controls must also ensure that appropriate risk 
controls prevent trading that could be contrary to the Market Abuse Regulation or the rules of 
the trading venue.71 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Requirements regarding relationship with the client 
 
MiFID II also imposes requirements on the relationship between the investment firm 
providing DEA and its clients.  
 
1. An investment firm that offers DEA must ensure that clients which avail themselves of the 
service comply with the requirements of MiFID II and the rules of the trading venue.72 It is 
ESMA’s task to develop draft regulatory technical standards that elaborate the above.73 RTS 6 
states that the investment firm must for this purpose conduct due diligence on prospective 
clients and indicates what aspects must be taken into account (including reliability, intentions, 
capacities and financial resources).74 
  
2. The investment firm monitors the transactions in order to identify (a) infringements of these 
rules, (b) disorderly trading conditions, or (c) conduct that may involve market abuse, and that 
is to be reported to the competent authority.75 
 
3. The investment firm ensures that there is a binding written agreement between it and the 
client regarding the essential rights and obligations arising from the provision of the service 
and that under the agreement the investment firm retains responsibility under MiFID II.76 This 
requirement assumes a far-reaching responsibility for the activities of the client. This 
approach is reminiscent of the responsibility of an investment firm which outsources 
functions to an external operator. In such cases, the investment firm remains responsible for 
compliance with the MiFID rules relating to the outsourced activities.77 
 
4. 
Duties regarding information and records 
                                               
70 Article 17(5), first paragraph, MiFID II. 
71 Article 17(5), first paragraph, last part of first sentence, MiFID II. 
72 Article 17(5), second paragraph, first sentence, MiFID II. 
73 Article 17(7) MiFID II. 
74 ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 
September 2015), pp 201-246, at pp. 202-203 (recital 9), pp. 219-220 (Article 22). 
75 Article 17(5), second paragraph, second sentence, MiFID II. 
76 Article 17(5), second paragraph, third sentence, MiFID II. 
77 See Article 14(1) MiFID I Implementing Directive, which provides that ‘[m]ember States shall ensure that, 
when investment firms outsource critical or important operational functions or any investment services or 
activities, the firms remain fully responsible [italics added, DB] for discharging all their obligations under 
[MiFID I] (…)’. As for the MiFID II regime, see Article 31(1), first sentence, Draft Commission Delegated 
Regulation, C(2016) 2398 final, 25 April 2016. On this point, see D. Busch, Chapter 20 - The Private Law Effect 
of MiFID: the Genil Case and Beyond, in:  D. Busch and G. Ferrarini (eds), Regulation of EU Financial 
Markets: MiFID II, Oxford, Oxford University Press 2016. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
15 
 
 
Finally, investments firms that offer DEA have certain duties regarding information and 
records. 
 
1. An investment firm which provides DEA to a trading platform must give notice of this to 
the competent authority of its home Member State and to the trading venue at which the 
investment firm provides DEA.78 
 
2. The competent authority of the home Member State of the investment firm may require the 
investment firm to provide, on a regular or ad hoc basis, a description of the systems and 
controls and evidence that they have been applied in practice.79 
 
3. The information referred to at point 2 above may naturally also be important to the 
competent authority of the trading venue at which the investment firm provides DEA. This is 
why MiFID II provides that the competent authority of the home Member State of the 
investment firm must communicate ‘without undue delay’ the information to the competent 
authority of the trading venue.80 
 
4. The investment firm arranges for relevant records to be kept. It ensures that those records 
are sufficient to enable its competent authority to monitor compliance with the rules.81 
 
VII. TRADING VENUES 
 
1. 
General 
 
As noted previously, MiFID II not only introduces specific rules for the AT and HFT traders 
themselves but also provides that the trading venues at which the traders use AT and HFT 
have a responsibility. The same is true of the trading venues that can be reached through 
DEA.  
 
Generally speaking, regulated markets, MTFs and OTFs must have in place effective systems, 
procedures and arrangements to ensure their trading systems (a) are resilient, (b) have 
sufficient capacity to deal with peak order and message volumes, (c) are able to ensure 
orderly trading under conditions of severe market stress, (d) are fully tested to ensure such 
conditions are met and (e) are subject to effective business continuity arrangements to ensure 
continuity of its services if there is any failure of its trading systems.82 However, if HFT and 
AT traders are connected to these trading venues, the internal systems and controls are subject 
to additional requirements. 
 
2. 
Trading venues to which HFT and AT traders are connected 
 
RTS 7 sets out in detail what additional requirements must be fulfilled by the internal systems 
and controls of trading venues to which HFT and AT traders are connected. Just as in the case 
of the traders themselves, trading venues are required to conduct a self-assessment, which 
must take account at least of the requirements set by RTS 7. RTS 7 imposes further 
                                               
78 Article 17(5), third paragraph, MiFID II. 
79 Article 17(5), fourth paragraph, MiFID II. 
80 Article 17(5), fifth paragraph, MiFID II. 
81 Article 17(5), sixth paragraph, MiFID II. 
82 Article 48(1) MiFID II (regulated markets) in conjunction with Article 18(5) (MTFs and OTFs) MiFID II. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
16 
 
requirements in respect of (i) governance, (ii) the compliance function within the government 
process, (iii) staffing, and (iv) outsourcing. There are also requirements relating to the 
resilience of the trading venues, for which purpose: (a) the trading venue must conduct due 
diligence to determine the knowledge and technical arrangements of the traders requesting 
connection to the trading venue, (b) the trading systems of the trader must be tested, (c) the 
algorithms of the traders must be tested to prevent disorderly trading conditions, (e) the 
trading systems must be capable of withstanding extreme trading peaks, (f) various 
requirements are made to prevent disorderly trading conditions (examples are limits per 
trader, pre- and post-trade controls, the power to cancel orders in certain circumstances and 
mechanisms to manage volatility; the trading venue must also have a ‘kill functionality’ that 
cancels all resting orders). RTS 7 also requires a trading venue to adequately protect its 
systems from misuse or unauthorised access and ensure the integrity of the data that are part 
of or pass through the systems.83 
 
The following is also important. 
  
1. Co-location is essential for the business model of HFT traders. They need their trading 
systems (computers) to be in close physical proximity to a trading venue’s matching engine, 
so that they know sooner than other traders what is happening on the trading venue concerned 
and can take advantage of this. To ensure orderly and fair trading conditions, it is essential for 
trading venues to be required to provide such co-location services on a non-discriminatory, 
fair and transparent basis.84 
 
2. Member States may (Member State option) allow a regulated market (i) to impose a higher 
fee for placing an order that is subsequently cancelled than an order which is executed, (ii) to 
impose a higher fee on participants placing a high ratio of cancelled orders to executed orders 
and (iii) to impose a higher fee on those operating a high-frequency algorithmic trading 
technique in order to reflect the additional burden on system capacity.85 
 
3. A trading venue may indicate by means of flagging from participants (a) what orders are 
generated by algorithmic trading, (b) what algorithms have been used for the creation of 
orders, and (c) what persons have initiated the orders. This information is made available to 
the competent authorities upon request.86 The flagging permits the competent authorities to 
react efficiently and effectively against algorithmic trading strategies that behave in an 
abusive manner or pose risks to the orderly functioning of the market.87 
 
3. 
Trading venues to which users of DEA have access 
 
Trading venues which permit DEA must also meet additional requirements concerning their 
internal systems and controls. MiFID II introduces a far-reaching responsibility for 
investment firms that offer DEA to their clients. 
 
                                               
83 ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 
September 2015), pp 248-274. RTS 7 has been adopted pursuant to Article 48(12)(a), (c) and (g) MiFID II. 
84 Recital 62 MiFID II; Article 48(8) MiFID II (regulated markets) in conjunction with Article 18(5) (MTFs and 
OTFs) MiFID II. See further RTS 10: ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – 
Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 September 2015), pp 294-299. 
85 Article 48(9), third paragraph, MIFID II (regulated markets) in conjunction with Article 18(5) (MTFs and 
OTFs) MiFID II. 
86 Art. 48(10) MIFID II (regulated markets) in conjunction with Article 18(5) (MTFs and OTFs) MiFID II. 
87 Recital 67 MiFID II. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
17 
 
1. A trading venue that permits DEA must have in place effective systems procedures and 
arrangements to ensure (a) that such services may be provided only by an authorised 
investment firm or credit institution, (b) that appropriate criteria are set and applied regarding 
the suitability of persons to whom such access may be provided, and (c) that the participant 
(i.e. the investment firm or bank) retains responsibility for orders and trades executed using 
that service in relation to the requirements of MiFID II.88 
 
2. A trading venue that permits DEA must (a) set appropriate standards regarding risk controls 
and thresholds on trading through such access, (b) be able to distinguish and, if necessary, 
stop orders or trading by a person using DEA separately from other orders or trading by the 
participant. 89 
 
3. A trading venue that permits DEA must have arrangements in place to suspend or terminate 
the provision of DEA by a member or participant to a client in the case of non-compliance 
with the requirements of points 1 and 2.90 
 
4. RTS 7 elaborates the rules still further. This too is based on self-assessment by the trading 
venue, which must take account at least of the requirements set by RTS 7. For example, the 
trading venue must draw up and publish rules determining on what conditions investment 
firms connected to the trading venue concerned may offer DEA to their clients. These rules 
must provide, among other things, (a)  that the DEA provider must conduct due diligence on 
their prospective clients; (b) that a legally binding agreement must have been concluded 
between the DEA provider and user; (c) that the DEA provider remains responsible for all 
transactions performed by DEA users with the provider’s trading code;91 (d) whether the DEA 
user may delegate its use to third parties. If so, the DEA provider must have arranged its 
systems in such a way that they can distinguish between the transactions of the DEA user and 
the third party (although it is not necessary for the DEA provider to know the identity of third 
parties who use the trading code by virtue of delegation).92 
 
5. RTS 7 also provides that the trading venue of the DEA provider must, among other things, 
demand (i) that the DEA provider has the ability to monitor orders placed by the DEA user; 
(ii) that the provider has the ability to stop or cancel orders transmitted by DEA users; (iii) 
that the provider has the ability to suspend or withdraw DEA services to any clients where the 
provider is not satisfied that continued access would be consistent with the trading venue’s 
rules and procedures for orderly trading and market integrity.93  
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
 
                                               
88 Article 48(7), first paragraph MiFID II (regulated markets) in conjunction with Article 18(5) (MTFs and 
OTFs) MiFID II. See also the main text immediately prior to n 77 about the parallel with the responsibility of an 
investment firm which outsources functions. 
89 Article 48(7), second paragraph, MiFID II (regulated markets) in conjunction with Article 18(5) (MTFs and 
OTFs) MiFID II. 
90 Article 48(7), third paragraph, MiFID II (regulated markets) in conjunction with Article 18(5) (MTFs and 
OTFs) MiFID II. 
91 See also the main text immediately prior to n 77 about the parallel with the responsibility of an investment 
firm which outsources functions. 
92 ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 
September 2015), pp 248-274. RTS 7 has been adopted pursuant to Article 48(12)(a), (c) and (g) MiFID II. 
93 ESMA/2015/1464, Regulatory technical and implementing standards – Annex I – MiFID II / MiFIR (28 
September 2015), pp 248-274. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104 
18 
 
By subjecting algorithmic trading (AT), including high frequency trading  (HFT), to special 
supervision, MiFID II recognises that this form of automated trading entails special risks. The 
same is true of DEA. It is first of all the AT and HFT traders and DEA providers themselves 
that are subject to strict supervision. It is noteworthy that DEA providers have a far-reaching 
responsibility for clients who wish to make use of DEA, which is apparent, for example, from  
the fact that they must conduct extensive due diligence on their clients. The operators of 
trading venues have, in turn, a far-reaching responsibility for the AT and HFT traders whom 
they admit to their venues – they must, for example, conduct extensive diligence on these AT 
and HFT traders before admitting them to the venue. And the responsibility of the operators 
of the trading venues goes further. They must, among other things, maintain continuous 
supervision of DEA providers. In fact, the operator of the trading venue serves as a kind of 
advance guard for the regulator in supervising DEA providers. It will have to be seen in 
practice how far the responsibility of the various parties actually extends. A situation in which 
parties are deterred from entering or remaining in the market must be prevented. This applies 
in particular to market makers, whose position is presently under pressure for other reasons 
(e.g. because the banks must maintain larger buffers for this activity). Moreover, the  AT and 
HFT traders and trading venues must always determine by means of self-assessment whether 
they comply with the rules. The requirements which this self-assessment must satisfy are 
fairly detailed. The competent authority can admittedly request information, but the picture 
which emerges is that of an authority that is quite remote. And if information is provided to 
the competent authority (whether or not on request), for example the source code of a trading 
algorithm or an overview of all trading transactions in a given period, we must hope that that 
the authority has the computer systems necessary to analyse (in the case of transaction data) 
astronomical quantities of data and also the expertise to assess the value of the information 
and intervene if necessary. The national competent authorities can in fact achieve the requisite 
level of knowledge and expertise only through far-reaching cooperation and the exchange of 
information not only among themselves (both in Europe and internationally) and with ESMA 
but above all with the sector itself. The sector has every interest in cooperating. After all, 
fresh scandals or irregularities could lead to even stricter regulation, for example even an 
outright ban on HFT trading.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3068104
