Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
 
Modelling Order Book Imbalance with Hawkes Processes 
Israel Bergenstein 
 
Abstract— This paper uses Hawkes processes to model cryptocurrency market microstructures. It specifically looks at order flow 
imbalance. It captures whether the order book, at the next time step, is dominated by buying pressure or by selling pressure. Hawkes 
processes are stochastic point processes that capture both self-excitations (a big bid arrival causing a surge in bid arrivals) and crossexciting effects such as surge in bid arrivals causing a cascading effect on ask arrivals. We use L2 order book data retrieved via Coinbase 
web socket API, model the dynamics of order book using Hawkes processes and benchmark it against the existing models such as 
Avellaneda–Stoikov that utilise Poisson processes. 
Index Terms— Bitcoin, Cryptocurrencies, high frequency trading, market making, market microstructure, order flow imbalance 
1 INTRODUCTION                                                                     
HIS paper investigates order book flow dynamics and 
asymmetries in the order book with respect to cryptocurrencies. Cryptocurrencies have seen a massive surge in investor interest, both retail and institutional investors. The current market cap of the cryptocurrency market is 3.6 trillion dollars with 313 billion dollars in volumes traded over the past 24 
hours as of November 5, 2025. Bitcoin dominates the market 
with over 2 trillion dollars in market capitalisation. Many proprietary trading firms have recently entered cryptocurrency 
spaces, either as newly founded crypto-native proprietary trading firms or the established ones that have entered the space. 
Cryptocurrency market making and high frequency trading 
have seen an equally massive surge in popularity as financial 
technology companies rush to build more advanced algorithms 
to take advantage of market microstructures. 
 
 
2 GOALS AND OBJECTIVES  
In this study, we aim to look at modelling the L2 order book 
cryptocurrency data for BTCUSD pair, retrieved via web socket 
API, using multivariate Hawkes processes to see if we can outperform the existing models. We will compare the results of our 
study to see which model performs better. We hypothesise that 
multivariate Hawkes processes are better suited for modelling 
order flow imbalance and will be able to capture self and cross 
exciting effects in cryptocurrency order book because of market 
dynamics better than existing models. This can help lead to 
more robust market making strategies. 
3  BACKGROUND 
In this section we introduce and define mathematical underpinnings of Hawkes processes such as kernel function, conditional intensity function and compensator. We will also define 
market micro-structures and provide explanations for common 
microstructures that are of interest to market participants.  
 
 
3.1 Efficient Market Hypothesis: 
The Efficient Market Hypothesis is the fundamental principle in traditional and corporate finance. It posits that markets are, 
by nature, free of arbitrage opportunities and if arbitrage were 
available, it would have been immediately exploited by the market participants, leading to prices reflecting the market expectation with all the available information. Furthermore, it hypothesises that participants are not likely to beat the market ( have risk 
adjusted returns in excess of the market return ) on a consistent 
basis. However, many market participants such as hedge funds, 
market makers, and traders believe that inefficiencies are present 
in markets and can be exploited using sophisticated technologies, 
advanced algorithms, and state-of-the-art trading infrastructure. 
 
3.2 Market Microstructure and Order-book Imbalance 
According to market participants, there are many arbitrage 
opportunities available in the market. Uninformed yet educated 
traders are classed into two categories: market takers and market 
makers. The makers provide liquidity to market participants. 
They are willing to place limit bid and limit ask orders that aren’t 
necessarily executed straight away. They quote bids and asks and 
consistently update their quotes to reflect market movements 
and mitigate their exposure. They are there to provide a solution 
when the market is in a standstill, such as when the best bid and 
the best ask are far apart in the order book. In situations like this, 
market makers provide bids and asks that meet the current best 
bid (highest) and the current best ask (lowest) “midway”, hence 
providing liquidity to the market while profiting the spread. 
 
There are a number of microstructures and arbitrage opportunities that are often utilised by market participants. Some examples 
include but are not limited to cross exchange arbitrage, statistical 
arbitrage, triangular arbitrage, funding rate arbitrage, order book 
imbalance, order flow imbalance,  and many more. In this paper, 
we will focus on order flow imbalance. It captures whether buying pressure (changes in bids) or selling pressure (changes in 
asks) dominate the order book at its top level with respect to the 
next time step usually defined as dt. We will, however, first introduce and motivate some common microstructures.  
 
3.3 A Primer on Market Microstructures  
In this section we provide a brief primer to the most common market microstructures. 
 
Order flow Imbalance: This signal looks at the changes in 
bids quantity with respect to time versus the changes in asks 
quantity with respect to time. If the difference between the 
two is over a certain threshold ε, then it signals a potential buy 
opportunity, whereas if the difference is below the negative of 
that ε, it signals a sell. The signal decays very fast and must be 
T 

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
exploited with very efficient algorithms usually within 20-30 
microseconds1. This often requires specialised hardware such 
as FPGA where the core logic runs, collocated servers and 
highly optimized C++ or Rust code.  
 
 
 
Quote Intensity: This microstructure looks at the top N levels 
of the order book and counts the number of updates for bids 
and asks respectively. It then uses the following formula: 
 
 
 
Where the difference between the quote updates is normalised 
by their sum. We can then calculate the mean and the standard deviation of the quote intensity itself and then z-score it. If 
the quote intensity is over a certain threshold epsilon or if the 
z score is over a certain value, the signal indicates pressure 
from buyers. On the contrary, it indicates a pressure from the 
sellers.2 
 
This microstructure signal also dissipates very fast in the 100s 
of microseconds. So, it is important to place market orders to 
hit the top level ahead of competition before the signal is captured by competitors. A typical set-up requires an end-to-end 
pipeline latency of 30-50 microseconds to capture the alpha 
generated by this signal.  
 
Another version looks at the updates at the top level such as 
how often participants update their quotes to remain on top of 
the order book.  
 
Volume Synchronised Probability of Informed Trading: This 
particular microstructure is specifically important in cryptocurrencies markets since it looks at the probability that informed traders are in the market, so that one would simply 
avoid trading in such times3. It does that by measuring bid-ask 
volume imbalance on a number of fixed volume buckets.  
 
The first equation below shows if the bids or the asks dominate the trade flow at bucket j whereas the second equation 
looks at the rolling average of the imbalance over n buckets. It 
simply looks at the recent history of volume and checks how 
consistently imbalanced the trades have been.  
 
 
 
 
 
If this value is high, it indicates a potential one-sided trading 
This may suggest presence of toxic trading such as momentum 
 
1 It is hard to define the exact half life, but the general consensus is that most microstructures decay within 100 
microseconds. However, it doesn’t mean that they will be available for the entire 100 microseconds as competitors may 
capture the alpha earlier leading to slippage.  
2 There are other nuances so QI must be updated to see if updates are real liquidity or liquidity withdrawals.  It is useful to combine this signal with VPIN or similar metrics to detect toxicity in the market. 
ignition, market manipulation, or simply it may indicate arrival of events leading to momentum due to recent news, announcements, etc. 
 
A bucket is defined as a finite set of consecutive trades. For example, if we set the bucket size to be 100 BTC and we have the 
following trades taking place:  
 
Trade 1: Buy 20 BTC  
Trade 2: Buy 22 BTC  
Trade 3: Sell 18 BTC  
Trade 4: Buy 40 BTC  
 
At this point the bucket is full, and we calculate the imbalance, 
which turns over to be 82%. We then repeat this process over a 
rolling window4. If the moving average exceeds a certain level, 
such as 80%, the bids are very aggressive, and there is a strong 
likelihood of one-sided trading, something that requires more 
investigation such as combining this signal with other microstructures to make a more informed decision.   
 
Micro-price: This microstructure looks at the volume 
weighted prices and checks if the current mid price exceeds 
micro price plus a threshold, indicating a signal to short (ask 
order). If, however, the average price falls below microprice 
minus the threshold, it indicates a security that is undervalued 
relative to order book pressure (as imbalance is on the bid 
side), suggesting a buy order. Here is the math: 
 
 
 
Where V is the quantity (volume) and p is the best price (bid 
or ask). The mid price is calculated as sum of bids and asks 
prices normalised by 2.  
 
 
 
Where the prices look at the top of order-book prices and the 
volumes also look at the volume at top of order-book.  
 
This microstructure is also very latency sensitive, and it decays very fast, thereby requiring specialised hardware and 
software stack to capture it within 30-50 microseconds.  
 
Orderbook Imbalance: It looks at the snapshot of the orderbook at its top level and checks if bids or asks dominate. It is 
simply defined as the difference of bids and asks quantities 
normalised by their sums. If this difference is over a certain 
threshold, it implies that bids dominate, signalling a potential 
buy order. Else, if it is below the negative of that exact threshold, it implies that asks dominate, signalling a sell order. However, anywhere in between these thresholds, the signal may 
not be reliable.  
 
3 This signal on its own doesn’t necessarily indicate market toxicity and needs to be combined with other 
signals to lead to a more informed decision. It may be that VPIN is high due to recent news leading to momentum spike.  
 

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This microstructure signal also tends to dissipate quickly 
though not as fast as micro price and order flow imbalance 
which are the most latency sensitive microstructures.  
 
All these microstructures can be modelled with Hawkes. 
However, for the purpose of this paper we look at Order Flow 
Imbalance, which looks at the next time-step and capture 
whether the pressure comes from bidders or sellers.  
 
  
3.4 Multivariate Hawkes processes  
This section describes multivariate Hawkes processes. 
Hawkes processes [1] are stochastic point processes that have 
both self excitation and cross excitation properties. Hawkes 
processes, unlike Markov chains, allow for past events to affect 
future events [2] Multivariate Hawkes processes take this further and allow for mutual excitements of a number of point processes. They have been used by [3] to model intensity of midprice changes and trade arrivals and by [4] to model the cross 
excitement of social media sentiment on cryptocurrency price 
swings investigating if there is a cross exciting effect of social 
media sentiment on cryptocurrency market returns. 
4  A MATHEMATICAL PRIMER OF HAWKES PROCESSES 
 
4.1 Conditional Intensity function  
Point processes are defined as probabilistic models of events 
that happen in a mathematical space and are oftentimes utilised to model event arrivals over space, over time or both [5]. 
Conditional intensity function is used to characterise a point 
process, also referred to as  “event arrival”. It is explained as 
the small rate of expectations of event occurrences [6]. 
Given a vector of m point processes: 
 
  
 
with conditional intensity function:  
 
 
 
 
with λi(t) defined as: 
  
            (1) 
 
  
where μᵢ explains the baseline intensity of point process i and 
.T is the transpose of the vector. We have: 
 
  
 
 
 if m=0.       
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
  
 
 
when m=1 
  
And for values of m>1,  
 
 
 
Where dt  is simply (t – s).   
  
This implies that the probability that in the infinitesimal time 
dt, the probability that m events of type i arrive is given by the 
equations above. Where m = 1, this is defined by the actual intensity of the event multiplied by the change in time dt. This 
simply implies that the conditional probability that a single 
event arrives within time dt conditioned on the history of all 
types of events is proportional to the intensity of the process 
itself plus a bias term of o(dt) which tends to 0 on the limit. 
  
Most importantly, it defines that the probability of more than 
a single event of the same type happening within an infinitesimal time dt, to be practically zero. It implies that two events of 
the same type cannot happen at the same time. 
 
 
 
4.2 Exponential Decay function and Kernels   
In this subsection we introduce exponential decay function and the kernel function. Exponential decay function is defined as follows: 
  
                                                     (3) 
 
where μ is the initial value at the initial time, r is the rate of decay and t is the time. 
  
This function is commonly used to describe events that 
quickly dissipate after their arrivals. 
  
The kernel function defines the relationship between two variables in a complex and intertwined system. It is used here in 
Hawkes processes to model the effect of one point process on 
the other over the time variable. In other words, how the arrival of one point process impacts the intensity of the other. According to [2] one common choice for φᵢⱼ(.) is the exponential 
decay function with the other common choice often considered for φᵢⱼ(.) as a power law function. The exponential decay 
function is defined as: 
  
                                                (4) 
  
with αᵢⱼ being the scaling excitation hyperparameter and βᵢⱼ the 
decay hyperparameter. 
  
The power law function is defined as: 
  
                                      
(5) 
  

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
This kernel function requires both cᵢⱼ and βᵢⱼ to take values over 
0 with the latter taking values over 1 allowing the excitation to 
decay gradually and eventually fade away. 
  
The kernel function in (3) models the influence of past events 
as a sudden and immediate burst in intensity which then decays exponentially, whereas the kernel function in (4) models 
the decays in a much more controlled manner, reflecting what 
happens in financial markets over time. 
 
 
4.3 Compensator 
Finally, the compensator is simply the sum of intensity 
functions, conditioned on the history of all events, over time. 
So, to calculate compensator, we integrate over the instantaneous rates of events at each time t shown below: 
  
                               (6) 
  
Where: 
  
    
               
              (7) 
  
And λᵢ(j) is defined as in (1) with φᵢⱼ(.) defined using (4) or (5).
 
4.4 Poisson Model 
The Poisson model is the mathematical model representing events that have very small probabilities but have huge 
state spaces of outcomes. An example is a number of serious 
car accidents happening in each time interval in a day. Such 
events are very rare in such timeframe, yet they can happen 
anywhere within the city. So, Poisson model can be seen as the 
limit of Binomial distribution as n tends to infinity with very 
small probability p, and such events can be represented by a 
Poisson distribution. 
  
Proof: 
  
Let X ~ Binomial(n, p) where n tends to infinity and p is very 
small and let lambda be a constant number: 
 
λ = n · p  => p = λ/n 
  
Then we look at the limit of Binomial distribution as n → ∞. 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Where 
 
 
  
 
 
by combination rules for sequences and since nᵏ is a dominant 
term and  
 
 
  
 
 since (λ/n) is a null sequence for constant term λ as n → ∞. Finally: 
 
 
   
 
by Taylor’s Rule. 
  
Hence, we get: 
  
             
         
              ☐ 
  
The rationale for utilising Poisson processes in AvellanedaStoikov model lies in the fact that Poisson processes are random, independent events that can happen concurrently and in 
continuous time modelling the uncertainty involved with the 
arrival of events (ask and bid) in the order book. 
 
 
4.5 Expectation Maximisation (Maximum Likelihood) 
Algorithm 
In this subsection we introduce expectation maximization 
algorithm, a mathematical model that aims to use multiple iterations to maximise its objective function. The maximum likelihood function is defined as:   
  
      
       
 
 
 
 
(8) 
1

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
  
    We transform the likelihood function to the logarithmic loglikelihood function due to a number of reasons: 1. the computational efficiency of summation over successive multiplications. 2. Since logarithmic function is strictly monotonic, the 
set of values that maximise the log-likelihood function would 
also maximise the original function in (8). 3. as probabilities 
take floating point values between 0 and 1, multiplying successive values in this range would lead to numerical instability 
and underflow problems, leading to the system outputting 0 
instead. 4. During backpropagation, not only will the optimiser suffer from vanishing gradients, but also product rule is 
much more computationally expensive to calculate than summation. The derivative of the sum is simply the sum of the derivatives. 
  
Log transformation is shown below in (9). 
  
             
(9) 
 
  
This is the log likelihood function formula for multivariate 
Hawkes processes. This formula represents the likelihood of 
observing a sequence of events given hyperparameters (baseline intensity μ, jump sizes α, and decays β). The algorithm 
will iterate to find the best values for these hyperparameters 
that would best fit the model. 
  
The optimiser iterates through every observed event of type k, 
calculates its intensity λ at event arrival. For example, if the intensity is high at arrival, it implies the expectation was met 
and this increases the probability. 
  
The compensator Λ(T) , as defined in (6) and (7) is simply the 
total number of expected events all the way up until the time 
of interest T. In other words, it is the Riemann integral of the 
conditional intensity function λ over the time interval starting 
with 0 and ending at time T: [0,T]. 
  
The first term is the sum of log-intensities at arrival of point 
processes whereas the second term represents the Riemann integral of the conditional intensity function for all process dimensions. 
5 ANALYSES OF EXISTING LITERATURE  
 
Marco Avellaneda and Sasha Stoikov [7] have proposed a 
seminal stochastic control approach for high-frequency market 
making. They model arrival of buy and sell market orders as 
independent Poisson processes whose intensities decline exponentially with the distance (depth) of the quoted spread. The 
market maker chooses a bid and asks quotes to maximize expected utility of terminal wealth, penalized by inventory risk.  
Luo 
The model above is elegant and tractable, and its popularity 
stems from closed-form approximations and analytic insight. 
However, its key limitation is the Poisson assumption on arrivals — i.e. exogenous, memoryless, and independent.  
Olivier Guéant [8] has pointed out that Avellaneda-Stoikov 
(AS) model is difficult to apply in most stock markets for two 
main reasons: (i) the discreteness of prices that is particularly 
relevant for stocks with large tick sizes, and (ii) the model’s 
omission of limit order books’ key features, such as the queuing 
structure, order priorities, and volume dynamics. This paper 
considers a modeling framework according to AvellanedaStoikov with general intensity functions, instead of the exponential intensity functions of most models, and demonstrates 
that the four-variable HJB equation derived from various optimization criteria can be reduced to a tractable system of ordinary differential equations. It generalizes the Poisson intensity 
framework, and offers some flexibility, though not necessarily 
capturing clustering or excitation in arrivals. The models above 
typically rely on Poisson or similarly memoryless/parametric 
arrival assumptions that may mis-specify the endogenous, clustered nature of modern order flow. Guéant therefore provides 
a flexible baseline control framework that is still rooted in intensity-based (often memoryless) arrival models. 
Liu & Wang [10] build a tractable equilibrium model of a 
dealer/market-maker in an OTC setting that explicitly embeds 
asymmetric information, inventory risk, and the dealer’s market power and ability to shift trades among investors by optimally setting bid/ask price schedules. They derive closed-form 
equilibria for prices, depths, traded volumes and inventories 
and show that expected bid-ask spreads can fall with greater 
information asymmetry and that spreads can be positively correlated with trading volume.  
 
Many classical and generalized models mentioned above still 
treat arrival intensities as exogenous or memoryless, or simple 
functions of quote depth. However, they don’t capture self-excitation, such as orders begetting further orders, or cross-dependence between buy/sell or between assets. While some 
Hawkes-based market-making models exist, their empirical 
performance on real high-frequency / crypto market data is less 
often studied. Therefore, we would like to piggyback on Poisson market-making models by replacing the arrival process 
with Hawkes, then we will compare performance and risk. 
 
Aggressive market orders are those that consume liquidity by 
crossing the spread. These orders directly impact price movement and are central to price formation. Xu & Zhou [4] argue 
that the arrival pattern of aggressive orders is therefore a useful 
object of study. Empirical observations of order flow often 
show fat tails inter-trade durations, autocorrelation in inter-arrival times, and clustering behavior. Xu & Zhou cite this as a 
key motivation for applying Hawkes point process modeling 
instead of memoryless Poisson processes.  
 
They propose a bivariate marked Hawkes model to characterize aggressive market order arrivals. They calibrated the model 
with two types of kernel function using order flow data of a 
stock traded on Shenzhen Stock Exchange in 2003 and concluded that the model is well estimated when the kernel is a 
smooth cut-off exponential function and the parameters satisfy 
the stationary condition. 
 
Luo, Rui, Vikram Krishnamurthy, and Erik Blasch [2] construct 
a trivariate Hawkes process model where each process corresponds to block arrival, positive price jump, or negative price 
jump respectively. They use a sum of exponential kernels to allow for multiple timescales of excitation. That helps capture 
both short-term and longer-term feedback. By using QQ plots 

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
constructed via the random time change theorem, they managed to show that the Hawkes model has much smaller deviations in slope than the Poisson models, both for block arrivals 
and for price jump events. This implies that Hawkes model is a 
better fit to the Blockchain dataset than the Poisson process 
model. 
 
In summary, Hawkes models, especially when marked and 
multivariate, consistently outperform Poisson baselines in 
modelling clustered order arrival data. They provide both a statistically superior description and mechanistic insight into the 
endogeneity of order flow.  
 
5.1 SUMMARY OF COMPETITOR ANALYSIS: 
The Avellaneda–Stoikov (AS) model [7] continues to be employed as the benchmark for academic market-making research, primarily due to its tractability. However, the biggest 
issue with this model is Poisson assumptions. It uses independent Poisson processes to model event arrivals dynamically. As a result, Avellaneda–Stoikov struggles to account for 
and reproduce self excitations and cross excitations that exit in 
real order flow dynamics   
Guéant [8] extends [7] with the inclusion of a generalized intensity function. It also transforms the stochastic control problem into ordinary differential equations. These modifications 
increase flexibility of the model. However, one of the main 
problems, the exogenous assumption of event arrivals remains 
under Guéant [8] dynamics. 
Liu & Wang [10] went on further and introduced information 
asymmetry into dealer market-making in a bid to link spreads 
to information friction. However, they failed to explicitly 
model the clustering of high-frequency order arrivals as they 
mainly remained as equilibrium models. 
Xu & Zhou [9] managed to directly apply Hawkes processes 
and test them in aggressive market orders, under order spikes, 
in Chinese equity markets. This proved that Hawkes processes 
are better fit than Poisson processes via both fat-tailed inter-arrival times and clustering. 
Luo et al. [2] extend the models to account for interlinked 
events via inclusion of multivariate Hawkes with multiple kernels. They applied the models to blockchain events (Bitcoin 
block arrivals and price jumps). Hawkes processes once again 
showed superior statistical fit compared to Poisson. 
 
6 PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Empirical evidence suggests that cryptocurrency order flow 
exhibits self-excitation. It is due to a significant event arrival 
causing further event arrivals of similar nature. For example, a 
large market order event can excite the network and significantly increase the likelihood of further buying/selling when it 
arrives. Besides, it also exhibits clustering especially during 
high volatility, and the cross excitation happens between different event types in crypto limit order book. This research aims to 
investigate both existing Poisson Market Making models such 
as Avellaneda-Stoikov as well as multivariate and univariate 
Hawkes models. Then it will compare the performance of the 
these models using their raw metrics and risk-adjusted metrics. 
To be able to calculate overflow imbalance, we will need to record L2 data and reconstruct the orderbook for further analysis. 
 
 
 
6.1 Data Retrieval and Processing Pipeline 
The data retrieval has been done using python that 
retrieves L2 order book data from Coinbase web-socket API. 
Due to the computational costs and limits imposed by the 
provider, we have limited retrieval to BTC-USD. The existing 
code makes a connection request to the web-socket API and 
subscribes to L2 order book. It retrieves data and processes 
them in real-time. It then stores the data locally for further 
analysis. Furthermore, it reconstructs the order book, models 
the dynamics, performs Maximum Likelihood estimation to 
tube hyperparameters, calculates order flow imbalance as a 
market micro-structure of interest, places orders based off the 
signals, and finally calculates and plots relevant financial 
metrics.  
 
6.2 Data Normalisation and Queue Logic for HFT 
It is important that upon retrieving the order book L2 data 
via a web socket client, the data is normalised using a stateless 
normaliser module to be turned into an order book object that 
is then processed inside a single producer single consumer lock 
free queue with atomic updates. CPU pinning mechanism must 
be put in place to pin the threads to specific CPU cores. This 
helps to prevent the CPU from reassigning threads to other 
cores leading to expensive cache reloads that can result in significant delays. Furthermore, memory must be pre-allocated to 
prevent dynamic memory allocations, that can lead to expensive allocation operations and create bottlenecks on the hot 
path. Strategy clients shall use single producer single consumer 
queue, each using its own queue, and retrieve data from the 
front of the queue via dequeuing it and running analytics on it. 
Much of these processes require programming languages such 
as C++ or Rust. In addition, back testing shall only happen on 
the cold path, where the normalised exchange data is stored in 
for archival. The hot path is only used for placing live orders.  
 
6.3 Model 
 
We have approached the task by investigating both univariate and multivariate Hawkes process as a method to 
model order book dynamics and look for potential imbalance 
as a microstructure. We have then compared the risk adjusted 
metrics to those created as a result of employing existing Poisson based models such as Avellaneda-Stoikov. 
The multivariate Hawkes process has two dimensions, one for 
arrival of bids and one for that of asks with their intensity 
functions defined as below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (10) 
  
 
          
 
 
 
 
 

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
            
          (11) 
  
where λ_b(t) and λ_a(t) define conditional intensities of bids 
and ask arrivals respectively and ϕ_ii is the kernel function 
representing self excitation and ϕ_ij represents cross excitation. Here ϕ_ba indicates cross excitation of asks on bids and 
ϕ_ab cross excitation of bids on asks. For the kernel function, 
we have employed both exponential decay function (4), 
aligned with what is used in academic research and for ease of 
computation, as well as the power law function (5) to compare 
the performance of the two. We hypothesise that, based on the 
limitation of the sample data, the power law kernel wouldn’t 
show an advantage over the exponential decay function.  
  
The parameters of the models are calibrated using maximum 
likelihood estimation algorithm.  
  
Finally, order flow imbalance, f(x), as defined in section 3.3, is 
calculated mathematically as follows for N levels: 
  
 
                                  (12) 
  
and for top-level imbalance we have: 
                    
         
 
          (13) 
  
where q is the quantity and b and a are bids and asks in the order book respectively. 
  
     We have, in our previous draft version, employed univariate Hawkes processes and compared the results to multivariate Hawkes. In our current work, the multivariate has been 
employed to compare against both univariate Hawkes and 
Avellaneda-Stoikov market making models  
 
 
6.4 Results 
The results our earlier research had shown that single variate 
Hawkes models are able to outperform existing Poisson based 
models at least based on our sample data. We summarise the 
findings of the results in the table and the graph below.  
 
 
 
Metric 
Hawkes 
AS 
Final PnL 
$14.06 
$15.94 
Return (%) 
0.01 
0.02 
Sharpe 
0.45 
0.23 
Max DD 
$18.22 
$39.75 
Max DD (%) 
0.02 
0.04 
Fills 
68 
115 
Fill Rate (%) 
6.8 
11.5 
 
From these metrics we can see that Hawkes processes win due 
to having lower drawdowns, leading to a higher Sharpe ratio. 
We see that on purely raw metrics Avellaneda-Stoikov (AS) 
wins since it offers twice more return compared to Hawkes, 
however, this comes at a much higher drawdown expense. 
Also, Hawkes have significantly lower fill rate. The high fill rate 
in AS may be due to noise present in data and not due to signal 
necessarily. However, more detailed analysis on more data and 
under different market regimes needs to be conducted to have 
a more informed conclusion. As we can see below that increasing fill rate probability will not impact the findings much. It is 
further shown below that both univariate Hawkes and AS underperform relative to multivariate Hawkes. However, univariate Hawkes model still outperforms AS model.  
7 MULTIVARIATE HAWKES 
This section outlines the process of performing Multivariate 
Hawkes on our data coupled with explaining the research findings.  
 
 
 
7.1 Explanation of the Model 
We have modelled the dynamics using using 4 variables. 1. 
buy trade to capture the aggressive market buy orders hitting 
the ask side of the order book. 2. Sell trade to conversely capture 
the aggressive asks hitting the bids and walking the order book 
down. 3. Limit bids to capture passive buy limit orders that are 
placed on the order book and finally 4. Limit ask to account for 
passive sale limit orders that are placed by sellers on the book. 
We have utilized a 4 x 4 matrix to represent excitations correlation such as self-excitations and cross excitations between different point processes. 
  
Additionally, we have implemented two different Kernel functions to capture different properties and effects of events on the 
order book dynamics. One is the exponential Kernel explained 
in (3) and (4) and the other is the power law explained in (5). 
 
7.2 Modelling Dynamics Using Multivariate Hawkes  
 
Figure 1 Univariate Hawkes vs AS PnL 

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
     We have conducted testing on BTC-USD L2 order book 
data that has been retrieved via web-socket client and normalised via a stateless normaliser. The testing has been done on a 
subset of almost 350,000 events of continuous trading, captured within a timeframe of 3 minutes, with 70% and 30% 
splits, as outlined in section 7.3. The Multivariate Hawkes using an exponential kernel shows the best Sharpe ratio at 15% 
followed by multivariate Hawkes using a power-law kernel at 
5.5%. Both AS and univariate Hawkes model show negative 
Sharpe ratios with AS significantly underperforming univariate Hawkes. The returns are also more impressive for Hawkes 
with the number of trades being identical for all the three. It is 
worth noting that these metrics have not been annualised. This 
has been done to show the models’ performance on data it has 
been tested on without artificially inflating any metrics.  
 
The drawdown analysis shows that both univariate Hawkes 
and AS are facing significant drawdowns, leading to much 
higher risks and potentially much lower Kalmar ratios. Such 
drawdowns, if persistent, are unsustainable over a long-term. 
AS model shows a maximum drawdown of almost 25%, the 
highest maximum drawdown of the four models. The multivariate Hawkes model seems to manage risk much better with 
much lower inventory drawdowns.  
 
 
It is worth mentioning that the tests have been conducted on 
very high frequency low latency data within a short time window due to computational costs, API restrictions and little access to exchange L2 historical data. So, it is important these 
tests are reconducted over a larger window of time and under 
different regimes to arrive at more rigorous conclusions.  
 
Furthermore, on raw trading profit and loss basis, multivariate 
Hawkes also outperforms Avellaneda-Stoikov model. The fill 
rates are over 60% for all models with Hawkes exponential 
having the lowest fill rate of all due to potentially higher signal to noise ratio.  
 
 
Figure 2: PnL comparison for the 4 models 
 
 
Figure 3: Drawdown comparison 
 
 
Figure 4: Inventory Evolution of the 4 Models 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Calibrated Parameters based on EM Algorithm 
 
 
Figure 6: Financial Metrics for the 4 models 
 
Figure 7: QQ Plots  
It is worth mentioning that on the self excitation parameter alpha,  univariate Hawkes model exhibits a high clustering with 
alpha parameter at 0.897. The exponential multivariate 
Hawkes shows 0.761 for buy (α₁₁ = 0.761) and 0.68 for sale (α₂₂ 

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
= 0.68).  This implies an asymmetric microstructure where buy 
orders dominate the order book. This makes sense in the period of study since cryptocurrencies market has been recovering recently after a massive correction.  
 
The model using power law as its kernel, however, shows the 
same value of 0.275 for both buy and sale events. This is due to 
the signal decay that happens slower than with exponential 
decay kernel. It indicates that the model shows same effect 
spread over the time window studied. This reinforces our earlier findings that this model exhibits a higher signal to noise 
ratio.  
 
Interestingly, the model with exponential kernel fails to capture buy and sell cross excitation which is unrealistic. It implies the model may not be able to learn from the pattern in 
between data and more testing needs to be done.  
  
7.3 STRATEGY  PREPARATION 
We have implemented two identical market making strategies 
using 
both 
multivariate 
Hawkes 
processes 
and 
Avellaneda-Stoikov. The hyperparameters of Hawkes μ, α, β 
have been tuned using expectation maximization (EM) algorithm as done by [2]. The Hawkes models use adaptive bid and 
ask quotes based on predicted directions. 
  
Regarding Avellaneda-Stoikov, its hyperparameter σ that represents volatility of the asset has been estimated from price evolution dynamics and price changes and the model adjusts bids 
and asks dynamically to neutralise inventory risk. The metrics 
have been discussed in section 7.2.  
7.4 METHODOLOGY USED FOR FAIR COMPARISON   
We have attempted to ensure that the comparison between 
the two models were following similar logic and under similar 
dynamics. This has been done in a bid to arrive at reasonable 
conclusion regarding the two dynamics for Market Making 
strategies. 
  
The main difference, however, is that the Hawkes multivariate 
model utilises the intensity ratio formula shown below to dynamically adjust quotes based upon order flow imbalance it 
predicts as a result of its training, whereas AS model utilises 
inventory and volatility of the inventory as mechanisms to adjust quotes dynamically. The rationale for such choice lies in fair 
comparison rather than differences in strategies, in which each 
model’s capability in predicting order flow imbalance is the primary driver of quote adjustments. 
7.5 LIMITATIONS   
We have assumed that we stay on the top of order book and 
that every market order hits our quote in both models with a 
relatively high probability. Realistically, however, without access to L3 order book data, it would be very hard to tell deterministically where we are. It is also possible competitors can 
beat us and fill the orders faster due to their technological infrastructure, FPGA programming and collocated servers. So, in reality the fill probability is likely much lower. 
 
The lower fill probability could potentially lead to slippage in 
which case the competitors may fill top of order book, which 
includes the highest bid on the bid leg and the lowest ask on the 
ask leg, ahead of us and with orders cascading down creating 
slippage. This process can lead to our orders not getting filled 
and if getting filled may not get filled at the desired quote due 
to slippage. However, we have decided to relax this assumption 
to look at fair comparison between the two models without concerns to competitive dynamics since these mathematical models 
can theoretically be deployed by any high frequency trading 
firm. Our focus here has been on quality, rather than quantity, 
of predictions.  
 
Furthermore, applying a fill probability will still lead to similar 
conclusions on model performance despite having fewer trades 
filled. In which case, both models would have most likely had 
fewer absolute returns, whereas the financial metrics such as 
Sharpe and Sortino ratios, Kalmar ratios would have stayed 
more favourable to multivariate Hawkes compared to AS 
model. In addition, due to limited data, a fill rate probability of 
20% would have potentially resulted in no conclusions.  
 
Finally, although it is important that such models run on significantly much more data, we believe that training these models 
on too much data can lead to a number of problems. For example, presence of noise and nonstationarity can be quite complex 
to handle. Due to the sheer volume of data, mathematical methods such as principal component analysis and variation inflation factor, which are used to remove highly correlated features 
and keeping a smaller orthogonal features set (in case of 
PCA),  can only add to the complexity of the model training. 
Furthermore, training complex expectation maximisation algorithms on large data is computationally very expensive. It is in 
the order of 
.  
 
Furthermore, the models work based on fresh set of data and 
are designed for speed and precision in capturing alpha rather 
than being trained on too much data. So, for these purposes, we 
have decided to rely on inference based on a small subset of real 
L2 normalised exchange data. 
 
7.6 FOLLOW UP WORK 
     Due to the limitations above, it is important that the study is 
conducted on more data and under different market regimes. 
As cryptocurrency markets are highly volatile with prices being 
nonstationary, a walk forward back-test capturing different 
market regimes coupled with differencing the quotes (bids and 
asks) or even differencing the filled prices, where best bids and 
asks are matched, would be an ideal next step. In our existing 
work, we are already handling non-stationarity. Furthermore, 
latency modelling, fill probability modelling with Monte Carlo 
methods to check the models’ performance under different conditions can help with making a better inference. Finally, a more 
advanced modelling such as a multi-agent reinforcement learning can help capture trading interactions, and adapt to them, 
more dynamically.  

Modelling Orderbook Imbalance with Multivariate Hawkes  
 
 
8 CONCLUSION  
In this study, we looked at modelling order flow imbalance 
using multivariate and univariate Hawkes process on BTCUSD 
L2 data retrieved via Coinbase web-socket API and compared 
that to inventory management Avellaneda-Stoikov model. The 
data has been retrieved live using a web-socket API client. Historical order book data aren’t provided by exchanges to individuals. In order to have access to historical L2 data, exchanges 
require participants to have market maker status with the relevant exchange. However, we tested the hypothesis using live 
trading data that was stored locally with mechanism utilised to 
recreate the order book for testing purposes.  
 
We have used identical rules and relaxed assumptions on probability of getting filled to compare the models on their raw 
mathematical ability to capture alpha and produce risk adjusted returns. We observed that, based on our sample, Hawkes 
processes with both exponential kernel and power law kernel 
outperform Avellaneda-Stoikov Poisson based processes on 
risk adjusted metrics with a higher signal to noise ratio. This is 
mainly due to reasonable return coupled with lower drawdowns, which led to higher Sharpe ratio for Hawkes compared 
to AS model. The metrics have not been annualised to avoid inflating them based on a very short time window. It is likely, 
however, that the ratio could differ significantly as the models 
are used to trade continuously. This is evident from the fact that 
the univariate Hawkes study conducted earlier on a different 
set showed better performance that the univariate study conducted most recently. Furthermore, as Multivariate Hawkes is 
a directional alpha model, whereas Avellaneda-Stoikov is an inventory management model, it seems that the former is better 
capable of capturing order book microstructures.  
 
Finally, it seems that the type of Kernel used with multivariate 
Hawkes model seems to impact the performance of the model 
at least based on our sample. This makes sense since the 
strength of the power law Kernel function as shown in (5)  lies 
in its ability to keep excitations over an extended period of time 
and gradually decaying them whereas the exponential decay 
immediately starts the decay. The excitation signal instantly 
fades away. This, on a very short-term horizon, would favour 
the exponential kernel. This was the case with our sample live 
L2 dataset. However, on a longer term, the difference can be 
more noticeable.  
 
These findings are interesting and call for more analysis on a 
larger window of time and under different regimes. It is likely 
that given their ability to capture the market dynamics, multivariate stochastic point processes are better suited to capture 
the cryptocurrency microstructures and can be looked at as an 
alternative to AS model by both market makers and market takers.  
REFERENCES 
1. 
A. G. Hawkes, “Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes,” 
Biometrika, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 83–90, 1971. 
2. 
R. Luo, V. Krishnamurthy, and E. Blasch, “Hawkes Process Modeling of Block Arrivals in Bitcoin Blockchain,” arXiv:2203.16666 [cs.NI], 2022. 
3. 
C. G. Bowsher, “Modelling security market events in continuous time: Intensity based, 
multivariate point process models,” Journal of Econometrics, vol. 141, no. 2, pp. 876–
912, 2007. 
4. 
R. C. Phillips and D. Gorse, “Mutual excitation of cryptocurrency market returns and 
social media topics,” in Proceedings of the 4th international conference on frontiers of 
educational technologies, 2018, pp. 80–86. 
5. 
A. Verma, S. G. Jena, D. R. Isakov, K. Aoki, J. E. Toettcher, and B. E. Engelhardt, “A 
self-exciting point process to study multicellular spatial signaling patterns,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 118, no. 32, 2021 
6. 
F. P. Schoenberg, “Introduction to point processes,” Wiley Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Science, 2010. 
7. 
Avellaneda, Marco, and Sasha Stoikov. “High-Frequency Trading in a Limit Order 
Book.” Quantitative Finance, vol. 8, no. 3, 2008, pp. 217-224. Cornell University 
ORIE, Feb. 2009, https://people.orie.cornell.edu/sfs33/LimitOrderBook.pdf 
8. 
Guéant, Olivier. “Optimal Market Making.” arXiv, 6 May 2016, arXiv:1605.01862. Ideals, https://ideas.repec.org/p/arx/papers/1605.01862.htmlLiu, Hong, and Yajun Wang. 
“Market Making with Asymmetric Information and Inventory Risk.” March 2014, Washington University Olin, http://apps.olin.wustl.edu/faculty/liuh/papers/lw.pdf. 
 
9. 
Xu, Hai-Chuan, and Wei-Xing Zhou. “Modeling Aggressive Market Order Placements 
with Hawkes Factor Models.” PLOS ONE, vol. 15, no. 1, 10 Jan. 2020, e0226667, 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0226667. PMC, https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6953867/. 
10. 
Liu, Hong, and Yajun Wang. “Market Making with Asymmetric Information and Inventory Risk.” March 2014, Washington University Olin, http://apps.olin.wustl.edu/faculty/liuh/papers/lw.pdf. 
 
