Order Aggressiveness and Order Book Dynamics
Anthony D. Hall
School of Finance and Economics
University of Technology, Sydney
Nikolaus Hautsch∗
Institute of Economics
University of Copenhagen
December 29, 2004
Abstract
In this paper, we study the determinants of order aggressiveness and traders’ order
submission strategy in an open limit order book market. Using order book data from
the Australian Stock Exchange, we model traders’ aggressiveness in market trading,
limit order trading as well as in order cancellations on both sides of the market using a
six-dimensional autoregressive intensity model. The information revealed by the open
order book plays an important role in explaining the degree of order aggressiveness in
the individual processes. Moreover, evidence for signiﬁcant dynamic interdependencies
between the individual processes conﬁrms the usefulness of the multivariate setting.
Overall, our empirical results conﬁrm theoretical ﬁndings on limit order book trading
and show that a trader’s decision of when and which order to submit is signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by the queued volume, the market depth, the inside spread, recent volatility,
as well as recent changes in both the order ﬂow and the price.
Keywords: order aggressiveness, multivariate intensity, open limit order book, order
book dynamics
JEL Classiﬁcation: G14, C32, C41
1
Introduction
Limit order book data provide the maximum amount of information about ﬁnancial markets at the lowest aggregation level. A theme in the recent literature is to obtain a better
understanding of a trader’s fundamental problem to decide when to submit which type of
order and on which side of the market.
∗Corresponding author. Email: Nikolaus.Hautsch@econ.ku.dk. Address: Studiestraede 6, University of
Copenhagen, DK-1455 Copenhagen-K, Denmark, tel: ++ 45 35323022, fax: ++ 45 35323000. Acknowledgements: Special thanks are due to James McCulloch whose assistance in preparing the data has made
this research project feasible.
1

In this paper, we model a trader’s decision problem in a multivariate setting. The
basic idea is to describe the processes of aggressive market orders, aggressive limit orders
as well as aggressive cancellations on both sides of the market in terms of a six-dimensional
point process which is modelled by an autoregressive intensity model. The multivariate
stochastic intensity function, associated with the contemporaneous instantaneous arrival
rate of an order in each dimension is a natural concept to simultaneously model the decision
of when and which order to submit.
In the previous literature on order aggressiveness, the trader’s decision problem is
typically addressed by applying the order classiﬁcation scheme proposed by Biais, Hillion,
and Spatt (1995). The major advantage of this approach is that it is easy to apply since
all information on order aggressiveness is encapsulated into a (univariate) variable which
permits modelling the degree of aggressiveness using a standard ordered probit model
with explanatory variables that capture the state of the order book.1 However, there are
three major drawbacks of this model. First, it is not a dynamic model, so any dynamics
within the dynamics as well as all interdependencies between the individual processes are
ignored. Ignoring multivariate dynamics and spill-over eﬀects can induce misspeciﬁcations
and biases. Second, in a recent paper, Coppejans and Domowitz (2002) show that trades
behave quite diﬀerently from orders and cancellations in relation to particular order book
variables. This makes it questionable whether it is reasonable to treat these events as the
ordered realizations of the same (single) variable.2 Third, modelling order aggressiveness
based on an ordered response model ignores the timing of orders.
Thus, the trader’s
decision is modelled conditional on the fact that there is a submission of an order at a
particular point in time. However, the question of when to place the order is ignored.
Our study avoids these diﬃculties and can be regarded as an extension of the existing
approaches by Coppejans and Domowitz (2002), Ranaldo (2004), and Pascual and Veredas
(2004) in several directions. First, using a multivariate autoregressive intensity model explicitly accounts for order book dynamics and interdependencies between the individual
processes. Second, we allow for the possibility that market orders, limit orders and cancellations behave diﬀerently in their dependence of the state of the market as we model them
as individual processes. Thus, instead of trying to capture order aggressiveness in terms of
a single variable, we account for the multi-dimensionality of the decision problem. Third,
the concept of the intensity function is a natural continuous-time measure for a trader’s
1See e.g. Al-Suhaibani and Kryzanowski (2000), Griﬃths, Smith, Turnbull, and White (2000), Holliﬁeld,
Miller, Sand˚as, and Slive (2002), Ranaldo (2004) or Pascual and Veredas (2004).
2For that reason, Pascual and Veredas (2004) consider the decision process as a sequential process of
two steps. In the ﬁrst step, the trader chooses between a market order, limit order and a cancellation,
whereas in the second step, he decides the exact order placement.
2

degree of aggressiveness. The multivariate intensity function provides the instantaneous
order arrival probability in each instant and in each dimension. This naturally captures
the question of where and when it is likely that an order is placed.
Since we are particularly interested in the determinants of a trader’s order aggressiveness, we explicitly focus on the processes of aggressive buy and sell market orders3,
aggressive ask and bid limit orders4, and aggressive ask and bid cancellations5. According
to previous studies in this ﬁeld, these are the most interesting and substantial orders.
In this sense, our approach can be seen as an extension of the study by Coppejans and
Domowitz (2002). They also focus on the arrival rate of trades, limit orders and cancellations, however not explicitly on aggressive orders but study all incoming orders. Moreover,
they analyze the individual processes separately using a generalized version of Engle and
Russell’s (1998) (univariate) autoregressive conditional duration (ACD) model, so their
framework does not allow for any multivariate interdependencies between the individual
processes.
Using the described setting, we state the following research questions: (i) Can we
conﬁrm previous results regarding the determinants of order aggressiveness and traders’
order submission strategies when the multivariate dynamics of limit order books are fully
taken into account? (ii) How strong are the (dynamic) interdependencies between the
individual processes and how important is it to take order book dynamics into account?
(iii) What is the explanatory power of order book variables on top of the multivariate
dynamics? (iv) Are traders looking not only on the state of the book, but also at previous
market activities inducing changes of the book during the past minutes?
Our empirical analysis is based on order book data from the ﬁve most liquid stocks
traded on the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX) during the period July-August 2002. By
replicating the electronic trading at the ASX, we reconstruct the complete order book at
each instant of time. The order arrival intensities are modelled using a six-dimensional
version of the autoregressive conditional intensity (ACI) model introduced by Russell
(1999), where we include variables capturing the current state of the order book as well
as recent changes in the book.
Our empirical results mainly conﬁrm previous theoretical results on traders’ optimal
order submission strategies as derived by Parlour (1998) and Foucault (1999). However,
3These are market orders whose posted volume exceeds the standing volume on the ﬁrst level of the
opposite queue and whose volume is equal or higher than the 75%-quantile of all order volumes.
4These are limit orders whose posted price improves the current best ask or bid price, respectively and
whose volume is equal or higher than the 75%-quantile of all order volumes.
5These are cancellations of pending limit orders with a volume equal or higher than the 75%-quantile
of all order volumes.
3

conﬁrming Coppejans and Domowitz (2002), we also observe that the arrival rates of
market orders and limit orders can behave quite diﬀerently in their dependence of the state
of the order book. Therefore, a limit order should not necessarily be considered simply as
a less aggressive version of a market order as in the order classiﬁcation scheme proposed by
Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995). This ﬁnding motivates modelling the individual processes
in a multivariate setting.
Moreover, we ﬁnd clear evidence for multivariate dynamics
and interdependencies between the individual processes.
Finally, it is shown that the
inclusion of order book variables clearly improves the goodness-of-ﬁt of the model. We
also demonstrate that a model which excludes dynamics, but does include order book
variables clearly outperforms a dynamic speciﬁcation without covariates. Hence, we ﬁnd
signiﬁcant evidence for the notion that traders’ order aggressiveness and order submission
strategy is aﬀected by the state of the limit order book.
The remainder of the paper is organized in the following way: In Section 2, we discuss
economic propositions on the basis of recent theoretical research on limit order book
trading.
Section 3 presents the econometric approach.
In Section 4, we describe the
data based on ASX trading as well as descriptive statistics characterizing the individual
limit order books. The empirical results are reported and discussed in Section 5, whereas
Section 6 concludes.
2
Economic Propositions
The desire for a deeper understanding of market participants’ order submission strategies in a limit order book market has inspired a wide range of theoretical and empirical
research6. In a limit order book market, investors can choose between limit orders and
market orders. In this context, traders face a dilemma. The advantage of a market order
is that it is executed immediately. However, with a limit order, while traders have the
possibility of improving their execution price, they face the risk of non-execution as well
as the risk of being ”picked oﬀ”. The latter arises from the possibility that the limit order
can be mispriced when time elapses as a result of new information entering the market.
These economic principles form the basis of numerous theoretical approaches in this area.
One of the ﬁrst models in this ﬁeld was Cohen, Maier, Schwartz, and Whitcomb (1981)
who discussed the ”gravitational pull” property of a limit order. This argument refers to
the idea that after observing a limit order, a market participant has a higher incentive to
6See e.g. Glosten (1994), Handa and Schwartz (1996), Harris and Hasbrouck (1996), Seppi (1997),
Harris (1998), Bisi`ere and Kamionka (2000), Griﬃths, Smith, Turnbull, and White (2000), Lo and Sapp
(2003), Cao, Hansch, and Wang (2003), or Ranaldo (2004) among others.
4

post a market order than placing further limit orders in the immediate neighborhood of
the existing oﬀer which would induce the risk of non-execution.
This idea was reﬁned and extended in several directions by Parlour (1998), Foucault
(1999), Griﬃths, Smith, Turnbull, and White (2000), or Handa, Schwartz, and Tiwari
(2003).
Parlour (1998) proposes a dynamic equilibrium model in which traders with
diﬀerent valuations for an asset arrive randomly in the market. Then, the endogenous
execution probability of a limit order depends both on the state of the book and how
many market orders will arrive over the remainder of the day. She shows that both the
past, through the state of the book, and the future, through the expected order ﬂow, aﬀect
the placement strategy and cause systematic patterns in transaction and order data. The
major underlying idea is the mechanism of ”crowding out” of market sell (buy) orders
after observing market buy (sell) orders. This is due to the eﬀect that after a buy (sell)
market order, a limit order at the ask (bid) has a higher execution probability. Therefore,
since the payoﬀto limit orders increases with the probability of execution, a trader who
wants to sell (buy) is more likely to submit a sell (buy) limit order instead of a sell (buy)
market order. Because of this crowding out of market orders on the opposite side, buy
(sell) market orders are less frequent after sell (buy) market orders than after buy (sell)
market orders. This has been empirically conﬁrmed by Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995)
using data from the Paris Bourse. Similarly, Parlour’s model predicts that the probability
of observing a limit buy order after a limit buy order is smaller than the probability of
observing a limit buy order after any other transaction. This is due to the fact that a
lengthening of the queue at one level decreases the execution probability of further limit
orders at the same level and thus makes them more unattractive.
These underlying principles determine the dependence of a trader’s aggressiveness on
the state of the limit order book. Order aggressiveness is typically measured by applying
the classiﬁcation scheme proposed by Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995) that classiﬁes orders
according to their position in the order book and their implied price impact. By setting the
limit price, the limit volume and attributes associated with speciﬁc execution rules, traders
implicitly determine the aggressiveness of their order, and thus inﬂuence the execution
probability and the implied price impact.
According to this classiﬁcation scheme, the
most aggressive order is a market order which is allowed to be matched with several price
levels on the opposite side, i.e. an order which is allowed to ”walk up” or ”down” the book.
Accordingly, the least aggressive order is a cancellation, where a pending limit order is
removed from the book.
Applying the theoretical underpinning outlined above, ”gravitational pull” and ”crowd5

ing out” arguments imply testable relationships regarding changes of the order book volume and their impact on traders’ incentive to post aggressive market orders, limit orders
and cancellations. As a result, we can formulate the following testable propositions:
(i) An increase of the volume on the ask (bid) side
– decreases the aggressiveness of market trading on the ask (bid) side and increases it on the bid (ask) side,
– decreases the aggressiveness of limit order trading on the ask (bid) side,
– decreases the probability of cancellations on the bid (ask) side.
Similar mechanisms apply to the inﬂuence of market depth on traders’ order aggressiveness.
A higher depth on the ask (bid) side reduces the execution probability on the ask (bid)
side and induces a crowding out towards the opposite market side. A related argument
refers to the informational content of the open limit order book. In particular, a higher
depth on the ask (bid) side reﬂects that a relative higher proportion of volume is to be
sold (bought) at a comparably low (high) price. This induces a negative (positive) price
signal which increases traders’ preference to sell (buy). However, in the case a trader posts
an aggressive limit order, he has to undercut/overbid the current price level in order to
increase the execution probability. This reduces the order’s possible price improvement
and makes limit order trading more expensive. Hence, following the ”gravitational pull”
argument, it is more reasonable to directly post a market order on the opposite side instead
of posting a further limit order and bearing the risk of non-execution. This is stated in
hypothesis (ii):
(ii) An increase of the depth on the ask (bid) side
– decreases the aggressiveness of market trading on the ask (bid) side and increases it on the bid (ask) side,
– decreases the aggressiveness of limit order trading on the ask (bid) side,
– increases the probability of cancellations on the ask (bid) side.
Furthermore, an important determinant of liquidity is the inside spread between the
best ask and bid price. The bid-ask spread determines the costs of crossing the market and
thus of market trading. The higher the bid-ask spread, the higher the costs of immediacy,
and thus the higher traders’ preference for limit order trading:
(iii) The higher the bid-ask spread, the lower the intensity of aggressive market trading.
In contrast, the higher the bid-ask spread, the higher the intensity of aggressive limit
order trading.
6

Moreover, traders’ order submission strategy should not only depend on the current
state of the book but also on recent movements of the price. Positive price movements
during the past trading minutes indicate that a substantial amount of the ask volume was
cleared leading to a decline of the ask depth. Since potential buyers face a high price for
immediacy, limit order trading on the bid side becomes more attractive. Moreover, when
price processes tend to be mean-reverting, a price increase over a particular period should
cause a rise of the sell pressure and an increase of the non-execution risk of limit ask orders
implying a crowding out of limit ask orders towards limit bid orders. These implications
are summarized in the following hypothesis:
(iv) A period of positive price movements leads to a higher (lower) intensity of aggressive
market trading on the bid (ask) side.
Furthermore, it increases (decreases) the
intensity of aggressive limit trading on the bid (ask) side.
In Foucault (1999), investors’ valuations of shares diﬀer. Thus, traders’ order placement
strategies depend on their valuations and the best oﬀers in the book. In a dynamic equilibrium model, Foucault (1999) shows that the volatility of the asset is a main determinant
of the mix between market and limit orders. Higher volatility increases the pick-oﬀrisk
which increases the reservation prices of limit order traders, and thus the costs of market
trading. Then, market trading is less intensive implying a decrease of limit order execution
probabilities. This is summarized in proposition (v):
(v) A higher volatility decreases market order trading and increases limit order trading.
These formulated hypotheses underpin the rationale for the construction of appropriate
explanatory variables in Section 5.
3
The Econometric Approach
The arrival of aggressive market orders, limit orders and cancellations is statistically described as a multivariate (ﬁnancial) point process. The econometric literature concerned
with the modelling of ﬁnancial point processes was originated by the seminal paper by
Engle and Russell (1998) who introduced the class of autoregressive conditional duration
(ACD) models. While this model was successfully applied to univariate duration processes7, it is not easily extended to a multivariate framework. The reason is that in a
7This model has been extended in several directions, see e.g. Bauwens and Giot (2000), Lunde (2000),
Dufour and Engle (2000), Grammig and Maurer (2000), Zhang, Russell, and Tsay (2001), Fernandes and
Grammig (2001), Coppejans and Domowitz (2002) or Bauwens and Veredas (2004) among others. For an
overview, see Hautsch (2004).
7

multivariate context the particular processes occur asynchronously, which is diﬃcult to
address in a discrete time duration model.
The most natural way is to model multivariate point processes on the basis of a speciﬁcation of the (multivariate) intensity function leading to a continuous-time framework. In
this paper, we apply a six-dimensional version of the autoregressive conditional intensity
(ACI) model proposed by Russell (1999). Following the notation of Hall and Hautsch
(2004), let t denote the calendar time and deﬁne tk
i , k = 1, . . . , K as the arrival times of
a K-dimensional point process. Let Nk(t) := P
i≥1 1l {tk
i ≤t} and Mk(t) := P
i≥1 1l {tk
i <t}
represent the right-continuous and left-continuous counting functions associated with the
k-type process, respectively.
Deﬁne the multivariate intensity function as
λ(t; Ft) := (λ1(t; Ft), λ2(t; Ft), . . . , λK(t; Ft)),
where
λk(t; Ft) := lim
∆↓0
1
∆Pr
h
(Nk(t + ∆) −Nk(t)) > 0 |Ft
i
(1)
denotes the (conditional) intensity function associated with the counting process Nk(t)
given the information set Ft.
Hence, in this framework λk(t; Ft) corresponds to the
instantaneous arrival rate of an aggressive order or cancellation, and thus is a natural
(continuous-time) measure for the degree of order aggressiveness at each instant.
Russell (1999) proposed parameterizing λk(t; Ft) in terms of a proportional intensity
structure
λk(t; Ft) = Ψk
M(t)λk
0(t)sk(t),
k = 1, . . . K,
(2)
where Ψk
i is a function capturing the dynamics of the k-type process, λk
0(t) denotes a k-type
baseline intensity component that speciﬁes the (deterministic) evolution of the intensity
until the next event and sk(t) is a k-type seasonality component that may be speciﬁed using
a spline function. The basic idea of the ACI model is to specify the dynamic component
Ψk
i in terms of an autoregressive process. Assume that Ψk
i is speciﬁed in log-linear form,
i.e.
Ψk
i := exp
³
˜Ψk
i + z′
i−1γk´
,
(3)
where zi denotes the vector of explanatory variables capturing the state of the market at
arrival time ti and γk the corresponding parameter vector associated with process k. Then,
8

the ACI(1,1) model is obtained by parameterizing the vector ˜Ψ′
i :=
³
˜Ψ1
i , ˜Ψ2
i , . . . , ˜ΨK
i
´
in
terms of a VARMA type speciﬁcation,
˜Ψi =
³
Akϵi−1 + B ˜Ψi−1
´
yk
i−1,
(4)
where Ak = {αk
j } denotes a (K × 1) innovation parameter vector and B = {βij} is a
(K ×K) matrix of persistence parameters. Moreover, yk
i deﬁnes an indicator variable that
takes the value 1 if the i-th point of the pooled process is of type k.
The innovation term ϵi is computed based on the integrated intensity function associated with the process observed most recently. Hence,
ϵi :=
K
X
k=1
Ã
1 −
Z tk
i
tk
i−1
λk(s; Fs)ds
!
yk
i .
(5)
Under fairly weak assumptions, the integrated intensity function corresponds to an i.i.d. standard exponential variate8. Therefore, ϵi is a random mixture of centered i.i.d. standard
exponential variables, and thus is itself i.i.d. For this reason, weak stationarity of the
model depends on the eigenvalues of the matrix B. If the eigenvalues of B lie inside the
unit circle, the process ˜Ψi is weakly stationary.
Note that the intensity function has left-continuous sample paths. Therefore, Ψi has
also to be a left-continuous function and has to be predetermined at least instantaneously
before the arrival of a new event. Therefore, Ψi is known instantaneously after the occurrence of ti−1 and does not change until ti. Then, λk(t; Ft) changes between ti−1 and ti
only as a deterministic function of time (according to λk
0(t) and sk(t)).
The baseline intensity function λk
0(t) is speciﬁed in terms of the backward recurrence
times xk(t) := t −tk
Mk(t), k = 1, . . . , K, of all processes and may be speciﬁed using a
Weibull-type parameterization depending on the parameters ωk and pk
r,
λk
0(t) = exp(ωk)
K
Y
r=1
xr(t)pk
r−1, (pk
r > 0).
(6)
Then, by denoting W as the data matrix consisting of all points and explanatory
variables, the log likelihood function of the multivariate ACI model is computed as
ln L (W; θ) =
K
X
k=1
n
X
i=1
(
−
Z tk
i
tk
i−1
λk(s; Fs)ds + yk
i ln λk(ti; Fti)
)
,
(7)
where n denotes the number of points of the pooled process. Under correct speciﬁcation
of the model, the resulting k-type ACI residuals
ˆεk
i :=
Z tk
i
tk
i−1
ˆλk(s; Fs)ds
8See Br´emaud (1981) or more recently Bowsher (2002).
9

should be distributed as i.i.d. unit exponential. Therefore, model diagnostics can be performed by evaluating the dynamical and distributional properties of the residuals. Engle
and Russell (1998) propose a test against excess dispersion based on the asymptotically
normal test statistic
p
nk/8(ˆσ2
εk −1), where ˆσ2
εk is the empirical variance of the k-type
residual series and nk denotes the number of points observed for process k.
4
Data and Descriptive Statistics
4.1
Trading at the ASX
The Australian Stock Exchange (ASX) is a continuous double auction electronic market.
Trading at ASX starts with a pre-opening period followed by an opening call auction.
Then, normal trading takes place continuously between 10:09 am and 16:00 pm.
The
market is closed with a further call auction and a late trading period. For more details
regarding the daily market schedule of the ASX, see Hall and Hautsch (2004).
During normal trading, orders can be entered as market orders which will execute
immediately and limit orders which enter the queues. At the ASX, in general orders are
not allowed to walk up (down) the book. Hence, a high quoted volume of a market order
will be matched with the pending volume on the ﬁrst level of the opposite queue. Trades
will be generated and traded orders deleted until there is no more order volume that is
equal to the posted price.
The remaining part of the order will enter the queue as a
corresponding limit order. When a market order is executed against several pending limit
orders, a trade record for each market order - limit order pair is generated. Since such
multiple trades are generated by a single market order, we aggregate them into a single
trade record.
Limit orders are queued in the buy and sell queues according to a strict price-time
priority order. During normal trading, pending limit orders can be modiﬁed or cancelled
without restrictions.9
All trades and orders are visible to the public.
Orders with a
total value exceeding $200,000 can be entered with a hidden volume. However, suﬃcient
information is available to unambiguously reconstruct all transactions.
4.2
Descriptive Statistics
Our empirical analysis is based on order book data from the ﬁve most liquid stocks traded
at the ASX during the period 1 July to 30 August 2002, namely Broken Hill Proprietary
Limited (BHP), National Australia Bank (NAB), News Corporation (NCP), Telstra (TLS)
9Clearly, modifying the order volume or the order price can aﬀect the order priority. For more details,
see Hall and Hautsch (2004).
10

and Woolworths (WOW). The samples are extracted from the Stock Exchange Automated
Trading System (SEATS) and contain time stamped prices, volumes and identiﬁcation
attributes of all orders as well as information about opening and closing auctions, preopening periods as well as market enquiries. By replicating the execution engine of the
ASX, with explicit consideration of all trading rules, we reconstruct the individual order
books at any time.
Our resulting samples consist of data covering the normal trading period, where we
remove data from the opening and closing call auctions as well as all market crossings
and oﬀmarket trades. Then, the resulting samples consist of 147, 552, 107, 595, 252, 009,
97, 804, and 59, 519 observations for BHP, NAB, NCP, TLS and WOW, respectively.
Table II shows descriptive statistics characterizing the order books of the ﬁve individual
stocks during the sample period. We observe an average bid-ask spread ranging between
1.0 ticks for TLS and around 2.2 ticks for NAB. For all stocks, the average sell volume is
slightly higher than the buy volume which is explained by a slightly down market during
the analyzed period. However, comparing the average posted as well as cancelled ask and
bid volume, there are no systematic diﬀerences. The variables d askp and d bidp measure
the diﬀerence between the current posted price of a limit order and the current best ask
and bid price, respectively. Thus, we observe that on average limit orders are placed within
a distance of about 5 ticks to the current best ask and bid price. Again, smaller spreads
are set for TLS (around 2 to 3 ticks), whereas NAB and NCP reveal relatively wide spreads
of around 6 to 8 ticks. The variables adiff x and bdiff x represent the price diﬀerence
between the mid-quote and the price associated with the x-th quantile of the standing ask
and bid volume, respectively10. Therefore, they reﬂect the average piecewise steepness of
the bid and ask reaction curves. It turns out that for most stocks, the average shape of
both curves is relatively symmetric, but for WOW we observe a slightly higher average
depth on the bid side. Finally, the variables adep x measure the market depth in terms of
the ratio of the volume associated with the x-th quantile and the corresponding implied
price impact. For instance, adep 5 = 45.662 for BHP means that up to the 5%-quantile
we observe on average a standing ask volume of 45, 662 shares per tick. Again, we ﬁnd
relatively symmetric shapes of the individual bid and ask queues.
4.3
Order Aggressiveness at the ASX
Table I gives a classiﬁcation of the order aggressiveness at the ASX. Market orders are
generally not allowed to walk up or down the ask or bid queues, respectively, so at the ASX
10For an exact deﬁnition of the variables, see Table II.
11

the most aggressive order is an order which has a volume that exceeds the standing volume
on the ﬁrst level of the opposite queue, and thus results in an immediately executed market
order for the matched volume and a limit order for the remaining volume. Accordingly, we
deﬁne a ”normal” market order as a buy or sell order whose volume can be fully matched
with pending limit orders.
Regarding limit orders, we apply the classiﬁcation scheme
proposed by Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995) and classify ask and bid limit orders according
to the distance between the posted limit price and the current best bid and ask price. Thus,
we distinguish between ”most aggressive” limit orders whose price undercuts or overbids
the current best ask or bid limit price, respectively. Correspondingly, ”aggressive” limit
orders are placed directly in the current ﬁrst level of the ask or bid queue, whereas ”normal”
limit orders enter the higher levels of the order book. Finally, cancelled limit orders are
regarded as the least aggressive orders.
Table III shows the average numbers of the diﬀerent order types as well as the average
waiting times between the individual order arrivals. We observe that the proportions of the
particular order types are not stable across stocks and show clear variations. For instance,
the percentage of aggressive market orders varies between 2% and 7% corresponding to
average waiting times between 2 and 8 minutes.
Accordingly, the proportion of most
aggressive limit order varies between 0.1% and 4% corresponding to average waiting times
between 3 and 35 minutes.
On average, we observe a higher proportion of the most
aggressive ask limit orders than of the corresponding bid limit orders. Furthermore, it
turns out that on average around 5% of all limit orders are cancelled. An exceptionally
high proportion of cancellations of around 11% is observed for NCP.
In our empirical analysis, we focus on the three most interesting groups of orders: aggressive buy and sell orders, most aggressive ask and bid limit orders as well as aggressive
ask and bid cancellations. Moreover, we introduce a further criterion for order aggressiveness which goes beyond the scheme shown in Table I. In particular, we exclusively select
only those orders which have a quoted volume which is equal or higher than the 75%-
quantile. This additional selection is applied for two reasons: First, order aggressiveness
is naturally linked to the size of the posted volume. For economic signiﬁcance, it makes
a huge diﬀerence whether a small or a high volume is quoted. For high volumes, the economic trade-oﬀbetween the costs of immediacy and the pick-oﬀrisk is much more relevant
than for small trades. Second, focussing exclusively on the big trades should reduce the
noise in the data and should help to identify distinct patterns and relationships. This
selection rule leads to a signiﬁcant reduction of the sample size resulting in 9, 316, 10, 463,
9, 142, 3, 102, and 3, 438 observations for BHP, NAB, NCP, TLS, and WOW respectively
12

(see Table III).
5
Empirical Results
Since the estimation of 6-dimensional ACI processes is a challenging task requiring the
estimation of a large number of parameters, we estimate restricted ACI speciﬁcations. In
order to reduce the number of parameters, we specify the backward recurrence functions
in terms of a Weibull parameterization, where we do not allow for interdependencies
between the individual functions, i.e. pk
r = 1 ∀k̸ = r.
Moreover, while the matrix of
innovation parameters A is fully parameterized, we do not allow for spill-over eﬀects in
the persistence terms, i.e. the matrix B is speciﬁed as a diagonal matrix. In order to
account for deterministic intra-day seasonality patterns, we specify three linear spline
functions for the processes of aggressive market orders, limit orders, and cancellations
based on one hour nodes11. For parameter identiﬁcation, the spline function is normalized
to one at the beginning of the trading day. To ease the numerical optimization of the log
likelihood function, we standardize the time scale by the average duration of the pooled
process.12
In order to test the economic propositions formulated in Section 2, we deﬁne the
following explanatory variables capturing the state of the order book:
• AV: Current logarithmic aggregated volume in the ask queue.
• BV: Current logarithmic aggregated volume in the bid queue.
• DAV: Changes of the logarithmic aggregated ask volume during the past 5 minutes.
• DBV: Changes of the logarithmic aggregated bid volume during the past 5 minutes.
• SD: Current bid-ask spread.
• MQ: Change of the mid-quote during the past 5 minutes.
• VL: Volatility, measured by the average squared mid-quote changes during the past
5 minutes.
In order to analyze the importance of order book dynamics and information provided by
the open limit order book for the goodness-of-ﬁt and the explanatory power of the model,
we estimate three diﬀerent speciﬁcations: Table IV reports the estimation results based
on an ACI model including both dynamic variables as well as order book variables. Table
V is based on a speciﬁcation which includes order book information, however, does not
11We do not estimate separate seasonality functions for the diﬀerent sides of the market.
12This scaling does not change the order of the processes.
13

account for any dynamics in the multivariate process. Hence, in this speciﬁcation, ˜Ψi is set
to zero. Finally, Table VI gives the results of a speciﬁcation which accounts for dynamic
structures but excludes any order book covariates.
5.1
Statistical Results
The processes are estimated by maximum likelihood using the MAXLIK-procedure of
GAUSS. It should be stressed that despite of the high-dimensionality of the processes and
the high number of parameters, the processes converged smoothly and without numerical
diﬃculties.
The following statistical results can be summarized. First, for all processes, we ﬁnd
signiﬁcantly declining backward recurrence functions as revealed by parameters pk
k < 1.
Thus, the event arrival rates decline with the length of the spell which is a well known
result for ﬁnancial duration data. However, as indicated by the residual diagnostics, not
in all of the models is the speciﬁcation of the backward recurrence function suﬃcient
to completely capture the distributional properties of the processes. In particular, the
speciﬁcations of Table IV and V reveal signiﬁcant excess dispersion, which is not the case
for the models reported in Table VI. Thus, the inclusion of order book variables seem to
deteriorate the model’s ability to capture the distributional properties of the data.
Second, we ﬁnd evidence for positive autocorrelations in the individual processes as
indicated by signiﬁcantly positive estimates of αk
k. Thus, the individual arrival rates are
clustered. This is true for all individual processes including cancellations. Nearly all processes show quite high persistence, revealed by parameter estimates of β close to unity.
Moreover, we also observe signiﬁcant spill-over eﬀects between the individual processes.
The strongest interactions seem to exist between the individual sides of the market which
is particularly true for market orders13, but also for limit orders. Weaker, however in
most cases still signiﬁcant, interdependencies are also found between the arrival rates of
aggressive market orders and aggressive limit orders. Interestingly, these spill-overs are
primarily positive, so we do not ﬁnd evidence for the fact that a high aggressiveness on
one side of the market negatively inﬂuences the aggressiveness on the opposite side. These
results suggest that interdependencies between the individual order arrival processes are
obviously not driven by an individual trading behavior as predicted by the economic underpinnings outlined in Section 2. Rather, such eﬀects seem to be driven by an underlying
process of general market activity which simultaneously aﬀects all individual processes.
13This ﬁnding is consistent with the results of Hall and Hautsch (2004) who ﬁnd similar results when
analyzing the continuous buy-sell pressure at the ASX.
14

Similar results are also found for the ask and bid cancellation intensity. In most cases, the
parameters α5
i and α6
i are signiﬁcantly positive, indicating that a higher market activity
also increases the intensity of order cancellations. This is particularly true for the impact
of aggressive market trading on the cancellation intensity. However, in the opposite direction, it turns out that the market and limit order processes do not seem to be aﬀected by
the arrival rate of order cancellations since the parameters αi
5 and αi
6 are insigniﬁcant in
most cases.
Third, the estimates of the seasonality functions support the evidence for distinct deterministic intra-day patterns of the intensities of aggressive market trading, limit order
trading and cancellations. The estimated individual intra-day seasonality functions reported in Figure 1, reveal similar patterns in the form of the well known U-shape. Hence,
intra-day seasonalities seem to be induced by a general level of trading activity implying relatively high intensities after the opening, a signiﬁcant decline around noon and a
distinct increase before the closure of the market.
Fourth, as indicated by the Ljung-Box statistics based on the ACI residuals, the dynamic speciﬁcations (Table IV and VI) seem to appropriately capture the dynamical properties of the data. Moreover, for four out of ﬁve stocks, the inclusion of dynamics is absolutely essential in order to capture the serial dependence in the data. This is illustrated by
the diagnostics for the non-dynamic speciﬁcation (Table V). Here, the Ljung-Box statistics
reveal a signiﬁcant dynamic misspeciﬁcation.
Fifth, by comparing the BIC values of the three diﬀerent speciﬁcations shown in Tables
IV through VI, we can conclude that the inclusion of both dynamic variables as well as
limit order book variables clearly improves the goodness-of-ﬁt of the model. However, for
all stocks, the speciﬁcations where order book variables are omitted (Table V) outperform
the non-dynamic models shown in Table VI in terms of explanatory power. Therefore,
this ﬁnding suggests that a speciﬁcation which includes order book information has a
signiﬁcantly higher explanatory power than a pure dynamic model without covariates.
Nevertheless, as indicated by the BIC values in Table IV, in four of ﬁve cases, the inclusion of dynamics on top of order book variables leads to a further increase of the BIC.
Summarizing these ﬁndings, we can conclude that the state of the order book plays a particularly important role in explaining the degree of order aggressiveness in the individual
processes. Nonetheless, in addition order book dynamics are required in order to obtain a
well-speciﬁed model.
15

5.2
Economic Results
A particular important ﬁnding is that for most of our order book covariates, we ﬁnd a
remarkable robustness over the cross-section of stocks. Actually, we ﬁnd no systematic
diﬀerences between the individual stocks. Regarding our economic hypotheses, we can
summarize the following ﬁndings.
The impact of the queued volume
Regarding the inﬂuence of the queued volume, we only ﬁnd a partial conﬁrmation of
hypothesis (i). In particular, a higher level of the cumulated ask volume increases the
intensity of aggressive buy market orders and decreases the intensity of aggressive buy
limit orders.
In contrast on the sell side, we observe no signiﬁcant eﬀects on the sell
aggressiveness, however a signiﬁcantly positive impact on the ask intensity.
Converse
eﬀects are found regarding the queued volume on the bid side. Here, a higher pending
volume negatively aﬀects the aggressiveness of buy market orders and ask limit orders,
whereas it positively aﬀects market trading on the sell side and limit order trading on the
bid side.
Hence a high standing volume on one market side increases traders’ preference for
market orders on the particular side and reduces it on the opposite side which does not
conﬁrm hypothesis (i). However, concerning the limit order trading we ﬁnd evidence for
crowding out eﬀects which are in line with hypothesis (i). In fact, a high standing volume
reduces traders’ preference to post aggressive limit orders on the same side and increases
it on the opposite side. Furthermore, it is shown that a high queued ask (bid) volume
signiﬁcantly decreases the cancellation intensity of big bid (ask) orders which also conﬁrms
hypothesis (i).
Concerning the inﬂuence of the cumulated volume during the past minutes we do not
ﬁnd a conﬁrmation of hypothesis (i). In fact, an increase in the cumulated volume on
one market side during the past ﬁve minutes decreases the intensity of market orders
as well as of limit orders on both sides of the market, and simultaneously increases the
overall cancellation intensity. Hence, we observe a type of mean reversion eﬀect causing a
reduction of the overall order ﬂow and an increase in the tendency to remove orders after
periods in which much (one-sided) volume has been accumulated in the queues.
The impact of market depth
Our results show a clear conﬁrmation of hypothesis (ii). Hence, a high depth on the ask
side decreases the intensity for aggressive buys and increases it for aggressive sells. The
16

converse is true for a high depth on the bid side. In particular, a higher depth on the ask
(bid) side reﬂects that a relative higher proportion of volume is to be sold (bought) at
a comparatively low (high) price. This negative (positive) price signal increases market
participants’ preference to aggressively sell (buy) their positions immediately by posting
corresponding market orders.
Furthermore, we observe that a high depth on one particular side of the market also
leads to a reduction of aggressive limit order trading on that side of the market. Thus,
trader’s incentive to undercut (overbid) the current best ask (bid) price level decreases
when there is already a high volume standing in the lowest levels of the queue. Interestingly, it turns out that the crowding out of limit orders even leads to a higher intensity of
aggressive limit orders on the opposite side of the market. Moreover, as stated in proposition (ii), it is shown that a high ask (bid) depth increases the probability of cancellations
on the same side of the market.
The impact of the bid-ask spread
Regarding the bid-ask spread, we ﬁnd a clear conﬁrmation of proposition (iii). Therefore,
traders’ preference for aggressive market trading signiﬁcantly decreases when the bid-ask
spread rises. Conversely, the aggressiveness of limit order trading increases. Hence, the
higher the bid-ask spread, the lower traders’ incentive to cross the market and to post a
market order on the opposite side. In this case, market agents are willing to bear higher
risk by posting limit orders. Furthermore, we ﬁnd weak evidence for the fact that the
bid-ask spread has a negative impact on the cancellation intensity on both sides of the
market.
The impact of past price movements
Price movements during the past ﬁve minutes have a signiﬁcant impact on traders’ preference to post aggressive market and limit orders. It turns out that positive price movements
decrease (increase) traders’ aggressiveness in market trading on the buy (sell) side. In contrast, trader’s incentive to post aggressive limit trades on the ask side increases, whereas
for bid limit orders as well as order cancellations no clear-cut results are found. Nevertheless, overall our results conﬁrm hypothesis (iv). Thus, positive (negative) price movements
over a longer period generate an increasing sell (buy) pressure and an increasing tendency
to post limit orders on the opposite side of the market.
17

The impact of past volatility
Regarding proposition (v), we do not ﬁnd a clear-cut conﬁrmation. Actually, we observe an
increase of both market trading and limit order trading after periods of higher mid-quote
volatility. These results are highly signiﬁcant and consistent over all stocks. However,
this result stands in contrast to the implications of Foucault (1999). Hence, we reject the
notion of a crowding out of market trading towards limit order trading. In fact, we ﬁnd
evidence for the eﬀect that higher volatility increases both market order trading as well
as limit order trading.
5.3
Summarizing the Results
Overall, we ﬁnd clear evidence that the arrival rate of aggressive market orders, limit
orders, and cancellations is aﬀected by the state of the order book and that the inclusion
of order book variables signiﬁcantly increases the goodness-of-ﬁt of the model. The most
important ﬁnding is that economic theory is broadly conﬁrmed. Particularly regarding
the inﬂuence of the standing volume, the market depth, the bid-ask spread and past
price movements, we ﬁnd a clear conﬁrmation of ”crowding-out” eﬀects as discussed in
Parlour (1998) or ”gravitational pull” arguments posited by Cohen, Maier, Schwartz,
and Whitcomb (1981). These results are in line with previous empirical studies such as
Griﬃths, Smith, Turnbull, and White (2000), Coppejans and Domowitz (2002), Pascual
and Veredas (2004) or Ranaldo (2004). Nevertheless, our ﬁndings suggest that a separate
modelling of the single processes in a multivariate setting is a valuable strategy providing
a clear-cut picture of how the particular processes are individually aﬀected by the state of
the order book. In particular, limit orders cannot necessarily be treated as less aggressive
versions of market orders since they behave in a diﬀerent way depending on certain order
book variables. This is particularly apparent for the impact of the aggregated queued
volume and the impact of past volatility, for which we ﬁnd conﬂictive reactions of the
aggressiveness in market trading and limit order trading which are not supported by
theory. Similar results have been also found by Coppejans and Domowitz (2002).
Moreover, it is shown that the order book eﬀects remain remarkably stable irrespective
whether order book dynamics are taken into account or not. While this ﬁnding illustrates
the robustness of the results, it also implies that the economic relations hold conditionally
on the history of the individual processes as well as unconditionally.
18

6
Conclusions
We analyze the impact of order book information of traders’ order aggressiveness in the
electronic trading on the Australian Stock Exchange. The novel feature of the paper is
to analyze this issue using a multivariate dynamic intensity framework. Therefore, order
aggressiveness in market trading, limit order trading as well as in order cancellations on
both sides of the market is modelled on the basis of a six-dimensional version of the autoregressive conditional intensity (ACI) model proposed by Russell (1999). The multivariate
intensity function gives the instantaneous order arrival probability in each instant and
for each order process. Therefore, it is nicely interpreted as a natural (continuous-time)
measure for traders’ degree of aggressiveness in the individual dimensions. In this sense,
our setting merges on the one hand approaches, where order aggressiveness is modelled in
terms of a categorized variable on the basis of the order classiﬁcation scheme proposed by
Biais, Hillion, and Spatt (1995) (see, for instance, Griﬃths, Smith, Turnbull, and White,
2000, or Ranaldo, 2004), and, on the other hand, studies which model the intensity of
aggressiveness using univariate (ACD-type) dynamic duration models (see e.g. Coppejans
and Domowitz, 2000 or Pascual and Veredas, 2004).
The usefulness of the individual modelling of the single order processes in a multivariate setting is illustrated by the ﬁnding that the intensity of market trading, limit
order trading, and cancellations do not necessarily behave similarly in their dependence
on certain order book variables. This result makes the application of (too simpliﬁed) order
classiﬁcation schemes questionable and supports the notion of using sequential classiﬁcations by distinctly distinguishing between market orders, limit orders and cancellations as
implemented by Pascual and Veredas (2004).
Our results show that order book information has signiﬁcant explanatory power in
explaining traders’ degree of aggressiveness. In particular we ﬁnd that the inclusion of
variables capturing the current state of the order book as well as recent changes in the book
improves the model’s goodness-of-ﬁt considerably. Analyzing the inﬂuence of fundamental
market characteristics such as the queued volume, the depth, the inside spread, recent
movements in the order ﬂow and in the price as well as the recent price volatility during the
last trading minutes, we widely conﬁrm economic theory. Particularly regarding market
depth, clear evidence for ”crowding out eﬀects” (cf. Parlour, 1998) is shown. Therefore, a
high depth on one particular side induces a crowding out of aggressive market and limit
order trading on that side towards the other side of the market.
Our results provide clear evidence that the timing of aggressive market orders, limit
19

orders as well as cancellations is inﬂuenced by the state of the order book which is in
line with the ﬁndings of Coppejans and Domowitz (2002), but in contrast to those of
Pascual and Veredas (2004). A possible explanation for these conﬂicting results is that
Pascual and Veredas (2004) apply a discrete-time duration model which does not allow
for time-varying covariates. However, particularly for the processes of highly aggressive
orders which arrive quite infrequently, it seems to be essential to account for changes of
the order book during a spell14.
Clear evidence for the existence of multivariate dynamic structures in the order arrival
processes is found. We observe signiﬁcant spill-over eﬀects between between the both sides
of the market and - in a weaker form - between market trading and limit order trading.
The fact that these interdependencies are primarily (signiﬁcantly) positive provides hints
that order book dynamics are driven by general market activity which simultaneously
inﬂuences all individual processes rather than by economic ”crowding out” arguments
which would imply negative spill-over eﬀects.
These ﬁndings support the notion that
the arrival rates of aggressive orders are basically driven by two pieces of information:
(i) the state of the market as revealed by the open limit order book and which directs
traders’ order submission strategy, and (ii) general market activity which simultaneously
inﬂuences the individual arrival rates15.
However, our ﬁndings show that order book
information plays the dominant role in explaining order aggressiveness. In particular, we
observe that in terms of its explanatory power, a model which excludes all dynamics but
includes order book covariates signiﬁcantly outperforms a completely dynamic model that
does not account for the state of the market. Nevertheless, the dynamic variables are
absolutely necessary in order to obtain a well-speciﬁed model.
14In our setting, such an updating of the information set occurs whenever a new point of the pooled
process arrives. A further extension would be to account for any changes of the order book. However this
would considerably increase the computational burden in our multivariate setting.
15This result supports the idea of Bauwens and Hautsch (2003) to model the underlying market activity in
terms of a latent autoregressive component which simultaneously aﬀects all individual intensity processes.
20

References
Al-Suhaibani, M., and L. Kryzanowski (2000): “An Exploratory Analysis of the
Order Book, and Order Flow and Execution on the Saudi Stock Market,” Journal of
Banking and Finance, 24, 1323–1357.
Bauwens, L., and P. Giot (2000): “The Logarithmic ACD Model: An Application to
the Bid/Ask Quote Process of two NYSE Stocks,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique,
60, 117–149.
Bauwens, L., and N. Hautsch (2003): “Dynamic Latent Factor Models for Intensity
Processes,” Discussion paper, University of Konstanz, Universit´e Catholique de Louvain.
Bauwens, L., and D. Veredas (2004): “The Stochastic Conditional Duration Model: A
Latent Factor Model for the Analysis of Financial Durations,” Journal of Econometrics,
119, 381–412.
Biais, B., P. Hillion, and C. Spatt (1995): “An Empirical Analysis of the Limit Order
Book and the Order Flow in the Paris Bourse,” Journal of Finance, 50, 1655–1689.
Bisi`ere, C., and T. Kamionka (2000): “Timing of Orders, Orders Aggressiveness and
the Order Book at the Paris Bourse,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 60, 43–72.
Bowsher, C. G. (2002): “Modelling Security Markets in Continuous Time: Intensity
based, Multivariate Point Process Models,” Discussion Paper 2002-W22, Nuﬃeld College, Oxford.
Br´emaud, P. (1981): Point Processes and Queues, Martingale Dynamics. Springer, New
York.
Cao, C., O. Hansch, and X. Wang (2003): “The Informational Content of an Open
Limit Order Book,” Discussion paper, Pennsylvania State University.
Cohen, K. J., S. F. Maier, R. A. Schwartz, and D. K. Whitcomb (1981): “Transaction Costs, Order Placement Strategy, and Existence of the Bid-Ask Spread,” Journal
of Political Economy, 89(2), 287–305.
Coppejans, M., and I. Domowitz (2002): “An Empirical Analysis of Trades, Orders,
and Cancellations in a Limit Order Market,” Discussion paper, Duke University.
Dufour, A., and R. F. Engle (2000): “The ACD Model: Predictability of the Time
between Consecutive Trades,” Discussion paper, ISMA Centre, University of Reading.
Engle, R. F., and J. R. Russell (1998): “Autoregressive Conditional Duration: A
New Model for Irregularly Spaced Transaction Data,” Econometrica, 66, 1127–1162.
Fernandes, M., and J. Grammig (2001): “A Family of Autoregressive Conditional
Duration Models,” Discussion Paper 2001/31, CORE, Universit´e Catholique de Louvain.
Foucault, T. (1999): “Order Flow Composition and Trading Costs in a Dynamic Limit
Order Market,” Journal of Financial Markets, 2, 99–134.
21

Glosten, L. R. (1994): “Is the Electronic Open Limit Order Book Inevitable,” Journal
of Finance, 49, 1127–1161.
Grammig, J., and K.-O. Maurer (2000): “Non-Monotonic Hazard Functions and the
Autoregressive Conditional Duration Model,” Econometrics Journal, 3, 16–38.
Griffiths, M. D., B. F. Smith, D. A. S. Turnbull, and R. W. White (2000): “The
Costs and Determinants of Order Aggressiveness,” Journal of Financial Economics, 56,
65–88.
Hall, A. D., and N. Hautsch (2004): “Estimating the Intensity of Buy and Sell Arrivals in a Limit Order Book Market,” Discussion Paper 04-07, Institute of Economics,
University of Copenhagen.
Handa, P., R. Schwartz, and A. Tiwari (2003): “Quote Setting and Price Formation
in an Order Driven Market,” Journal of Financial Markets, 6, 461–489.
Handa, P., and R. A. Schwartz (1996): “Limit Order Trading,” Journal of Finance,
51, 1835–1861.
Harris, L. (1998): “Optimal Dynamic Order Submission Strategies in Some Stylized
Trading Problems,” Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments, 7, 1–75.
Harris, L., and J. Hasbrouck (1996): “Market vs. Limit Orders: The SuperDOT Evidence on Order Submission Strategy,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
31(2), 213–231.
Hautsch, N. (2004): Modelling Irregularly Spaced Financial Data – Theory and Practice
of Dynamic Duration Models, vol. 539 of Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical
Systems. Springer, Berlin.
Hollifield, B., R. A. Miller, P. Sand˚as, and J. Slive (2002): “Liquidity Supply
and Demand in Limit Order Markets,” Discussion paper, Centre for Economic Policy
Research, London.
Lo, I., and S. G. Sapp (2003): “Order Submission: The Choice between Limit and Market Orders,” Discussion paper, University of Waikato, University of Western Ontario.
Lunde, A. (2000): “A Generalized Gamma Autoregressive Conditional Duration Model,”
Discussion paper, Aarlborg University.
Parlour, C. A. (1998): “Price Dynamics in Limit Order Markets,” The Review of
Financial Studies, 11(4), 789–816.
Pascual, R., and D. Veredas (2004): “What Pieces of Limit Order Book Information
are Informative?,” Discussion Paper 204/33, CORE.
Ranaldo, A. (2004): “Order Aggressiveness in Limit Order Book Markets,” Journal of
Financial Markets, 7, 53–74.
Russell, J. R. (1999): “Econometric Modeling of Multivariate Irregularly-Spaced HighFrequency Data,” Discussion paper, University of Chicago.
22

Seppi, D. J. (1997): “Liquidity Provision with Limit Orders and Strategic Specialist,”
Review of Financial Studies, 1(1), 103–150.
Zhang, M. Y., J. Russell, and R. S. Tsay (2001): “A Nonlinear Autoregressive
Conditional Duration Model with Applications to Financial Transaction Data,” Journal
of Econometrics, 104, 179–207.
Appendix
A
Tables
Table I
Classiﬁcation of Order Aggressiveness at the ASX
Aggressive buy order
Quoted volume exceeds the ﬁrst level of standing ask volume
Normal buy order
Quoted volume does not exceed the ﬁrst level of standing ask volume
Most aggressive ask order
Limit price is below current best ask price
Aggressive ask order
Limit price is at current best ask price
Normal ask order
Limit price is above current best ask price
Cancelled ask order
Cancellation of a standing ask order
Aggressive sell order
Quoted volume exceeds the ﬁrst level of standing bid volume
Normal sell order
Quoted volume does not exceed the ﬁrst level of standing bid volume
Most aggressive bid order
Limit price is above current best bid price
Aggressive bid order
Limit price is at current best bid price
Normal bid order
Limit price is below current best bid price
Cancelled bid order
Cancellation of a standing bid order
23

Table II
Order book characteristics
Means and standard deviations of various order book characteristics based on the BHP, NAB, NCP,
TLS and WOW stock traded at the ASX. The samples contain all market and limit orders of the
individual stocks traded at the ASX during July-August 2002,
corresponding to 45 trading days.
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
sprd
1.075
0.311
2.175
1.516
1.277
0.599
1.006
0.079
1.485
0.922
trvol
2746.7
7688.5
1174.1
2901.3
1113.7
4131.5
8877.5
39414.2
1646.7
4906.6
buyvol
5692.4
9783.9
2830.6
4016.9
4817.5
7408.2
21233.8
57399.5
3707.5
7184.2
sellvol
8336.2
12190.6
2902.7
3902.7
5358.7
7789.6
21816.1
60877.4
4410.3
6785.4
qvol
8303.4
38223.4
3534.3
4858.5
5235.3
6238.4
35513.0
68337.0
4832.7
7329.7
qavol
9704.9
12842.4
3621.1
5169.3
5209.8
6058.5
35077.7
68038.8
5123.8
7046.5
qbvol
7212.8
49667.3
3453.4
4549.0
5264.2
6436.2
35927.5
68618.7
4585.3
7553.3
cvol
11172.2
81984.5
4308.8
6063.3
4533.8
5999.2
61007.7
97236.4
6021.8
9469.3
cavol
11595.3
17307.7
4348.3
6392.8
4315.7
5438.5
64477.8
100813.0
5793.7
8761.2
cbvol
10778.7
112671.2
4271.5
5736.1
4774.1
6553.5
58166.4
94120.8
6211.8
10018.1
d askp
5.842
86.084
6.407
24.454
7.247
52.743
3.198
11.616
4.818
16.021
d bidp
4.662
16.628
8.543
71.853
6.131
14.328
2.377
7.798
4.104
14.611
amq
0.115
0.316
0.423
0.809
0.101
0.319
0.040
0.197
0.230
0.518
avol
1452.4
343.7
265.1
62.1
920.6
256.4
5409.2
1558.8
501.8
185.0
bvol
1376.9
665.7
222.9
78.7
720.3
216.3
6237.1
1647.8
344.5
230.7
adiﬀ1
0.897
0.671
2.018
1.926
1.271
0.939
0.577
0.268
1.376
1.323
adiﬀ2
1.308
1.007
2.880
2.752
1.884
1.319
0.643
0.357
2.001
1.931
adiﬀ5
2.717
2.116
5.829
5.403
3.712
2.340
0.866
0.565
4.024
3.415
bdiﬀ1
0.898
0.650
1.851
1.700
1.155
0.869
0.582
0.273
1.187
1.032
bdiﬀ2
1.269
0.954
2.523
2.381
1.633
1.204
0.656
0.371
1.546
1.409
bdiﬀ5
2.488
1.948
4.806
4.639
3.077
2.078
0.937
0.612
2.781
2.610
adep 1
22.257
10.725
2.404
1.870
11.055
7.154
102.651
35.792
6.352
4.686
adep 2
34.429
21.732
3.614
3.262
15.621
12.257
196.338
77.341
9.862
8.665
adep 5
45.662
40.078
4.577
5.093
18.572
16.865
420.273
216.059
12.729
14.358
bdep 1
20.477
13.596
2.093
1.697
9.203
5.613
117.936
39.229
4.516
4.183
bdep 2
31.411
23.779
3.228
2.924
13.874
10.131
223.766
85.101
7.479
7.465
bdep 5
42.927
38.160
4.293
4.507
17.876
15.783
455.945
240.004
11.290
12.538
Shown order book characteristics: Bid-ask spread (sprd), traded volume (trvol), traded buy/sell volume (buyvol,
sellvol), quoted volume (qvol), quoted ask/bid volume (qavol, qbvol), cancelled volume (cvol), cancelled ask/bid
volume (cavol, cbvol), diﬀerence between quoted ask price and the current best ask price (d askp), diﬀerence
between current best bid quote and quoted bid price (d bidp), absolute midquote change (amq), as well as
cumulated ask/bid volume (avol, bvol, in units of 1000 shares). Furthermore, adiff x := px,a −mq, where px,a
denotes the price associated with the x%-quantile of the cumulated ask volume and mq denotes the midquote.
Correspondingly, bdiff x := mq −px,b, where px,b denotes the price associated with the x%-quantile of the
cumulated bid volume. Moreover, adep x := (x/100) · avol/(px,a −mq) and bdep x := (x/100) · bvol/(mq −px,b),
measured in units of 1000 shares.
24

Table III
Descriptive Statistics of Trade and Limit Order Arrival Processes at the ASX
Descriptive statistics of order arrival processes of the BHP, NAB, NCP, TLS and WOW stock.
For the
deﬁnition of the order categories, see Table I. ”v > 75%” means that the quoted volume is above the
75%-quantile.
The upper table shows the number of the orders in the individual categories as well as
their corresponding percentage with respect to the complete sample.
The lower table shows the average
waiting time between two order arrivals and the corresponding standard deviation.
The samples contain
all market and limit orders of the individual stocks traded at the ASX during July-August 2002, corresponding to 45 trading days.
Duration statistics measured in minutes.
Overnight spells are ignored.
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Number of observations
Num.
Prop.
Num.
Prop.
Num.
Prop.
Num.
Prop.
Num.
Prop.
Total number
147552
107595
252009
97804
59519
Aggr. buys, v > 75%
1946
0.013
2657
0.025
2385
0.009
522
0.005
838
0.014
Aggr. buys
5998
0.041
8057
0.075
7700
0.031
1761
0.018
3359
0.056
Normal buys
28349
0.192
14303
0.133
21402
0.085
19142
0.196
10125
0.170
Most aggr. asks, v > 75%
1511
0.010
1763
0.016
2058
0.008
241
0.002
795
0.013
Most aggr. asks
4092
0.028
4695
0.044
6879
0.027
909
0.009
2460
0.041
Aggr. asks
15065
0.102
11632
0.108
14544
0.058
12595
0.129
6787
0.114
Normal asks
10306
0.070
7963
0.074
50769
0.201
9565
0.098
4106
0.069
Canc. asks, v > 75%
1029
0.007
842
0.008
528
0.002
716
0.007
273
0.005
Canc. asks
6689
0.045
5912
0.055
30390
0.121
4572
0.047
2763
0.046
Aggr. sells, v > 75%
2338
0.016
2867
0.027
2372
0.009
551
0.006
892
0.015
Aggr. sells
6133
0.042
8016
0.075
7711
0.031
1747
0.018
3559
0.060
Normal sells
15455
0.105
13100
0.122
17249
0.068
17707
0.181
7329
0.123
Most aggr. bids
1611
0.011
1455
0.014
1174
0.005
353
0.004
348
0.006
Aggr. bids, v > 75%
5772
0.039
4626
0.043
5903
0.023
1249
0.013
2109
0.035
Aggr. bids
17441
0.118
12967
0.121
15333
0.061
13848
0.142
8010
0.135
Normal bids
14900
0.101
8504
0.079
42375
0.168
9125
0.093
5594
0.094
Canc. bids, v > 75%
881
0.006
879
0.008
625
0.002
719
0.007
292
0.005
Canc. bids
7329
0.050
6265
0.058
27624
0.110
5584
0.057
3318
0.056
All aggr. orders, v > 75%
9316
10463
9142
3102
3438
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Time between order arrivals
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Aggr. buys, v > 75%
8.070 16.429
5.958 12.499
6.628 14.213 27.467 41.131 15.000 34.635
Aggr. buys
2.634
5.084
1.958
3.383
2.056
3.507
8.892 17.635
4.708
8.490
Normal buys
0.557
0.878
1.102
1.912
0.738
1.273
0.825
1.167
1.556
2.821
Most aggr. asks, v > 75%
10.081 22.034
8.842 12.935
7.572 13.371 46.636 69.354 17.258 32.415
Most aggr. asks
3.809
8.886
3.342
4.794
2.293
4.175 15.074 33.948
6.353 12.809
Aggr. asks
1.047
1.844
1.356
2.542
1.086
1.994
1.253
2.092
2.322
4.420
Normal asks
1.529
2.593
1.974
3.107
0.311
0.840
1.642
2.379
3.799
6.850
Canc. asks, v > 75%
14.767 27.042
17.373 31.419
28.451 42.565 20.208 31.547 28.330 44.988
Canc. asks
2.352
4.087
2.643
4.628
0.519
1.521
3.455
5.365
5.648 10.773
Aggr. sells, v > 75%
6.719 13.908
5.488 11.964
6.674 13.725 27.319 40.144 16.454 35.553
Aggr. sells
2.569
4.840
1.969
3.526
2.052
3.557
8.946 18.536
4.427
8.255
Normal sells
1.022
1.636
1.204
1.846
0.916
1.663
0.892
1.249
2.153
3.399
Most aggr. bids
8.816 19.374
10.075 17.388
11.712 22.701 35.128 53.063 24.065 45.808
Aggr. bids, v > 75%
2.703
6.502
3.396
5.184
2.654
5.264 11.277 27.220
7.276 13.564
Aggr. bids
0.904
1.545
1.215
2.288
1.030
1.828
1.140
1.787
1.968
3.519
Normal bids
1.056
1.680
1.848
3.264
0.372
0.821
1.723
2.503
2.788
5.659
Canc. bids, v > 75%
17.248 27.849
16.978 27.560
23.258 34.908 21.048 30.493 34.455 57.392
Canc. bids
2.144
3.344
2.507
4.292
0.571
1.385
2.823
4.284
4.716
8.339
25

Table IV
Fully speciﬁed ACI models
Maximum likelihood estimates of six-dimensional ACI(1,1) models for intensity processes of (1) aggressive buy
orders, (2) aggressive sell orders, (3) aggressive ask limit orders, (4) aggressive bid limit orders, (5) aggressive
cancellations of ask orders, (6) aggressive cancellations of bid orders. Backward recurrence functions are speciﬁed
in terms of individual univariate Weibull parameterizations. The persistence vectors Ak are fully parameterized,
whereas B is parameterized as diagonal matrix. Three spline functions are speciﬁed for market orders (s12
. ), limit
orders (s34
. ) and cancellations (s56
. ) based on 1 hour nodes between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. The exact deﬁnition of
the covariates is found in Section 5. All covariates except V OL are scaled by 10. Standard errors are computed
based on OPG estimates. The time series are re-initialized at each trading day.
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Constants and backward recurrence parameters
ω1
-1.059∗∗∗-0.336∗∗∗-0.294∗∗∗-1.085∗∗∗-1.015∗∗∗
p1
0.844∗∗∗0.797∗∗∗0.820∗∗∗0.832∗∗∗0.737∗∗∗
ω2
-0.301∗∗∗-0.285∗∗∗-0.157
-1.207∗∗∗-0.672∗∗∗
p2
0.845∗∗∗0.778∗∗∗0.798∗∗∗0.836∗∗∗0.731∗∗∗
ω3
-0.793∗∗∗-0.782∗∗∗-0.490∗∗∗-0.722∗∗∗-0.859∗∗∗
p3
0.834∗∗∗0.905∗∗∗0.878∗∗∗0.825∗∗∗0.810∗∗∗
ω4
-0.497∗∗∗-1.348∗∗∗-1.081∗∗∗-0.420∗
-1.637∗∗∗
p4
0.818∗∗∗0.862∗∗∗0.834∗∗∗0.700∗∗∗0.838∗∗∗
ω5
-1.352∗∗∗-1.397∗∗∗-1.576∗∗∗-1.025∗∗∗-1.674∗∗∗
p5
0.742∗∗∗0.749∗∗∗0.873∗∗∗0.653∗∗∗0.789∗∗∗
ω6
-1.704∗∗∗-1.442∗∗∗-1.410∗∗∗-1.363∗∗∗-1.980∗∗∗
p6
0.762∗∗∗0.741∗∗∗0.859∗∗∗0.671∗∗∗0.780∗∗∗
Innovation parameters
α1
1
0.115∗∗∗0.114∗∗∗0.076∗∗∗
0.235∗∗∗
0.176∗∗∗
α1
2
0.003
0.029∗∗
0.018∗∗
0.046
0.081∗∗∗
α2
1
-0.010
0.013
0.004
0.179∗∗∗
0.055∗∗∗
α2
2
0.120∗∗∗0.115∗∗∗0.085∗∗∗0.244∗∗∗0.177∗∗∗
α3
1
0.052∗∗∗0.038∗∗∗
0.012
0.160
0.082∗∗∗
α3
2
-0.010
-0.009
0.013∗
-0.007
0.054∗∗
α4
1
-0.033∗∗
-0.009
-0.007
0.076
0.059∗
α4
2
0.018
0.042∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗0.263∗
0.058∗
α5
1
0.031∗∗
0.037∗∗
0.064∗∗∗
0.074∗∗
0.016
α5
2
0.046∗∗∗0.049∗∗∗0.022∗
-0.030
0.145∗∗∗
α6
1
0.044∗∗∗0.027∗
0.042∗∗∗
0.049∗∗
0.199∗∗∗
α6
2
0.010
0.042∗∗∗0.041∗∗∗0.030∗
0.138∗∗∗
α1
3
0.042∗∗∗-0.002
-0.015∗
0.085
0.074∗∗∗
α1
4
0.028∗∗
0.053∗∗∗
0.005
-0.079∗
0.071∗∗∗
α2
3
0.026∗
-0.007
0.018∗
-0.159∗∗
0.070∗∗∗
α2
4
0.064∗∗∗0.048∗∗∗
0.013
0.046
0.021
α3
3
0.097∗∗∗0.073∗∗∗0.028∗∗∗
0.438∗∗∗
0.122∗∗∗
α3
4
0.012
0.008
0.038∗∗∗-0.393∗∗
0.084∗∗∗
α4
3
0.076∗∗∗-0.004
0.026∗∗∗
0.010
0.175∗∗∗
α4
4
0.116∗∗∗0.083∗∗∗0.033∗∗∗-0.042
0.215∗∗∗
α5
3
0.051∗∗∗0.034∗∗
0.022∗
0.063
0.132∗∗∗
α5
4
0.031∗
0.056∗∗
0.029∗
0.017
0.058
α6
3
0.056∗∗∗0.032∗∗
0.008
-0.038
0.029
α6
4
0.022
0.010
0.010
-0.014
0.201∗∗∗
α1
5
-0.008
-0.017
-0.010
-0.019
0.118∗∗∗
α1
6
0.002
-0.054∗∗
0.012
0.127∗∗∗0.083∗∗∗
α2
5
0.023
0.013
-0.004
0.185∗∗∗
0.133∗∗∗
α2
6
0.017
-0.024
0.012
-0.056∗∗∗
0.013
α3
5
-0.007
0.017
-0.063∗∗∗
0.186∗
0.022
α3
6
0.000
0.014
0.024
-0.451∗∗
-0.021
α4
5
0.058∗
0.015
0.010
0.129
0.104∗
α4
6
0.001
-0.002
0.012
-0.088
0.058
α5
5
0.002
0.097∗∗∗
0.025
0.068∗∗
0.122∗∗∗
α5
6
0.005
0.030
-0.006
0.029
-0.185∗∗∗
α6
5
0.094∗∗∗
0.002
-0.001
0.030
-0.141∗∗
α6
6
0.067∗∗∗0.119∗∗∗
0.017
0.019
0.068∗
Persistence parameters
β11
0.980∗∗∗0.961∗∗∗0.993∗∗∗
0.922∗∗∗
0.994∗∗∗
β44
0.950∗∗∗0.984∗∗∗0.998∗∗∗-0.251∗∗∗0.995∗∗∗
β22
0.969∗∗∗0.968∗∗∗0.980∗∗∗
0.820∗∗∗
0.993∗∗∗
β55
0.980∗∗∗0.980∗∗∗0.993∗∗∗0.948∗∗∗0.994∗∗∗
β33
0.955∗∗∗0.991∗∗∗0.995∗∗∗
0.481∗∗∗
0.994∗∗∗
β66
0.979∗∗∗0.982∗∗∗0.994∗∗∗-0.973∗∗∗0.991∗∗∗
Seasonality parameters
s12
11:00 -0.673∗∗∗-0.646∗∗∗-1.216∗∗∗
8.226∗∗∗-1.355∗∗∗
s34
11:00
0.160
-0.334
-0.831∗∗∗3.955∗∗-1.183∗∗∗
s12
12:00
0.138
0.266
0.961∗∗∗-14.730∗∗∗1.228∗∗∗
s34
12:00 -1.159∗∗
0.183
0.492
-7.780∗∗
0.672
s12
13:00 -0.981∗∗∗-1.341∗∗∗-0.937∗∗∗
2.870∗
-0.570∗
s34
13:00 -0.438∗∗∗-1.551∗∗∗-0.957∗∗∗3.113∗∗∗
0.179
s12
14:00
3.161∗∗∗3.553∗∗∗2.620∗∗∗10.182∗∗∗
2.222∗∗∗
s34
14:00
2.956
3.548∗∗∗2.661∗∗∗5.563∗∗
1.526∗∗∗
s12
15:00
-0.286
-0.521∗
-0.721∗∗∗-6.032∗∗
-0.034
s34
15:00
0.025∗∗∗-1.032∗∗
-0.269
-4.674
-0.422
s12
16:00
0.468
0.516
1.509∗∗∗
6.824∗∗
4.069∗∗∗
s34
16:00
-0.237
0.652
-0.986∗∗
1.557
0.896
s56
11:00 -0.572∗
-1.387∗∗∗-1.309∗∗∗-0.264
-1.894∗∗∗
s56
14:00
3.755∗∗∗2.814∗∗∗2.770∗∗∗4.863∗∗∗1.495∗∗∗
s56
12:00
0.266
1.555∗∗∗1.163∗∗
0.359
1.817∗∗∗
s56
15:00 -1.313∗∗∗-1.044∗∗∗-0.827∗
-2.817∗∗∗
0.184
s56
13:00 -1.531∗∗∗-1.605∗∗∗-1.135∗∗∗-2.265∗∗∗-0.349
s56
16:00
1.071∗
0.799∗
0.273
3.798∗∗∗
0.516
26

Table IV continued
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Explanatory variables
AV1
3.108∗∗∗
1.579∗∗∗
1.129
10.325∗∗∗
1.952
DAV1 -0.649∗∗-0.411∗∗-0.974∗∗∗-2.109∗∗∗-1.097∗∗∗
AV2
0.477
-0.006
0.044
1.283
-4.123∗∗∗
DAV2 -0.698∗∗-0.161
-0.899∗∗∗-1.309∗∗∗-1.558∗∗∗
AV3
8.480∗∗∗
5.378∗∗∗
8.408∗∗∗23.421∗∗∗3.956∗∗∗
DAV3
0.172
-0.456∗
-0.376
-0.662
-0.963∗∗∗
AV4
11.203∗∗∗-10.071∗∗∗-12.398∗∗∗-5.250∗∗∗-5.426∗
DAV4 -0.910∗∗-0.232
-0.868∗∗
-0.938∗∗∗
0.841∗
AV5
-0.602
0.635
3.546∗∗∗
5.198∗∗∗-0.008
DAV5 1.341∗∗∗1.811∗∗∗1.585∗∗∗-0.390
0.993∗
AV6
-3.195∗∗∗-7.523∗∗∗-4.154∗∗∗-4.753∗∗∗-6.877∗∗∗
DAV6
0.363
-0.968∗∗∗-0.851∗
0.524∗
-0.269
BV1
0.379
-1.429∗∗
-0.241
-2.643∗
-1.420
DBV1 -0.440∗∗-0.629∗∗∗-0.351∗∗
-1.498∗∗∗-0.774∗∗∗
BV2
1.869∗∗∗-0.271
0.751
10.025∗∗∗3.522∗∗
DBV2 -0.290
-0.549∗∗∗-0.368∗
-1.588∗∗∗-0.465∗∗
BV3
-4.407∗∗∗-5.105∗∗∗-6.919∗∗∗-6.776∗∗∗-1.855
DBV3 -0.447∗
-0.228
-0.243
-0.991∗
-0.244
BV4
15.485∗∗∗11.177∗∗∗13.989∗∗∗21.712∗∗∗8.300∗∗
DBV4 0.539∗∗-0.167
0.605
-0.105
0.342
BV5
-4.124∗∗∗-5.123∗∗∗-9.011∗∗∗-8.142∗∗∗-4.821∗∗
DBV5 -1.576∗∗∗-0.289
-0.599∗
0.112
-0.604∗∗
BV6
-1.756∗∗
2.774∗∗∗
-0.647
2.399∗∗
2.235
DBV6 0.543∗
1.046∗∗∗1.017∗∗∗-0.980∗∗∗1.522∗∗∗
AD1
-7.287∗∗∗-2.318∗∗∗-3.390∗∗∗-18.057∗∗∗-2.130∗∗∗
BD1
3.974∗∗∗1.903∗∗∗2.575∗∗∗8.315∗∗∗
1.036∗∗
AD2
4.400∗∗∗
1.340∗∗∗
2.405∗∗∗
4.035∗∗∗
0.828∗∗
BD2
-7.144∗∗∗-1.247∗∗∗-3.381∗∗∗-16.624∗∗∗-0.586
AD3
-7.708∗∗∗-2.072∗∗∗-3.448∗∗∗-28.527∗∗∗-3.019∗∗∗
BD3
0.148
-0.185
-0.390
4.385∗∗∗-1.137∗∗
AD4
0.709∗
-0.302
0.596
2.784∗∗
-2.468∗∗∗
BD4
-8.672∗∗∗-2.400∗∗∗-4.005∗∗∗-26.667∗∗∗-2.832∗∗∗
AD5
4.822∗∗∗
6.074∗∗∗
7.804∗∗∗
2.902∗∗∗4.521∗∗∗
BD5
1.516∗∗∗-0.048
-1.026
1.510∗∗
0.904
AD6
0.584
0.177
0.270
-1.085
0.937
BD6
6.410∗∗∗6.437∗∗∗5.877∗∗∗4.674∗∗∗5.545∗∗∗
SP1
-1.925∗∗∗-0.386∗∗∗-1.130∗∗∗
-1.594
-0.471∗∗∗
MQ1
-1.849∗∗∗-0.305∗∗∗-0.596∗∗∗-0.925∗∗
-0.239∗∗
SP2
-1.699∗∗∗-0.297∗∗∗-0.892∗∗∗-3.223∗
-0.273∗∗∗
MQ2
1.551∗∗∗0.248∗∗∗0.329∗∗∗1.836∗∗∗0.256∗∗∗
SP3
0.639∗∗∗
0.199∗∗∗
0.416∗∗∗
1.661∗∗∗0.250∗∗∗
MQ3
-0.257∗
-0.010
-0.217∗∗
-0.770∗
-0.261∗∗∗
SP4
0.549∗∗∗
0.173∗∗∗
0.459∗∗∗
1.753∗∗∗0.235∗∗∗
MQ4
0.467∗∗∗-0.016
-0.247∗∗
0.911∗
-0.161
SP5
-0.857∗∗∗
0.044
-0.279∗∗∗-1.218∗∗
0.086
MQ5
-1.098∗∗∗-0.096
-0.839∗∗∗
0.608
-0.112
SP6
-0.969∗∗∗
0.124∗∗∗-0.136∗
-0.887∗
-0.169∗∗
MQ6
1.788∗∗∗-0.062
0.424∗∗
0.440
0.698∗∗∗
VL1
3.773∗∗∗
0.242∗∗∗
2.901∗∗∗
0.124
0.977∗∗∗
VL2
4.790∗∗∗
0.232∗∗∗
2.498∗∗∗
0.073
1.018∗∗∗
VL3
3.936∗∗∗
0.042
1.361∗∗∗
0.055
0.153
VL4
3.921∗∗∗
0.144∗∗∗
0.695∗∗
-0.090
0.414∗
VL5
5.712∗∗∗
0.266∗∗∗
2.992∗∗∗
0.055
1.125∗∗∗
VL6
5.848∗∗∗
0.273∗∗∗
1.551∗∗∗
0.069
1.188∗∗∗
Diagnostics
Obs
9316
10463
9142
3102
3438
LL
-20145
-23836
-19894
-6343
-6527
BIC
-20721
-24419
-20468
-6850
-7040
Aggressive Buy Orders
Aggressive Sell Orders
Mean of ˆεi
1.014
1.001
0.993
0.952
0.995
0.994
1.000
0.991
1.042
1.002
S.D. of ˆεi
1.159
1.067
1.095
1.190
1.114
1.139
1.058
1.088
1.241
1.100
LB(20) of ˆεi
13.039
18.503
25.243
14.846
13.610
14.905
28.017
27.049
26.972
17.114
Exc. disp.
5.379∗∗∗
2.533∗∗
3.443∗∗∗
3.369∗∗∗
2.477∗∗
5.106∗∗∗2.295∗∗3.179∗∗∗4.501∗∗∗
2.216∗∗
Aggressive Ask Limit Orders
Aggressive Bid Limit Orders
Mean of ˆεi
1.020
0.999
0.991
0.978
0.992
1.015
0.997
0.979
1.032
0.959
S.D. of ˆεi
1.095
1.058
1.086
1.088
1.050
1.091
1.035
1.097
1.083
1.025
LB(20) of ˆεi
10.806
22.876
13.522
29.364∗
32.165∗∗
20.823
13.765
11.254
10.760
11.538
Exc. disp.
2.740∗∗∗
1.796∗
2.891∗∗∗
1.009
1.040
2.714∗∗∗
0.985
2.472∗∗
1.151
0.339
Aggressive Ask Cancellations
Aggressive Bid Cancellations
Mean of ˆεi
0.991
1.004
1.011
1.029
1.031
1.006
1.023
1.005
1.005
1.083
S.D. of ˆεi
0.975
0.963
0.932
0.975
1.045
0.932
0.972
0.992
0.905
1.095
LB(20) of ˆεi
17.313
20.241
11.585
31.632∗∗
22.407
12.733
27.965
10.571
37.679∗∗∗
15.504
Exc. disp.
0.549
0.744
1.067
0.464
0.542
1.368
0.578
0.133
1.701∗
1.202
27

Table V
ACI models without dynamics
Maximum likelihood estimates of six-dimensional ACI(1,1) models without dynamics for intensity processes
of (1) aggressive buy orders, (2) aggressive sell orders, (3) aggressive ask limit orders, (4) aggressive bid limit
orders, (5) aggressive cancellations of ask orders, (6) aggressive cancellations of bid orders. Backward recurrence
functions are speciﬁed in terms of individual univariate Weibull parameterizations. The autoregressive matrices
Ak and B are set to zero.
The spline functions are speciﬁed for market orders (s12
. ), limit orders (s34
. ) and
cancellations (s56
. ) based on 1 hour nodes between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. The exact deﬁnition of the covariates is
found in Section 5. All covariates except V OL are scaled by 10. Standard errors are computed based on OPG
estimates. The time series are re-initialized at each trading day.
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Constants and backward recurrence parameters
ω1
-0.970∗∗∗-0.304∗∗∗-0.256∗∗
-0.578∗
-1.849∗∗∗
p1
0.828∗∗∗0.772∗∗∗0.779∗∗∗0.806∗∗∗
0.557∗∗∗
ω2
-0.250∗
-0.243∗∗
-0.088
-0.814∗∗
-0.569∗∗∗
p2
0.830∗∗∗0.759∗∗∗0.777∗∗∗0.827∗∗∗
0.575∗∗∗
ω3
-0.671∗∗∗-0.845∗∗∗-0.517∗∗∗-0.611∗∗
-0.639∗∗∗
p3
0.837∗∗∗0.865∗∗∗0.849∗∗∗0.795∗∗∗
0.701∗∗∗
ω4
-0.450∗∗∗-1.463∗∗∗-1.131∗∗∗-0.440∗
-1.827∗∗∗
p4
0.804∗∗∗0.837∗∗∗0.811∗∗∗0.700∗∗∗
0.614∗∗∗
ω5
-1.343∗∗∗-1.427∗∗∗-1.583∗∗∗-0.718∗∗
-0.987∗∗∗
p5
0.713∗∗∗0.706∗∗∗0.823∗∗∗0.649∗∗∗
0.604∗∗∗
ω6
-1.771∗∗∗-1.552∗∗∗-1.393∗∗∗-1.030∗∗∗-3.317∗∗∗
p6
0.727∗∗∗0.714∗∗∗0.791∗∗∗0.668∗∗∗
0.627∗∗∗
Seasonality parameters
s12
11:00 -0.779∗∗∗-0.817∗∗∗-1.134∗∗∗
5.225∗∗∗-1.216∗∗∗
s34
11:00 -0.403∗
-0.403
-0.812∗∗∗
4.292∗∗
-0.571∗
s12
12:00
0.247
0.424
0.861∗∗∗-9.370∗∗∗
0.998∗∗∗
s34
12:00 -0.360
0.245
0.594∗
-8.839∗∗
-0.240
s12
13:00 -0.867∗∗∗-1.119∗∗∗-0.951∗∗∗
0.947
-0.257
s34
13:00 -0.415
-1.408∗∗∗-1.149∗∗∗
4.130∗∗
0.862∗
s12
14:00 2.917∗∗∗
3.231∗∗∗
2.764∗∗∗
8.350∗∗∗
1.551∗∗∗
s34
14:00
2.459∗∗∗3.449∗∗∗2.791∗∗∗5.828∗∗∗
1.174∗
s12
15:00 -0.474∗∗
-0.909∗∗∗-1.008∗∗∗-4.896∗∗∗-1.108∗∗
s34
15:00 -0.129
-1.453∗∗∗-0.210
-5.695∗
-1.713∗∗
s12
16:00 -0.072
0.584∗
1.315∗∗∗
4.353∗∗
1.640∗∗∗
s34
16:00 -0.147
0.741
-1.208∗∗
2.312
2.539∗∗∗
s56
11:00 -0.414
-1.361∗∗∗-1.125∗∗∗-0.220
-1.224∗∗∗
s56
14:00
3.742∗∗∗2.795∗∗∗3.108∗∗∗4.911∗∗∗
1.569∗∗
s56
12:00
0.042
1.531∗∗∗
1.018∗∗∗
0.352
0.920
s56
15:00 -1.188∗∗∗-1.263∗∗∗-0.898
-2.894∗∗∗-1.288
s56
13:00 -1.498∗∗∗-1.592∗∗∗-1.353∗∗
-2.334∗∗∗
0.047
s56
16:00
0.233
0.685∗
-0.396
3.788∗∗∗
0.932
Explanatory variables
AV1
1.717∗∗∗
0.639
-2.788∗∗∗12.936∗∗∗
0.091
DAV1 -0.415
-0.261
-0.648∗∗∗-1.970∗∗∗
0.587∗
AV2
1.510∗∗∗
0.455
0.802∗
0.909
1.200∗
DAV2 -0.615∗∗-0.210
-0.796∗∗∗-0.990∗∗∗-0.437∗
AV3
7.577∗∗∗
4.381∗∗∗
8.662∗∗∗21.358∗∗∗
3.234∗∗∗
DAV3 0.367
-0.566∗∗-0.306
-0.499
0.164
AV4 -10.311∗∗∗-10.219∗∗∗-9.006∗∗∗-5.775∗∗∗-15.237∗∗∗
DAV4 -0.837∗∗-0.302
-0.660∗
-1.029∗∗∗
1.491∗∗∗
AV5
-0.774
0.157
1.334
3.986∗∗∗
3.446∗∗∗
DAV5 1.587∗∗∗1.868∗∗∗1.630∗∗∗-0.346
1.719∗∗∗
AV6
-3.138∗∗∗-6.224∗∗∗-5.912∗∗∗-4.956∗∗∗-12.886∗∗∗
DAV6 0.442
-1.120∗∗∗-0.642
0.598∗∗
0.314
BV1
0.787∗
-0.651∗
3.028∗∗∗-3.281∗
2.461∗∗∗
DBV1 -0.234
-0.514∗∗∗-0.301∗
-0.932∗∗∗-0.374∗
BV2
0.084
-0.759∗∗
-0.244
10.528∗∗∗-1.222∗
DBV2 -0.143
-0.284∗∗∗-0.284
-1.270∗∗∗
0.310∗
BV3
-4.146∗∗∗-4.487∗∗∗-6.735∗∗∗-5.331∗∗∗-1.634∗
DBV3 -0.227
-0.218
-0.140
-1.055∗∗
-0.410∗∗
BV4 13.824∗∗∗11.335∗∗∗11.352∗∗∗21.499∗∗∗18.504∗∗∗
DBV4 0.440
0.082
0.734∗
-0.125
0.635∗∗
BV5
-4.307∗∗∗-4.653∗∗∗-6.657∗∗∗-6.256∗∗∗-7.446∗∗∗
DBV5 -1.502∗∗∗-0.129
-0.784∗∗
0.181
0.329
BV6
-2.250∗∗∗
1.421∗
0.830
2.351∗∗
10.951∗∗∗
DBV6 0.551∗
1.270∗∗∗1.271∗∗∗-0.937∗∗∗
1.600∗∗∗
AD1
-5.852∗∗∗-2.001∗∗∗-2.542∗∗∗-18.482∗∗∗-1.714∗∗∗
BD1
3.915∗∗∗1.971∗∗∗2.843∗∗∗7.732∗∗∗
0.465
AD2
4.520∗∗∗
1.436∗∗∗
2.372∗∗∗
3.827∗∗∗
1.153∗∗∗
BD2
-6.109∗∗∗-1.208∗∗∗-3.027∗∗∗-17.238∗∗∗-0.745∗
AD3
-6.738∗∗∗-1.523∗∗∗-3.776∗∗∗-27.456∗∗∗-1.939∗∗∗
BD3
0.113∗∗∗0.024
-0.621∗
3.950∗∗∗-1.365∗∗∗
AD4
0.578
0.008
-0.225
3.221∗∗
-0.477
BD4
-7.338∗∗∗-2.499∗∗∗-4.289∗∗∗-26.201∗∗∗-3.493∗∗∗
AD5
5.127∗∗∗
6.341∗∗∗
7.808∗∗∗
2.694∗∗∗
5.165∗∗∗
BD5
1.746∗∗∗-0.108
-0.974
0.881
-0.589
AD6
1.036∗∗
0.333
0.570
-1.004
0.942
BD6
6.696∗∗∗6.540∗∗∗6.174∗∗∗4.977∗∗∗
4.212∗∗∗
SP1
-1.951∗∗∗-0.389∗∗∗-1.148∗∗∗-3.472
-0.665∗∗∗
MQ1 -1.642∗∗∗-0.310∗∗∗-0.678∗∗∗-0.856∗∗∗-0.183∗∗
SP2
-1.740∗∗∗-0.299∗∗∗-0.917∗∗∗-2.502
-0.377∗∗∗
MQ2
1.493∗∗∗0.177∗∗∗0.380∗∗∗1.547∗∗∗
0.289∗∗∗
SP3
0.639∗∗∗
0.221∗∗∗
0.416∗∗∗
1.787∗∗∗
0.229∗∗∗
MQ3
-0.260∗
-0.026
-0.253∗∗∗-0.782
-0.035
SP4
0.535∗∗∗
0.188∗∗∗
0.493∗∗∗
1.745∗∗∗
0.193∗∗∗
MQ4
0.482∗∗∗-0.049
-0.109
1.034∗∗
0.029
SP5
-0.898∗∗∗
0.051∗
-0.311∗∗∗-1.514∗∗
-0.019
MQ5 -1.321∗∗∗-0.171∗∗-0.856∗∗∗
0.411
-0.399∗∗
SP6
-1.010∗∗∗
0.129∗∗∗-0.157∗∗
-1.332∗
-0.196∗∗
MQ6
1.870∗∗∗-0.080
0.433∗∗∗
0.205
0.586∗∗∗
VL1
3.989∗∗∗
0.261∗∗∗
2.613∗∗∗
0.068
0.279∗
VL4
3.892∗∗∗0.114∗∗∗0.975∗∗∗-0.073
-0.342
VL2
4.621∗∗∗
0.256∗∗∗
2.442∗∗∗
0.001
0.265∗
VL5
5.922∗∗∗0.271∗∗∗2.889∗∗∗
0.026
0.483∗
VL3
3.772∗∗∗
0.029
1.405∗∗∗
0.039
-0.021
VL6
5.942∗∗∗0.273∗∗∗1.547∗∗∗
0.083
0.755∗∗∗
28

Table V continued
Diagnostics
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Obs
9316
10463
9142
3102
3438
LL
-20426
-24192
-20210
-6422
-7322
BIC
-20809
-24581
-20593
-6759
-7664
Aggressive Buy Orders
Aggressive Sell Orders
Mean of ˆεi
1.011
1.004
1.004
0.984
1.027
1.001
1.004
1.006
1.018
1.039
S.D. of ˆεi
1.227
1.061
1.121
1.274
1.136
1.155
1.075
1.102
1.219
1.108
LB(20) of ˆεi138.654∗∗∗228.349∗∗∗328.073∗∗∗28.760∗875.175∗∗∗152.729∗∗∗380.321∗∗∗189.016∗∗∗40.895∗∗∗1168.166∗∗∗
Exc. disp.
7.904∗∗∗
2.312∗∗
4.458∗∗∗
5.039∗∗∗
2.976∗∗
5.719∗∗∗
2.952∗∗
3.724∗∗∗
4.052∗∗∗
2.421∗∗
Aggressive Ask Limit Orders
Aggressive Bid Limit Orders
Mean of ˆεi
1.002
1.001
1.001
0.993
0.993
0.988
0.995
0.987
1.017
0.948
S.D. of ˆεi
1.087
1.077
1.138
1.126
1.070
1.078
1.038
1.132
1.068
1.073
LB(20) of ˆεi 59.655∗∗∗179.270∗∗∗98.016 ∗∗∗36.974∗∗687.721∗∗∗169.180∗∗∗192.434∗∗∗57.125 ∗∗∗
9.576
457.756∗∗∗
Exc. disp.
2.502∗∗
2.384∗∗
4.756∗∗∗
1.470
1.454
2.312∗∗
1.068
3.428∗∗∗
0.947
1.000
Aggressive Ask Cancellations
Aggressive Bid Cancellations
Mean of ˆεi
1.003
0.995
1.002
1.008
1.013
1.005
1.002
1.003
1.012
1.037
S.D. of ˆεi
1.004
0.964
0.952
0.954
1.161
0.936
0.960
1.034
0.908
1.168
LB(20) of ˆεi 37.028∗∗83.534 ∗∗∗41.465∗∗∗48.019∗∗∗233.517∗∗∗46.825∗∗∗80.124∗∗∗61.366 ∗∗∗38.402∗∗∗110.162∗∗∗
Exc. disp.
0.107
0.718
0.747
0.851
2.032∗∗
1.287
0.813
0.611
1.654∗
2.207∗∗
Diagnostics: Log Likelihood (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC) and diagnostics (mean, standard deviation,
Ljung-Box statistics and excess dispersion test) of ACI residuals ˆεs
i.
29

Table VI
ACI models without covariates
Maximum likelihood estimates of six-dimensional ACI(1,1) models for intensity processes of (1) aggressive buy
orders, (2) aggressive sell orders, (3) aggressive ask limit orders, (4) aggressive bid limit orders, (5) aggressive
cancellations of ask orders, (6) aggressive cancellations of bid orders. Backward recurrence functions are speciﬁed
in terms of individual univariate Weibull parameterizations. The persistence vectors Ak are fully parameterized,
whereas B is parameterized as diagonal matrix. Three spline functions are speciﬁed for market orders (s12
. ),
limit orders (s34
. ), and cancellations (s56
. ) based on 1 hour nodes between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Standard errors
are computed based on OPG estimates. The time series are re-initialized at each trading day.
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Constants and backward recurrence parameters
ω1
-0.893∗∗∗-0.724∗∗∗-0.635∗∗∗-1.204∗∗∗-1.109∗∗∗
p1
0.822∗∗∗0.787∗∗∗0.803∗∗∗0.797∗∗∗0.705∗∗∗
ω2
-0.742∗∗∗-0.658∗∗∗-0.544∗∗∗-1.153∗∗∗-1.014∗∗∗
p2
0.798∗∗∗0.766∗∗∗0.781∗∗∗0.843∗∗∗0.721∗∗∗
ω3
-0.967∗∗∗-1.138∗∗∗-0.783∗∗∗-1.665∗∗∗-0.740∗∗∗
p3
0.760∗∗∗0.870∗∗∗0.821∗∗∗0.671∗∗∗0.784∗∗∗
ω4
-0.986∗∗∗-1.385∗∗∗-1.330∗∗∗-1.259∗∗∗-1.705∗∗∗
p4
0.736∗∗∗0.816∗∗∗0.780∗∗∗0.595∗∗∗0.779∗∗∗
ω5
-1.449∗∗∗-1.600∗∗∗-1.910∗∗∗-1.210∗∗∗-1.959∗∗∗
p5
0.706∗∗∗0.734∗∗∗0.832∗∗∗0.665∗∗∗0.746∗∗∗
ω6
-1.604∗∗∗-1.537∗∗∗-1.876∗∗∗-1.216∗∗∗-1.851∗∗∗
p6
0.755∗∗∗0.730∗∗∗0.862∗∗∗0.672∗∗∗0.749∗∗∗
Innovation parameters
α1
1
0.049∗∗∗0.124∗∗∗0.063∗∗∗0.147∗∗∗0.134∗∗∗
α1
2
0.046∗∗∗0.056∗∗∗0.028∗∗∗0.047∗∗
0.049∗∗∗
α2
1
0.027∗∗
0.034∗∗
0.012
0.124∗∗∗0.064∗∗∗
α2
2
0.085∗∗∗0.133∗∗∗0.078∗∗∗0.096∗∗∗0.097∗∗∗
α3
1
-0.008
0.010
-0.018∗
0.037
0.078∗∗∗
α3
2
0.013
0.010
0.038∗∗∗0.043
0.050∗∗
α4
1
0.037∗∗∗0.017∗
0.062∗∗∗0.036
0.107∗∗∗
α4
2
-0.007
-0.013
-0.025
-0.057∗
-0.002
α5
1
-0.014
0.041∗
0.021
0.033
-0.039∗
α5
2
0.095∗∗∗0.154∗∗∗0.055∗∗∗0.085∗∗∗0.133∗∗∗
α6
1
0.167∗∗∗0.091∗∗∗0.063∗∗∗0.088
0.151∗∗∗
α6
2
-0.033
0.038∗∗
0.053∗∗∗0.027
0.081∗∗∗
α1
3
0.025∗∗
-0.008
-0.005∗∗∗0.092∗∗
0.056∗∗∗
α1
4
0.016
0.017
0.007
-0.016
0.086∗∗∗
α2
3
0.017
-0.009
0.018∗
0.049
0.054∗∗∗
α2
4
0.007
0.041∗∗
0.004
-0.053
0.037∗
α3
3
0.110∗∗∗0.084∗∗∗0.096∗∗∗0.182∗∗∗0.108∗∗∗
α3
4
-0.003
-0.005
0.019
0.008
0.051∗
α4
3
0.005
-0.037∗∗∗-0.029∗
0.129∗∗∗0.080∗∗∗
α4
4
0.151∗∗∗0.110∗∗∗0.186∗∗∗0.046
0.224∗∗∗
α5
3
-0.006
0.056∗∗
0.040∗∗
0.034
0.083∗∗∗
α5
4
-0.019
0.032
-0.001
-0.008
0.073∗∗
α6
3
0.022
0.026
-0.024
0.045
0.005
α6
4
-0.003
-0.005
0.001
0.035
0.125∗∗∗
α1
5
-0.029∗
-0.007
-0.021
0.004
0.087∗∗∗
α1
6
0.039∗∗-0.050∗
0.026
0.036
0.044∗∗∗
α2
5
0.025∗
0.037
0.006
0.034
0.088∗∗∗
α2
6
0.003
-0.038
0.001
-0.003
0.006∗∗∗
α3
5
-0.001
0.013
-0.011
-0.024
0.025
α3
6
0.013
-0.003
-0.027
0.025
-0.001∗∗∗
α4
5
-0.058∗∗
0.017
-0.050
0.018
0.032
α4
6
0.002
-0.016
-0.008
0.018
0.088∗∗
α5
5
0.045∗∗
0.134∗∗∗0.055∗
0.001
0.056
α5
6
0.049∗∗
0.031
0.022
0.025
-0.014∗∗∗
α6
5
0.122∗∗∗0.031
0.007
0.013
-0.164∗∗∗
α6
6
0.149∗∗∗0.094∗∗∗0.042
0.001
0.102
Persistence parameters
β11
0.987∗∗∗0.945∗∗∗0.994∗∗∗0.986∗∗∗0.994∗∗∗
β44
0.997∗∗∗0.998∗∗∗0.990∗∗∗0.992∗∗∗0.995∗∗∗
β22
0.987∗∗∗0.951∗∗∗0.984∗∗∗0.985∗∗∗0.995∗∗∗
β55
0.987∗∗∗0.961∗∗∗0.993∗∗∗0.983∗∗∗0.997∗∗∗
β33
0.997∗∗∗0.994∗∗∗0.997∗∗∗0.994∗∗∗0.994∗∗∗
β66
0.961∗∗∗0.972∗∗∗0.993∗∗∗0.979∗∗∗0.994∗∗∗
Seasonality parameters
s12
11:00 -1.257∗∗∗-1.223∗∗∗-1.665∗∗∗-0.793∗∗∗-1.553∗∗∗
s34
11:00 -1.449∗∗∗-1.291∗∗∗-1.495∗∗∗-0.913∗∗∗-1.660∗∗∗
s12
12:00 0.791∗∗∗0.912∗∗∗1.499∗∗∗-0.137
1.339∗∗∗
s34
12:00 0.989∗∗∗1.326∗∗∗1.505∗∗∗-0.189
1.245∗∗∗
s12
13:00 -0.577∗∗∗-0.929∗∗∗-0.736∗∗∗-0.005
-0.362
s34
13:00 -0.172
-1.098∗∗∗-1.110∗∗∗1.040∗
0.191
s12
14:00 2.330∗∗∗2.666∗∗∗2.046∗∗∗2.603∗∗∗1.666∗∗∗
s34
14:00 1.675∗∗∗2.189∗∗∗2.151∗∗∗1.692∗∗∗1.003∗∗∗
s12
15:00 -0.311
-0.411∗
-0.579∗∗∗-1.491∗∗∗-0.134
s34
15:00 -0.975∗∗∗-0.755∗∗∗-0.336
-2.316∗∗∗-0.632
s12
16:00 0.286
0.355
1.291∗∗∗1.402∗∗
2.487∗∗∗
s34
16:00 0.698∗∗
0.174
-0.695∗∗
3.150∗∗∗1.044∗
s56
11:00 -0.884∗∗∗-1.224∗∗∗-1.506∗∗∗-0.430
-1.612∗∗∗
s56
14:00 3.110∗∗∗3.064∗∗∗2.309∗∗∗4.714∗∗∗1.505∗∗∗
s56
12:00 0.502
1.249∗∗∗1.304∗∗∗0.598
1.227∗∗
s56
15:00 -0.646
-0.870∗∗
-0.586
-2.483∗∗∗-0.127
s56
13:00 -1.110∗∗∗-1.572∗∗∗-0.860∗∗∗-2.250∗∗∗-0.040
s56
16:00 0.173
0.924
0.569
3.274∗∗∗1.130
30

Table VI continued
Diagnostics
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
BHP
NAB
NCP
TLS
WOW
Obs
9316
10463
9142
3102
3438
LL
-22351
-25144
-21277
-7538
-6967
BIC
-22680
-25477
-21605
-7828
-7260
Aggressive Buy Orders
Aggressive Sell Orders
Mean of ˆεi
0.989
0.999
0.992
0.958
0.988
0.992
0.996
1.001
1.002
1.012
S.D. of ˆεi
1.016
1.020
1.051
0.930
1.087
1.027
1.044
1.058
0.957
1.084
LB(20) of ˆεi
13.858
18.542
18.892
27.911
20.361
12.845
27.835
20.016
17.917
17.768
Exc. disp.
0.515
0.760∗
1.831∗
1.079
1.869∗
0.934
1.712
2.075∗∗
0.698
1.864∗
Aggressive Ask Limit Orders
Aggressive Bid Limit Orders
Mean of ˆεi
0.983
1.009
1.015
0.987
0.987
0.997
0.986
0.964
0.966
0.9457
S.D. of ˆεi
1.036
1.048
1.070
0.953
1.001
1.012
1.033
1.0203
0.921
0.9929
LB(20) of ˆεi
15.927
14.314
11.126
31.249
17.930
19.197
21.943
17.132
17.175
18.180
Exc. disp.
1.015
1.488
2.333∗∗
0.494
0.037
0.344
0.918
0.495
1.003
0.093
Aggressive Ask Cancellations
Aggressive Bid Cancellations
Mean of ˆεi
0.995
1.002
1.012
1.008
1.0079
1.010
1.009
1.003
1.010
1.037
S.D. of ˆεi
0.935
0.962
0.9503
0.906
0.9750
0.929
0.942
0.978
0.876
1.047
LB(20) of ˆεi
23.337
25.336
16.429
20.911
19.263
11.344
24.900
13.915
24.142∗∗∗
8.333
Exc. disp.
1.411
0.749
0.787
1.681∗
0.288
1.428
1.169
0.374
2.200∗∗
0.584
Diagnostics: Log Likelihood (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC) and diagnostics (mean, standard deviation,
Ljung-Box statistics and excess dispersion test) of ACI residuals ˆεs
i.
Figure 1.
Intraday seasonality functions: Estimated intraday seasonality functions of the processes of
aggressive market orders (solid line), aggressive limit orders (broken line), and aggressive cancellations (dotted
line) for the BHP, NAB, NCP, TLS and WOW stock traded at the ASX. The estimates are based on the ACI
speciﬁcations in Table 4.
31
