 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477 
1 Copyright © Quantum Way Data Analytics Corporation 
 
Pairs Trading and Its Implied Timing Ability 
 
Jessy Gao1 
1 THE THEORY OF PAIRS TRADING 
The pairs trading strategy has a long trading history. Many investors are still trading this strategy with 
different versions of model. The basic idea is still the mean reversion, which people believe that the 
relationship between two securities tends to reverse to its long-term mean. 
However, as indicated in the paper, "Pairs trading with a fundamental flavor", (Jussa, Chen, et al, 
Deutsche Bank global quantitative strategy, March 20, 2012) the profitability of pairs trading strategies 
has been declining in recent years, possible due to: 
 
The proliferation of quant and hedge funds that mobilize automated, instantaneous trading 
strategies 
 
Large inflows of capital chasing similar investment strategies could potentially have impacted 
arbitrage strategies like pairs trading. 
 
The dramatic increase in the availability of pricing and fundamental data enables savvy investors to 
easily develop standard pairs trading models. 
 
Limits to arbitrage may be a result of constraining transaction costs. 
Therefore, in order to explore the market with the pairs trading idea, a unique model is required. 
We have adopted a different approach in pairs trading with NASDAQ 100 Index future (NQ) and Dow 
Jones Industry Average Index future (YM). Generally speaking, stocks in NASDAQ 100 Index tend to be 
growth oriented stocks, while Dow Jones Industry Average Index consists of value oriented stocks. Since 
both indices are broad market indices, they are highly correlated. In a bull market, growth stocks tend to 
outpace value stocks, and in a bear market, value stocks perform better. 
We implement the model on intraday base. During the trading hours (9:30 am - 4:00 PM, EST), the 
model calculates whether NASDAQ 100 Index is overbought or oversold relative to Dow Jones Industry 
Average Index. If NASDAQ 100 Index is overbought, we will short its future NQ and long Dow Jones 
Industry Average Index future (YM) with 1-on-1 contract ratio. If NASDAQ 100 Index is oversold, we will 
long its future NQ and short Dow Jones Industry Average Index future (YM) with 1-on-1 contract ratio. 
2 THE IMPLIED MARKET TIMING ABILITY BEHIND THE INDEX PAIRS TRADING  
In the previous section, we point out that "In a bull market, growth stocks tend to outpace value stocks, 
and in a bear market, value stocks perform better". In other words, when the pairs trading model 
suggests to long NQ and short YM, the market is likely to go up, otherwise, the market is likely to drop. 
This is the implied market timing ability of the index pairs trading model. 
                                                          
1 Co-founder of Quantum Way Data Analytics Corp. jessygao@quandumda.com http://www.quantumda.com 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477 
2 Copyright © Quantum Way Data Analytics Corporation 
 
Figure 1 out-of-sample signals 
 
This timing ability can be demonstrated in the highlighted transaction. During all 5 completed "long NDX 
short DOW" trades, market indices were all up, while in three of five completed "short NDX long DOW", 
the market was down. Therefore, the timing probability is 80%! The current signal is "long NDX short 
DOW". Even though the US market dropped on April 30, the market recovered the loss on May 1st, 
suggesting that market indices are likely to go up when we close the current transaction.  
This timing ability can enable us to improve the performance significantly. We can buy call or put 
options on indices or ETFs based on signals to add addition returns to the pairs trading. 
3 CHOOSE BETTER ENTRY POINTS WITH TREND FOLLOWING SYSTEMS  
We can improve entry points of the pairs trading with the trend following system both for indices and 
pairs. 
Figure 2 pairs trading and trend following 
 
The above chart shows the system that combines the pairs trading model and a trend following system. 
We could wait to open the pairs trading positions until the system shows the spread forms a trend. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477 
3 Copyright © Quantum Way Data Analytics Corporation 
 
4 EXPANDING THE MODEL AND IDEA  
The idea of trading between NDX and Dow Jones can be expanded to other markets. 
 
In Hong Kong market, pairs can be formed with HSI and HSCEI, both indexes have regular future and 
mini-size futures. Following are results: 
Figure 3 Performance in Hong Kong market 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477

4 Copyright © Quantum Way Data Analytics Corporation 
 
In FX market, commodity currencies such as AUD and CAD are paired with safe heaven currencies 
including CHF and JPY. We choose CADJPY to trade.  The leverage is 5. 
Figure 4 performance in FX market 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477

5 Copyright © Quantum Way Data Analytics Corporation 
 
5 LIVE OUT-OF-SAMPLE PERFORMANCE 
Figure 5 and Figure 6 show the live out-of-sample performance of the pairs trading and its timing ability 
in 2015 as of September 28. Both the market-neutral portfolio and the timing portfolio could have 
achieved very promising risk adjusted returns. 
Figure 5live performance statistics 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477

6 Copyright © Quantum Way Data Analytics Corporation 
 
Figure 6Live portfolios 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2710477
