 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063 
1 
 
Demystifying pairs trading: The role of 
volatility and correlation 
 
 
Stephanie Riedinger is a finance research associate at the Catholic University of EichstaettIngolstadt in Bavaria, Germany 
 
Auf der Schanz 49, 85049 Ingolstadt, Bavaria, Germany 
Phone: 0049/841/937/21926 
Stephanie.Riedinger@ku.de 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063 
2 
 
Demystifying pairs trading: The role of volatility and correlation 
 
Abstract 
This paper explains why the profitability of the popular trading strategy “pairs trading”, as 
introduced by Gatev, Goetzmann, and Rouwenhorst (2006), varies across markets, industries, 
macroeconomic circumstances, and firm characteristics. The authors disentangle how the 
strategy’s two input parameters, volatility and correlation, influence the rule-based pair 
selection, the trading algorithm, and the total return. They find that the traditionally applied 
pair selection fails to identify the most profitable pairs. In the US market, small algorithm 
modifications raise the average risk-adjusted monthly return from 37bp to 76bp between 1990 
and 2014. The authors’ findings emphasize the importance to acquire a profound 
understanding of the technical interrelation when using a technical, rule-based trading 
strategy. The findings are robust to liquidity issues, bid-ask spread, and limits of arbitrage. 
 
Keywords: Pairs trading, hedge fund, algorithm, volatility, limits of arbitrage 
JEL Classification: G11, G12, G14, G17 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063 
1 
 
1 
Introduction 
In times of low interest rates, trading strategies which promise a high risk-adjusted return are of 
particular interest. One of the most prominent trading strategies among practitioners and in the 
academic world is pairs trading, a relative-value arbitrage strategy that was first introduced in 
literature by Gatev et al. (2006). Several academic studies identify a number of factors and conditions 
which increase the strategy’s profitability. However, until now little is known about the channel that 
translates these factors into higher pairs trading returns. We extend the current literature about pairs 
trading by explaining the concrete mechanism behind the technical algorithm. Our insights help to 
better understand the influence of external factors on the profitability of pairs trading. Furthermore, 
our results encourage to critically evaluate the chosen procedure to select pairs for trading. 
We start with the question: What is pairs trading? In an efficient market, two assets that receive an 
identical payoff in each state of the world must have the same current price as arbitrage opportunities 
arise otherwise. As markets are not perfectly efficient, pairs trading exploits these temporary price 
differences. In the first step, the strategy identifies stock pairs with an almost identical price pattern as 
close economic substitutes during a twelve-month identification period. For this purpose, Gatev et al. 
(2006) compute the sum of daily squared price differences (SSD) between all possible stock pair 
combinations. The 20 pairs with the lowest SSD are eligible for trading in a subsequent six-months 
trading period.1 A new trade is initialized as soon as the price spread2 between both stocks exceeds two 
standard deviations, as measured during the identification period (2σ-trading rule). The underlying 
argument of pairs trading is that price deviations of two close economic substitutes are temporary and 
dissolve in the near future. The worse performing ‘loser’ stock is, hence, the one which is temporary 
underpriced, whereas the better performing ‘winner’ stock is overpriced. To exploit mispricing, Gatev 
et al. (2006) initiate a one-unit long position in the loser stock and a one-unit short position in the 
                                                 
1 We refer to this portfolio as the SSD-portfolio in the following. 
2 All prices are normalized to one at the beginning of the identification period and at the beginning of the trading 
period. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

2 
 
winner stock. Both positions will revert and earn an arbitrage premium if the price deviation is indeed 
only temporary. The positions are closed as soon as both normalized prices fully converge. 
Pairs trading is a technical, rule-based investment strategy. As such, its return is a product of the 
interaction between different input parameters and arbitrarily set rules and thresholds. Figure 1 
disentangles the technical interdependencies of the rule-based pair selection (SSD measure) and the 
trading algorithm (2σ-trading rule) with the strategy’s return generating components, return per trade 
and trading frequency. 
[Exhibit 1] 
The 2σ-trading rule directly determines the return per trade, while the SSD Selection Criterion 
determines the levels of pair volatility and the correlation of selected pairs. These levels, in turn, 
influence the return per trade and the trading frequency, which are the strategy’s main return 
components. 
We derive three research propositions from financial and stochastic literature which we confirm 
empirically: First, pair correlation and pair volatility explain up to 88% of SSD’s variation and vice 
versa. We conclude that traditionally selected pairs with the lowest SSD consist of highly correlated 
stocks with little volatility. Second, the 2σ-trading rule induces the following relationship: Highly 
volatile (less volatile) pairs and negatively (positively) correlated pairs increase (decrease) the return 
per trade. Third, low pair volatility and high pair correlation during the identification period, coupled 
with higher volatility and lower correlation during the trading period, increase the number of trades. 
More trades in turn increase the total return. Pair volatility increases are more likely for pairs with 
currently low pair volatility due to mean-reverting volatility. Likewise, correlation declines are more 
likely for highly correlated pairs. Overall, pairs with high pair volatility and high correlation are the 
most profitable ones. As the SSD selects pairs with low pair volatility, it fails to exploit the full return 
potential. This insight is of high relevance for interested practitioners, who wish to implement profit 
increasing modifications.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

3 
 
Our analysis, how pair volatility and correlation affect the return, complements the literature on pairs 
trading by bridging the gap between previous empirical findings and the mechanism of the technical 
trading algorithm. Varying market conditions and factors across individual stocks, industries, and 
countries determine the levels of volatility and correlation among stocks which affect the profitability 
of pairs trading. For instance, Gatev et al.  (2006) find that certain industry portfolios outperform 
others. Do and Faff (2010) discover a superior return in times of market distress between January 
2000-December 2002 and July 2007-June 2009. Jacobs and Weber (2015) observe varying returns 
across different countries. These variations over time, across markets, and industries are often 
explained with different levels of market efficiency3, the number of eligible pairs, and limited 
investor’s attention4. Without doubt, less efficient markets or industries and investor’s inattention 
allow more mispricing opportunities, which in turn increase the strategy’s return. Yet, we demonstrate 
that at least part of the additional return originates from the interaction of the algorithm with higher 
market volatility and correlation levels over time, across countries, and across industries.  
The remaining parts of the paper are organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our data set and 
methodology. In Section 3, we derive three research propositions about the technical drivers of pairs 
trading. Section 4 challenges the classical pairs selection measure SSD. Afterwards, Section 5 
empirically explores the influence of pair volatility and correlation on the return per trade and the 
trading frequency. Section 6 takes a closer look on the total returns in calendar time. Finally, Section 7 
addresses robustness issues before Section 8 concludes. 
2 
Methodology and data selection 
The following Section 2.1 introduces our data selection. We closely follow Gatev et al.’s (2006) 
distance approach to implement pairs trading. Section 2.2 describes the traditional algorithm in detail, 
before Section 2.3 introduces our modified test design. 
                                                 
3Do and Faff (2010). 
4Jacobs and Weber (2015). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

4 
 
2.1 Data selection 
We obtain all historical index constituents of the S&P 1500 between January 1990 and December 
2014 from the Compustat Monthly Updates - Index Constituents file and merge the data via the 
WRDS CCM merged database link with daily closing, bid closing, and ask closing prices from CRSP. 
We exclude stocks for a specific trading period if any of the three: bid, ask, or closing price is 
unavailable on more than one day during the previous identification period. After this preselection, 
approximately 1900 stocks on average are eligible for trading each month, forming around 1.8 million 
possible pair combinations. We obtain risk factors from Kenneth French’s and Lubos Pastor’s 
homepage. 
2.2 How pairs trading works 
Following Gatev et al. (2006), a pairs trading period in our paper consists of two periods – first, a 12month identification period and a subsequent 6-month trading period. At the beginning of the 
identification period, all prices are normalized to one. During the consecutive twelve months, we 
compute three key figures for each possible pair combination AB in the stock universe: the total pair 
volatility σAB = σA + σB, the pair correlation ρA,B, and the traditional selection measure, the sum of 
squared differences of normalized prices (SSD). Gatev et al. (2006) compute the SSD as sum of the 
squared deviations between the normalized price movements of two stocks over the identification 
period: 
Distance Measure (SSD) = ∑
(PA,t-PB,t)
2
T
t=1
   
(1) 
where t is the day index during the identification period, and PA,t is the normalized price of stock A (or 
B) at day t. At the end of the identification period, the authors form a portfolio, consisting of the 20 
pairs with the lowest SSD, which is traded during the next trading period. 
To avoid an in-sample bias, the trading period starts on the first day after the identification period. 
Again, all prices are normalized to one. At the end of each day, the trading algorithm checks for each 
pair, included in the trading portfolio, whether to open a new trade or close a currently open trade. If 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

5 
 
the normalized prices of a pair diverge by more than two historic standard deviations 2σhist, as 
calculated during the identification period, we initialize the self-financing trade as follows: We sell 
one monetary unit of the better performing ‘winner’ stock and simultaneously buy one monetary unit 
of the less successful ‘loser’ stock. As soon as the two prices completely converge, we neutralize both 
positions. Thereafter, a pair might open and close several times during the trading period. If prices do 
not fully converge until the end of the trading period, all open positions are closed. Furthermore, trades 
are also closed if the price spread exceeds 4σhist (overshooting trade) or one stock is delisted on any 
day while the trade is active (delisted trade). A new pairs trading period starts every month, thus, six 
portfolios are traded simultaneously at each point in time.5 
Gatev et al. (2006) and follow-up papers implement a one-day-waiting strategy to consider a potential 
upward bias in returns caused by the bid-ask bounce.6 After the initial trading signal, they wait for one 
day until they trade. We forgo to approximate the bid-ask-spread and trade with the exact last bid or 
last ask price. At trade initialization, we buy the long position at the ask price and sell the short 
position at the bid price. We neutralize the long position at the bid price and the short position at the 
ask price. Similarly, we use these latter prices for the daily evaluation. Additional computations, like 
the average volatility or correlation, are executed with closing prices. 
We closely follow Gatev et al.’s approach to calculate the monthly returns for each portfolio (calendar 
time return). Furthermore, we also compute the return per trade, which we define as payoff of a pair’s 
round-trip. We refer to the internet appendix7 for further information on the return calculation and 
numerical examples. The interested practitioner can find more information in Vidyamurthy’s (2004) 
implementation book.  
                                                 
5 Because of the overlapping trading periods, one portfolio starts to trade in each month. At that time, the second 
portfolio is already active two months, the third one for three months and so on. 
6 In an upward trend, the closing price most likely represents the ask price. As pairs trading sells the increasing 
“winner stock”, an investor receives only the lower bid price. Likewise, the closing price of a decreasing stock is 
more likely to be the bid price, which must be purchased at the higher ask price. Hence, using closing prices 
might overestimate the real return. 
7 The internet appendix is attached at the end of this document. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

6 
 
2.3 Modified test design 
To systematically investigate the influence of volatility and correlation, we analyze pairs trading 
returns separately for different pair volatility and correlation levels. We modify the classical pair 
selection algorithm as follows: First, we calculate the pair correlation ρA,B and pair volatility 
(𝜎𝑉𝑂𝐿,𝐴+ 𝜎𝑉𝑂𝐿,𝐵), a proxy for the combined volatility, during the twelve month identification period. 
Second, we define five pair correlation and five pair volatility quintiles and classify pairs accordingly. 
Quintile Corr_Q1 (Corr_Q5) includes the pairs with the lowest (highest) pair correlation, quintile 
VOL_Q1 (VOL_Q5) includes the pairs with the lowest (highest) level of pair VOL. Third, we 
construct 25 pair groups from the intersection of the five pair volatility and five pair correlation 
quintile groups. For example, Corr_Q1/VOL_Q1 includes the pairs, whose pair correlation and pair 
volatility are among the lowest 20% compared to all other pair combinations. The quintile and group 
affiliations of a pair are updated every identification period. Fourth, we randomly pick 20 pairs out of 
each group and include them into one of our 25 pair volatility and pair correlation double sorted 
portfolios. These pairs remain in the trading portfolio during the subsequent six-month trading period 
and are eligible for trading. Finally, we compute the average monthly pairs trading returns and 
compare the performance of portfolios of stocks with different pair volatility levels. We form the 25 
portfolios based on five total pair volatility quintiles. To eliminate a selection bias while we pick 20 
stocks out of each group, we repeat the random pair selection ten times and average the returns. 
Exhibit 2 reports the mean pair correlation and pair volatility per quintile during the identification 
period. For instance, the median pair correlation of all Corr_Q5 pairs (highest pair correlation quintile) 
is 0.8026. 
[Insert Exhibit 2] 
The median pair correlation ranges from -0.4885 (Corr_Q1) to 0.8024 (Corr_Q5). The average pair 
volatility ranges from 0.0134 (Vola_Q1) to 0.1892 (Vola_Q5). 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

7 
 
3 
Disentangling the pairs trading algorithm 
This section analyzes the role of pair volatility and correlation on the technical trading algorithm in 
theory. Our insights are crucial to understand the concrete mechanism that translate pair volatility and 
correlation into higher or lower pairs trading returns. Furthermore, they provide a solid foundation to 
critically evaluate the influence of pairs trading’s arbitrarily set trading rules. We start with a brief 
overview of related empirical findings in Section 3.1. Afterwards in Section 3.2, we derive why we 
expect that pairs, which are picked by the traditional selection criterion SSD, include stocks with low 
pair volatility and high correlation levels. These levels, in turn, influence the return per trade and the 
trading frequency. We explain how the two drivers, pair volatility and correlation, influence the return 
per trade in Section 3.3 and the trading frequency in Section 3.4. 
3.1 Previous findings in literature 
Our research is motivated by previous papers that indirectly examine the influence of pair volatility 
and correlation. In this section, we summarize the most important related findings. First, out of fifty 
pairs with the lowest distance measure (SSD), Do and Faff (2010) select the twenty pairs with the 
highest number of price crossings during the identification period and observe a higher profitability for 
these pairs. The authors argue that multiple divergences and convergences of a pair within the 
identification period, predict more trading opportunities. We, therefore, analyze which level of pair 
volatility and correlation maximize the trading frequency. Moreover, Do and Faff (2010) find an 
increased profitability during times of market distress from January 2000-December 2002 and July 
2007-June 2009. Both bear market phases were accompanied by high market volatility. Hence, we 
suspect that high volatility increases the return. Second, the success of pairs trading was explored in 
many countries, for instance Andrade et al. (2005), Perlin (2009) and Bolgün et al. (2010) among 
others. Most notable, Jacobs and Weber (2015) provide a broad overview for 34 countries worldwide. 
They observe that less developed markets usually realize a higher return. These markets are normally 
less liquid, and hence possess higher market volatility. Third, Engelberg et al. (2009) provide a 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

8 
 
number of in-depth analyses about the drivers of opening, horizon and divergence risks. Among other 
findings, they demonstrate the positive influence of idiosyncratic volatility on the opening probability 
and a negative impact of idiosyncratic volatility on the time till convergence and also on the 
divergence probability. Similarly, Jacobs and Weber (2015) examine the influence of idiosyncratic 
volatility as proxy for limits to arbitrage and find a positive influence of volatility on the total return. 
Finally, Huck (2015) investigates the effect of total market volatility over time. He initializes positions 
if the VIX is categorized into a certain regime, additionally to the traditional opening signal. However, 
the return is only significant at times of an increasing or high 3-month moving average VIX.  
3.2 The SSD selection criterion 
We now take a closer look on the distance measure (SSD), and its implicit selection of pairs with low 
pair volatility and high correlation. A broad stream of literature applies the SSD to identify close 
economic substitutes during the identification period. These pairs are eligible for trading in the 
subsequent trading period. The SSD computes the sum of squared differences of the normalized prices 
Pi,t of two stocks i = A, B  at time t and selects the 20 pairs with the lowest SSD: 
Distance Measure (SSD)          = ∑
(PA,t-PB,t)
2 =
T
t=1
 
(2)  
   
= ∑
(PA,t
2 + PB,t
2 −2ρA,B)
T
t=1
                                                             (3) 
where ρA,B is the Pearson correlation coefficient of the standardized price time series.8 From the 
mathematical term in (3) we see that maximizing the correlation coefficient equals minimizing the 
SSD (Krauss (2016)). Based thereupon, we conclude that the SSD typically selects highly correlated 
pairs.  
Furthermore, we argue that low stock volatility is also crucial to minimize the SSD. Formula (3) 
reveals that high stock prices for PA,t or PB,t increase the SSD. Both prices are normalized to one in t = 
                                                 
8 The Pearson correlation coefficient equals: 𝜌𝐴,𝐵=
1
𝑡−1 ∑
(
𝑃𝐴,𝑡−𝑃𝐴̅̅̅̅
𝑠𝑃𝐴
) (
𝑃𝐵,𝑡−𝑃𝐵̅̅̅̅
𝑠𝑃𝐵
)
𝑇
𝑡=1
, where 𝑃𝑖,𝑡=
𝑃𝑖,𝑡−𝑃𝑖̅
𝑠𝑃𝑖
 are the 
daily z-transformed normalized prices. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

9 
 
0. Thus, high values for PA,t and PB,t only arise if stock volatility is high. Whether the minimizing 
influence of correlation on the SSD or the increasing effect of stock volatility dominates, depends on 
the magnitude of both factors. Formula (2) provides a good intuition. Let’s consider three stocks A, B, 
and C, whose prices PA, PB, and Pc are all normalized to one in t = 0. The returns of stock A and C are 
uncorrelated (ρA,C = 0), and the returns of both stocks are independently and normally distributed with 
the same standard deviation . Hence, the confidence intervals for the price realizations of PA and PC 
are identical with: [1 −𝓏1−𝛼
2
𝜎
√𝑛, 1 + 𝓏1−𝛼
2
𝜎
√𝑛]. The return of stock B is perfectly correlated with the 
return of stock A (ρA,B = 1). However, a △ change in the return of stock A translates into a 4△ change 
of stock B’s return.9 In consequence, stock B’s standard deviation is higher, and so is the confidence 
interval of PB. The daily price difference between PA and PB might therefore be higher than the price 
difference between PA and PC, although ρA,B = 1 and ρA,C = 0. For example, in t = 1, Stock A rises 
from PA,0 = 1 to PA,1 = 1.01. Hence, Stock B rises from PB,0 = 1 to PB,1 = 1.04. The price difference 
between stock A and B is: |PA,1-PB,1| = 0.04. Stock C is uncorrelated with stock A and does not move at 
all, PC,0 = PC,1 = 1. The price difference between stock A and C is therefore: |PA,1-PC,1| = 0.01. If we 
cumulate all daily squared price differences as in formula (2), we come to the following conclusion: 
The SSD for two uncorrelated stocks (A and C) can be smaller than the SSD of two highly correlated 
stocks (A and B) if the highly correlated pair includes at least one highly volatile stock. Altogether, we 
expect a negative relation between the SSD and correlation, and a positive one between SSD and pair 
volatility. 
Research proposition 1: Pairs with high correlation and low pair volatility are associated with a low 
SSD.  
A validation of research proposition one implies that applying the SSD results in trading with highly 
correlated pairs that exhibit little volatility. It is, however, unclear, whether this pair volatility and 
                                                 
9 For instance, if PA raises from $1 to $1.01, PB raises from $1 to $1.04.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

10 
 
correlation combination is beneficial for the return per trade and the trading frequency. 
3.3 Return per trade 
This section progresses with a closer look on the influence of pair volatility and correlation on the 
return per trade. During the trading period, we initialize positions as soon as the stock pair’s price 
difference exceeds two historic standard deviations 2hist, as calculated during the identification 
period. The return is continuously earned while the pair is ‘open’, until stock prices fully converge. At 
that point in time, we neutralize positions. We distinguish four different closing types. First, trades that 
fully converge during the trading period are denoted as ‘natural trades’ (closing type 1). Second, pairs 
which are not converged until the last day of the trading period are forcefully closed and categorized 
as ‘incomplete trades’ (closing type 2). Third, as we trade with highly volatile stocks, investors might 
be concerned about the asymmetric return profile10 of pairs trading. Therefore, we close a pair if the 
price difference exceeds 4hist on any day while a trade is open like Engelberg et al.’s (2009) 10-daymaximum strategy. Hence, the return potential is symmetric within the range of -2ơ and +2ơ. These 
trades are categorized as ‘overshooting trades’ (closing type 3). Affected pairs are blocked for the rest 
of the trading period.11 Finally, ‘delisted trades’ are trades that automatically close if one stock is 
delisted (closing type 4).  
We conjecture that a pair always earns a positive return if prices fully converge (natural trade).12 The 
return per trade equals the stock price difference at the time of the opening. Positions are initialized as 
soon as prices diverge by more than 2hist. Thus, the return of a natural trade equals 2hist plus an 
overshooting component. The overshooting component occurs if the price difference exceeds the 2ơhist 
                                                 
10 The positive return per trade is limited to 2ơ, while pairs that further diverge might generate an infinite loss. 
11 Otherwise, a new trade would open on the next day, as the price spread is still above 2ơhist because prices are 
not set back to one during the trading period. We also assume that a price spread of 4ơhist indicates a permanent 
price spread and thus refrain from further trading with these pairs. 
12 A possible unprofitable price development of one stock is always overcompensated by the return of the other 
stock that overcomes the previous price difference. For instance, if the stock price of the short position is rising, 
the return of the long position will overcompensate the negative return of the short position as otherwise stock 
prices would not fully converge. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

11 
 
threshold during the day and prices further diverge until closing prices are set. We derive: 
Return per natural trade = 2σhist+ overshooting. Accordingly, the return per natural trade is higher if 
the historical standard deviation is higher. 
Pairs trading can be understood as a portfolio which consists of stock A (long) and stock B (short). 
The pair’s historic standard deviation can easily be computed in this case. A simple mathematic 
transformation reveals the relationship between trade return, volatility of stock A and B, and the pair’s 
correlation coefficient pAB: 
Return per natural trade = 2√σA
2 +σB
2 - 2ρABσAσB + overshooting, 
(4) 
The formula validates our conjecture that the return of a successful trade is always positive. The 
overshooting component is always positive as otherwise the total price difference would not exceed 
2ơhist. As stock A is unequal to stock B, we conclude that (σA-σB)
2>0. Hence, the influence of 
volatility on the return per trade is always positive or zero, as σA
2 +σB
2 ≥ 2ρABσAσB with ρAB∈[-1,1]. 
Based upon this inequality, we argue that a higher volatility level of stock A or stock B (or both) 
increases the historic standard deviation, and thus the return per trade. On the contrary, higher pair 
correlation decreases 2ơhist. Neglecting the overshooting component, the first differentiation of the 
function regarding the historical correlation coefficient equals: 
   
∂f(σA,σB,ρAB)
∂ρAB
= - 
2σAσB
√σA
2 + σB
2 - 2ρABσAσB
,                                                                                                                              (5) 
The first differentiation is always negative, as the numerator and the denominator are positive. The 
return should therefore increase with declining historical correlation. We conclude that more volatile 
stocks and a negative or low stock correlation raise the return per trade. In contrast, overshooting 
trades, which are closed if the price spread exceeds 4ơhist, always generate a negative return. Recall 
that positions are initialized at a price spread of 2ơhist and are closed at 4ơhist. The potential loss is 
limited to 2ơhist, and therefore symmetric to the return potential of natural trades. The effect of pair 
volatility and correlation on overshooting trades is reverse to natural trades. Hence, low pair volatility 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

12 
 
and high correlation reduce the downside risk.  
Incomplete and delisted trades neither fully converge nor diverge by more than 4ơhist. These trades 
earn a positive return if prices converge and generate a loss if prices diverge. In conclusion, the link 
depends upon the direction of the stock’s movement. 
Research proposition 2: Highly volatile pairs and negatively correlated pairs increase the return per 
trade of converging trades. In contrast, low volatility and high correlation reduce the downside risk of 
diverging trades. 
3.4 Trading frequency 
We now turn to the second return dimension, the trading frequency, and argue that a high trading 
frequency is beneficial for the strategy’s total return. The trading frequency is defined as number of 
trades of all pairs within a portfolio over one trading period. Obviously, more trades with positive 
returns are beneficial, whereas many trades with a negative return are harmful. A pair can generate 
several natural trades within one trading period. Earning the price spread several times during one 
trading period successively increases the total return. In contrast, incomplete trades, overshooting 
trades, and delisted trades are always the last trade within a trading period.13 As unprofitable trades are 
limited to one, increasing the trading frequency only raises the number of natural trades, the closing 
type which always yields a positive return. 
The trading frequency is determined by the probability to open a pair and the time till convergence. 
The probability to generate loss-making overshooting trades is linked to the probability of further price 
divergence while a pair is open. Engelberg et al. (2009) explore the influence of various variables on 
the former probabilities including average mean idiosyncratic volatility. The authors observe a positive 
influence of idiosyncratic volatility on the opening probability, a negative influence on the time till 
                                                 
13 A pair cannot open after an incomplete trade as the incomplete trade is closed on the last day of the trading 
period. Pairs are blocked for further trades after an overshooting trade, as otherwise pairs are opened and closed 
daily, while the price spread exceeds 4ơhist. Likewise, a pair can obviously not open after the delisting of one 
included stock. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

13 
 
convergence, and on the probability of further price divergence. 
We concentrate on the probability of a pair opening and argue that a pair volatility increase or a 
correlation decrease between the identification and the trading period raises the opening probability. 
Let Xt be a normally distributed random variable,14 which describes the price spread, the difference 
between the normalized prices of stock A and B, on day t. The left graph of Figure 3 displays the 
density function of Xt during the identification period (DensityID_Period) with Xt~N, 0, σhist. Pairs 
trading expects both stocks to strictly co-move, such that the expected value μ of the price spread Xt is 
zero. The distribution of Xt is symmetric because it is equally likely that stock A outperforms stock B 
as it is that stock B outperforms stock A. Following the traditional pairs trading algorithm, the 
threshold to open a trade is 2ơhist. More precisely, a pair is opened if Xt falls either below μ-2ơhist or 
exceeds μ+2ơhist.  
[Insert Exhibit 3] 
The dashed area in the left figure between μ-2ơhist and μ+2ơhist represents the density to not exceed the 
thresholds. We derive from the density function that this probability is 95.45%.  
Hence, the probability to open a new trade is 4.55% if the volatility does not change between the 
identification and the trading period. However, the opening probability changes dramatically if Xt’s 
volatility increases to ơtrade at the beginning of the trading period. However, the former thresholds of μ 
+/- 2ơhist, based on the volatility during the identification period ơhist, are still active. The probability of 
Xt to exceed the trigger points, illustrated by the grey area in the right figure, is significantly higher 
than before with Xt~N, 0, σtrade. In an extreme case the opening probability could increase from 
4.55% to 31.73%15 if the volatility doubles (ơtrade = 2ơhist) between the identification and the trading 
period. On the contrary, a drop in the volatility of Xt (ơtrade < ơhist) reduces the probability to open a 
                                                 
14 This is a simplified assumption to demonstrate the idea. Xt is rather a function of Xt-1, the return of stock A, 
and the return of stock B. 
15 The probability of a realization within the +/-2ơ area around  decreases from 95.45% to 68.27% for a 
realization within the +/-ơ threshold. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

14 
 
new trade. 
We now turn to the drivers of Xt’s volatility. The volatility of the price spread Xt (ơhist and ơTrade) is 
positively influenced by the stock volatilities σA and σB. Furthermore, Xt’s volatility is negatively 
affected by ρA,B, the correlation of stock A and B.16 We conjecture that an increase of stock volatility 
σA or σB, or a decrease of pair correlation ρA,B between the identification and trading period increases 
the volatility of Xt. The increase of Xt’s volatility, in turn, raises the chance to open a new trade, and 
hence raises the trading frequency. In contrast, a decrease of stock volatility or a correlation increase 
reduces the trading frequency. Therefore, selecting promising pairs is also a matter of correctly 
forecasting volatility and correlation changes.  
Volatility clustering over time implies that a period of low or high volatility is usually followed by a 
more medium volatility level. Most volatility forecasting models, therefore, assume that volatility 
follows a mean-reverting process (e.g., Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (1930) process in Stein and Stein (1991) 
in Heston’s model (1993), and in ARCH/GARCH models (Engle (1982), Bollerslev (1986))).17 If 
volatility reverts to its mean, the volatility of Vola_Q1 pairs (lowest pair volatility) should only be 
temporarily low. We expect more volatility increases for Vola_Q1 pairs, and hence, more trades by 
these pairs. In contrast, the volatility of Vola_Q5 pairs is more likely to decrease which would 
generate less trades. We argue similarly for correlation and expect to observe more correlation 
decreases for pairs within the highest correlation quintile compared to pairs within the lowest 
correlation quintile.  
Research proposition 3: The number of natural trades is increased by low stock volatility and high 
pair correlation during the identification period, coupled with higher volatility and lower correlation 
during the trading period. Pair volatility increases are more likely for pairs with currently low pair 
volatility, while correlation decreases are more likely for pairs with a currently high correlation. 
                                                 
16 We derive these results from the following mathematical transformation: V(X) = V(PA −PB) = V(PA) +
 V(PB) −2Cov(PA, PB) = V(PA) + V(PB) −2ρA,B√V(PA)√V(PB). 
17 Andersen et al. (2006) provide a comprehensive overview of models and literature on volatility forecasting. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

15 
 
4 
A critical review of the SSD selection method 
What are the implications of applying the traditional pair selection criterion (SSD)? This section 
investigates the extent to which pair volatility and correlation influence the SSD as proclaimed in 
research proposition one. A significant influence of both factors implies that the use of the SSD equals 
selecting pairs with a specific pair volatility-correlation combination. This specific combination, in 
turn, may influence the trading behavior as proposed in research proposition two and three, and hence, 
impacts the total return potential. 
The classical distance measure SSD is introduced by Gatev et al. (2006) and applied by several other 
authors. The appeal to use the SSD is its simplicity and the possibility to automatize the process. The 
SSD calculates the sum of the squared deviations between the normalized price movements of two 
stocks. The 20 pairs with the lowest SSD are selected for trading in the subsequent trading period. 
Research proposition one conjectures that low pair volatility and high correlation minimize the SSD. 
We regress the SSD on pair volatility and correlation to investigate the explanation power of both 
factors. Our sample includes all possible pair combinations across all identification periods. We use 
period and pair clustered standard errors. The results are displayed in Exhibit 4, Panel A. 
[Insert Exhibit 4] 
Pair volatility and correlation explain 88% of the SSD’s total variation which confirms a strong 
influence of both factors. As expected, the SSD is positively correlated with pair volatility and 
negatively correlated with pair correlation. The formal definition of the SSD veils whether the effect of 
pair correlation or the volatility effect dominates. The standardized regression coefficients suggest that 
low pair volatility dominates the effect of high correlation. To check the robustness of our results, we 
repeat the regression individually with our ten data sets. The results confirm the previous results 
separately for each set. We conclude that the traditional selection algorithm picks pairs with low pair 
volatility and high correlation. As an additional test, we examine into which of our volatility and 
correlation double-sorted quintiles the 20 pairs with the lowest SSD are classified. Almost 67% of all 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

16 
 
SSD selected pairs are classified into Corr_Q5/Vola_Q1, the portfolio with the lowest pair volatility 
and highest correlation. The remaining pairs are all allocated to one of the other Corr_Q5 or Vola_Q1 
portfolios. We conclude that either their pair volatility is very low or their correlation is high. 
Furthermore, the SSD portfolio allows a direct comparison with selected fellow studies. We exclude 
papers that apply major modifications, conceal raw returns, or one-day-waiting returns. Do and Faff 
(2010) detect a declining trend in pairs trading returns over time. Therefore, we consider the covered 
period when comparing returns. Furthermore, minor adaptions of the original algorithm might cause 
small differences, like the preselection of pairs as in Papadakis and Wysocki (2007). Exhibit 4, Panel 
B summarizes the monthly U.S. returns for similar stock universes. Our return of 37bp is consistent 
with the 37bp return in Do and Faff (2010) for 1989-2002 and 24bp for 2003-2009, as well as the 36bp 
in Papadakis and Wysocki (2007) for 1994-2006. These results indicate that our computation and the 
bid-ask price approach are reliable. 
Altogether, our findings confirm research proposition one. When applying the traditional SSD 
measure, investors unconsciously commit to trade with highly correlated pairs and low pair volatility. 
The next section examines the consequences of trading with this specific pair selection for the 
strategy’s profitability. 
5 
The effect of volatility and correlation on the return per trade and the trading frequency 
This section investigates the isolated effect of pair volatility and correlation on the trading algorithm. 
The previous section revealed that the traditional selection procedure picks pairs with low pair 
volatility and high correlation. Therefore, we do not restrict our analysis to SSD-selected pairs as we 
are also interested in the effect of high pair volatility and low correlation. We study the trading 
behavior of the 25 portfolios, which are double sorted on pair volatility and correlation.  Afterwards, 
we investigate the effect of pair volatility and correlation on the return per trade, which is defined as 
average single round-trip of a pair. Afterwards in Section 5.2, we analyze the influence on the trading 
frequency. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

17 
 
5.1 Return per trade 
Research proposition two predicts a positive (negative) influence of high pair volatility (correlation) 
on the return per trade for profitable natural trades and vice versa for overshooting trades. The 
influence on the return per trade of incomplete and delisted trades depends on whether stock prices 
converge or diverge. Like natural trades, high pair volatility and low correlation are beneficial for 
converging prices, whereas low volatility and high correlation are preferable for diverging prices. 
Exhibit 5 compares the return per trade for each volatility-correlation double sorted portfolio 
separately for each closing type in panel A to D. Panel A reports that the average return per natural 
trade of a Vola_Q1/Corr_Q5 pair (lowest pair volatility and highest correlation quintiles) is $0.14 for a 
$1 commitment in the long and the short position. The average return per natural trade ranges between 
$0.1441 for Vola_Q1/Corr_Q5 pairs and $0.7256 for Vola_Q5/Corr_Q1 pairs. As conjectured in 
research assumption two, the return per trade for natural trades rises for higher pair volatility levels 
(within each correlation quintile) and decreases for higher correlation (within each volatility quintile). 
Although incomplete trades are forcefully closed on the last day, Panel B reports an average positive 
return per trade. Similar as for natural trades, higher pair volatility and lower correlation significantly 
enhance the profitability of incomplete successful trades. The return ranges between $0.0118 for 
Vola_Q1/Corr_Q5 and $0.0338 for Vola_Q5/Corr_Q1. Panel C shows that higher pair volatility and 
lower correlation increase the loss per trade for overshooting trades. The return per trade ranges 
between -$0.4668 for Vola_Q5/Corr_Q1, and -$0.1125 for Vola_Q1/Corr_Q5. As expected, the link 
between volatility, correlation and return of overshooting trades is reverse to natural trades. Panel D 
reports that the return of delisted trades is on average negative for highly volatile and weakly 
correlated pairs. Yet, the return is increasing and positive for less volatile and highly correlated pairs. 
The average return per trade ranges between -$0.1322 for Vola_Q5/Corr_Q1 and $0.0190 for 
Vola_Q2/Corr_4. However, the return of 8 out of 25 portfolios is insignificant, indicating that there is 
no clear volatility and correlation effect for delisted trades. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

18 
 
[Insert Exhibit 5] 
Altogether, our findings support research proposition 2. As expected, high pair volatility and low 
correlation levels increase the return of converging pairs, but also increase the loss of diverging pairs. 
We learn that the volatility and correlation levels during the identification period determine the 
average return level per trade. Hence, pairs in more volatile markets or in times of general higher 
market volatility should earn more per trade. Furthermore, our findings imply that the SSD’s 
preselection of highly correlated pairs with low volatility is disadvantageous as less correlated pairs 
with higher volatility earn more per trade. 
5.2 Trading frequency 
After examining the return per trade in the previous section, we now turn to the second return building 
block, the trading frequency. This section explores the link between pair volatility, correlation, and 
trading frequency to evaluate research proposition three. We argue that raising the trading frequency 
means earning the return per trade multiple times during one trading period. Recall that a high trading 
frequency increases only the number of profitable, Closing Type 1 trades (natural trades). Closing 
Type 2, 3 and 4 are always the last trades within a specific trading period. Hence, the number of these 
potentially loss-making trades is unaffected by a higher trading frequency. 
The first analysis investigates the influence of pair volatility and correlation on the probability of a 
level shift. A level shift means that the pair volatility or correlation of a pair changes between the 
identification period and the trading period. The price spread Xt is defined as the difference between 
the two normalized stock prices of the pair on day t and determines whether a new trade is initialized. 
The opening probability is higher if the volatility of Xt is low during the identification period and high 
during the trading period. As derived in research proposition three, we conjecture that volatility 
increases and correlation decreases raise the volatility of Xt, which, in turn, raise the desired opening 
probability. We expect to observe more volatility decreases for pairs with high pair volatility 
(Vola_Q5 quintile) and less volatility decreases for pairs with little volatility (Vola_Q1 quintile). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

19 
 
Likewise, we argue that correlation increases are more likely for low correlated pairs (Corr_Q1) and 
less likely for originally strongly correlated pairs (Corr_Q5). 
We first compute the average pair volatility and the correlation coefficient of each pair during the 
identification period and separately for the subsequent trading period. Based thereupon, we generate 
two dummies for each pair: The volatility dummy (correlation dummy) indicates whether the pair 
volatility increases (correlation decreases) between the identification and the trading period (D = 1) or 
not (D = 0). We determine the volatility and the correlation dummy for each trade. Afterwards, we 
calculate the average percentage of trades which are generated by pairs with a desired volatility 
increase or a correlation decrease separately for each volatility-correlation double sorted portfolio. 
Exhibit 6, Panel A reports the results for pair volatility increases. 61.08% of all trades in portfolio 
Corr_Q1/Vola_Q1 are generated by pairs with a volatility increase. Consistent with mean-reverting 
volatility (Engle and Patton (2001)), volatility increases are more likely for low pair volatility levels 
(Vola_Q1) across all correlation quintiles. Furthermore, pair volatility increases are more likely for 
reversely correlated pairs (Corr_Q1 quintile). Overall, Panel A suggests that desired volatility 
increases are most frequently generated by pairs with a low pair volatility and low correlation.   
[Insert Exhibit 6] 
Furthermore, we conjecture that correlation decreases between the identification and the trading period 
raise the trading frequency. Similar as in Panel A, Panel B shows the percentage of trades by pairs 
with a correlation decrease. For instance, 23.68% of all trades in portfolio Corr_Q1/ Vola_Q1 are 
generated by pairs whose correlation level decreased. Panel B indicates that desired correlation 
decreases are most often generated by pairs with high volatility and high correlation. 
Altogether, our research reveals that high pair volatility and high correlation are positive for the 
correlation-decrease-effect, but harmful for the volatility-increase-effect. To answer whether the 
aggregated influence on the trading frequency is positive or negative, we count the total number of 
trades over all periods for each portfolio in Panel C. The exhibit uncovers that high pair volatility 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

20 
 
portfolios generate less trades than low pair volatility portfolios. Hence, the influence of low pair 
volatility in the volatility-increase-effect dominates the influence of high pair volatility in the 
correlation-decrease-effect. Moreover, high correlation portfolios produce significantly more trades 
than low correlation portfolios. The effect of high correlation in the correlation-decrease-effect is thus 
stronger than the effect of low correlation in the volatility-increase-effect. Overall, low pair volatility 
and high correlation raise the total number of trades.  
Two major results emerge from the previous two sections. First, the SSD, which selects pairs with low 
pair volatility and high correlation, is a convenient selection measure to increase the trading frequency. 
However, it fails to identify the best pair selection to maximize the overall return. Second and even 
more important, high volatility reduces the number of trades, and hence, the total return.  
6 
Pairs Trading Return in calendar time 
Our previous results are antithetic so far. High pair volatility and negative correlation increase the 
return per trade on the one hand (Section 5.1), but reduce the trading frequency on the other hand 
(Section 5.2). Unfortunately, we cannot derive which effect dominates from the trading algorithm. 
However, only the aggregated effect is important for an investor. This section takes a closer look at the 
monthly pairs trading returns. The monthly return represents the payoff to an investor, and it considers 
the aggregated effect of pair volatility and correlation on the return per trade and the trading 
frequency. It provides not only the possibility to compute a risk-adjusted return, but also allows us to 
compare the monthly return of a traditionally formed SSD portfolio and portfolios with alternating 
volatility-correlation combinations. Additionally, the results help us to ultimately judge whether the 
SSD is superior in selecting profitable pairs.  
The analysis of the monthly returns between January 1991 and December 2014 uncovers whether the 
positive effect of high pair volatility and low correlation on the return per trade, or the negative effect 
on the trading frequency dominates. Exhibit 7, Panel A reports the average monthly return for each 
volatility-correlation double sorted portfolio between January 1991 and December 2014. All returns 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

21 
 
are positive, significant and range between 19bp to 234bp. For instance, portfolio Vola_Q1/Corr_Q5 
(low pair volatility/high correlation) yields an average monthly return of 47bp. The most striking result 
to emerge from Panel A is the successive increase in monthly returns for higher volatility levels from 
Vola_Q1 to Vola_Q4 in correlation quintiles Corr_Q2 to Corr_Q5. The return increase is particularly 
stronger in higher correlation levels. 
[Insert Exhibit 7] 
The return differences between Corr_Q5 and Corr_Q1 portfolios are insignificant in three out of five 
cases, indicating equally high portfolio returns. Furthermore, 21 out of 25 volatility-correlation double 
sorted portfolios outperform the SSD portfolio with a monthly return of 37bp. Even the direct peer 
portfolio Vola_Q1/Corr_Q5 with low pair volatility and high correlation earns 10bp more. We 
speculate that the superior performance of the Vola_Q1/Corr_Q5 portfolio results from randomly 
selecting twenty out of approximately 72000 pairs within the particular quintile intersection group. 
These selected pairs exhibit an average level of correlation and volatility within the volatilitycorrelation double sorted group. In contrast, the pairs of the SSD portfolio observe the absolutely 
lowest pair volatility and the highest correlation. We conclude that even slightly higher volatility and 
lower correlation levels increase the pairs trading return. 
To account for well-established return patterns, we regress monthly returns on a six factor model, 
including Fama and French’s three factor model, a momentum factor and a short-term-reversal factor. 
All data is obtained from Kenneth French’s website. As our sample includes stocks with different 
liquidity levels, we further extend our factor model with Pastor and Stambaughs’ (2003) liquidity 
factor. Panel B reports the alphas of the regression for each volatility-correlation double sorted 
portfolio. Like fellow papers, we use Newey-West Standard errors with lag 6. The results confirm our 
previous findings. All alphas are positive and almost always significant. Again, high pair volatility and 
strong correlation increase alpha.  
Altogether, the results suggest that pairs with high pair volatility and high correlation maximize the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

22 
 
return. We conclude that the positive pair volatility effect on the return per trade and the positive effect 
of strong correlation on the trading frequency dominate. This implicates that the SSD, which selects 
pairs with low pair volatility, is suboptimal to identify the most profitable pairs. The monthly return of 
the traditionally selected portfolio with 37bp is considerably lower than the risk adjusted return of 
most alternatively formed volatility-correlation double sorted portfolios. 
7 
Robustness 
Trading strategies which successfully exploit anomalies always raise several robustness questions. We 
first address limits of arbitrage in Section 7.1, before we test our results in a cross-sectional FamaMacBeth (1973) test setting in Section 7.2. 
7.1 Limits of arbitrage 
One obvious question is whether pairs trading returns resist trading costs. Do and Faff (2012) dedicate 
a full paper to the question and find that pairs trading returns are decreasing but still significant and 
positive after controlling for commission, market impact, and short selling constraints. Their result is 
consistent with Gatev et al. (2006) who also find significant returns after controlling for transaction 
costs. However, our highly volatile pairs might demand higher trading costs. We address the most 
crucial issue, the bid-ask bounce, by directly trading with bid and ask prices, which is more accurate 
than the traditional one-day-waiting procedure. As our alphas are positive and significant, we conclude 
that transaction costs are not an impediment, especially not for large institutional traders.  
Furthermore, an investor must be able to hold the position until the pair converges. While the trade is 
open, investors might be confronted with margin calls if the short stock further diverges. 
Subsequently, some arbitrageurs must liquidate their positions to meet the required additional capital 
commitment (Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). Recalls are more likely when prices are falling. When 
prices start to converge in pairs trading, the shorted stock of a pair is expected to fall and is hence 
more likely to be recalled. However, D’Avolio (2002) observes a low recall rate of around 2% per 
month. Furthermore, pairs traders can still earn a profit if the price already converged until the stock 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

23 
 
was recalled. Similar as in Exhibit 6 Panel C, we examine the volatility and correlation effect on the 
trading frequency of overshooting trades. Our unreported results indicate that high pair volatility and 
low correlation reduce the number of overshooting trades, and hence, divergence risk. This finding is 
consistent with Engelberg et al. (2009) who find that high idiosyncratic volatility decreases the 
divergence probability. 
In addition, we address the previously mentioned arbitrage problems by replicating our analyses with 
stocks that are included at the time in the S&P 100 or the NASDAQ 100. To consider possible 
liquidity declines, we exclude stocks if they lose their index membership. This test setting challenges 
the robustness of our findings in an almost limits of arbitrage free setting as all stocks are liquid, easyto-short, cheap to trade, and highly efficient due to high analyst coverage. Exhibit 8, Panel A (B) 
shows the results for the S&P 100 (NASDAQ 100)18.  
[Insert Exhibit 8] 
All returns are smaller compared to previous returns. Thus, part of the previous returns can be 
explained with short selling constraints, a liquidity premium, and efficiency issues. However, all 
returns are still positive and significant. The NASDAQ 100 portfolios outperform the corresponding 
S&P 100 portfolios. This result is consistent with our previous results as NASDAQ 100 stocks are 
more volatile than S&P 100 stocks.  
7.2 Short Selling Constraints 
The next question is whether it is difficult to short stocks for pairs trading. Stambaugh et al. (2015) 
argue that return asymmetry of long-short strategies might originate from short selling constraints of 
overpriced stocks compared to easily exploitable underpriced stocks. In this case, the isolated short leg 
return exceeds the long leg return. Alternatively, Gatev et al. (2006) ponder that long leg profits might 
represent a compensation for an unrealized bankrupt. In this alternative case, the long leg contributes 
more to the total return than the short leg. To shed further light on this topic, we separately compute 
                                                 
18 Bid and ask prices are reported starting in Jan 1995. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

24 
 
the isolated return generated by the short and the long leg, similar to Gatev et al. (2006), and determine 
the following contribution ratio: 
 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜= 
𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑙𝑒𝑔 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒 
   (6) 
[Insert Exhibit 9] 
Exhibit 9 reports the median percentage contribution ratio of the long leg to the total return. The 
percentage is below 50% in 24 out of 25 portfolios, indicating a higher contribution of the short leg. 
The long legs of Vola_Q5/Corr_Q1&2 portfolios contribute relatively little with a share of 31.64%-
32.60%. As the return asymmetry is especially pronounced for highly volatile stocks, the short leg 
contribution might originate from practically not exploitable mispricing. However, D’Avolio (2002) 
finds that only 16% of all stocks included in the monthly CRSP file can eventually not be shorted. 
91% of all stocks, including almost all S&P 500 constituents, cost less than 1% to borrow, and their 
value-weighted average fee is approximately 17%. The remaining 9% of stocks, which are called 
“special stocks”, have an average fee of 4.5% per annum. Less than 1% of the special stocks demand 
negative rebate rates and charge a fee of up to 50%. Not surprisingly, smaller stocks demand higher 
fees. However, these special stocks account for less than 1% of the market by value. We assume that 
the probability of “special stocks” in our dataset is relatively low for two reasons. First, our stock 
universe is restricted to current or former members of the S&P 1500. These stocks cover around 90% 
of the total market capitalization and should be under regular investor’s attention (Wurgler and 
Zhuravskaya (2002)). Second, our stock universe is restricted to stocks with a listed bid and ask price. 
These restrictions secure the liquidity and tradability of our stocks. Even if shorting is impossible, a 
modified pairs trading strategy could invest only in the ‘loser’ stock (long position) and use the 
‘winner’ stock as a trading signal without physically selling the stock. Alternatively, investors could 
include only stocks which they already hold in their portfolios. 
7.3 Fama-MacBeth regression 
In addition to our analyses based on portfolio sorts, we conduct a Fama-MacBeth (1973) regression to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

25 
 
investigate the role of pair volatility and correlation in the cross-section. We regress pair volatility and 
correlation on the return per trade. This model allows us to evaluate how the technical drivers 
influence the return per trade (research proposition two) in the cross-section. We use standardized 
coefficients for pair volatility and correlation and apply Newey-West (1987) standard errors with lag 
six. We control for the duration of a trade because these trades usually possess a wider price spread at 
the opening. Furthermore, a pair can open multiple times during one trading period. The returns of 
these trades are similar because the opening signal, which determines the return per trade, is always 
identical in these cases. Therefore, we only consider the first trade of each pair within a trading period. 
Both coefficients are significant at a 1% significance level. A one standard deviation increase of pair 
volatility raises the trade return by 13 cents, whereas a one standard deviation increase in correlation 
decreases the trade return by 7.5 cents. The result adds further evidence to research proposition two. 
For further robustness, we repeat the analysis and choose one random trade of each pair within a 
trading period. We also repeat the analysis with non-overlapping trading periods. The results in both 
additional tests remain robust. 
8 
Conclusion 
We complement the literature on pairs trading by demonstrating that pair volatility and correlation are 
the main drivers which influence the two return building blocks of pairs trading: The return per trade 
and the trading frequency. High pair volatility and low correlation are beneficial for the return per 
trade, but negative for the trading frequency. 
The key learning point for active pairs traders is that choosing stocks of one specific industry, one 
country, or applying a certain selection procedure like the SSD results in a preselection of eligible 
pairs for trading. This preselection of pairs determines a given pair volatility and correlation 
combination. The selection of pair volatility and correlation levels, in turn, affects the total return via 
the return per trade and the trading frequency. Hence, smart investors should optimize the pair 
volatility-correlation level of their stock selection to maximize their returns.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

XXVI 
 
References 
Andrade, S., V. di Pietro, and M. Seasholes “Understanding the profitability of pairs trading.” Working 
paper, UC Berkeley Haas School and Northwestern University, 2005. 
Bolgün, K., E. Kurun, and S. Güven “Dynamic pairs trading strategy for the companies listed in the 
Istanbul stock exchange.” International Review of Applied Financial Issues and Economics, Vol. 2 (2010), 
pp. 37-57. 
Bollerslev, T. “Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity.” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 
31 (1986), pp. 307-327. 
D'Avolio, G. “The market for borrowing stock.” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 66 (2002), pp. 271306. 
Do, B. and R. Faff “Does simple pairs trading still work?” Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 66 (2010), pp. 
83–95.  
- -. “Are pairs trading profits robust to trading costs?” Journal of Financial Research, Vol. 35 (2012), pp. 
261–287. 
Engelberg, J., P. Gao, and R. Jagannathan “An anatomy of pairs trading: The role of idiosyncratic news, 
common information and liquidity.” Working Paper, University of North Carolina, University of Notre 
Dame, Northwestern University, 2009. 
Engle, R. “Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of United Kingdom 
inflation.” Econometrica, Vol. 50 (1982), pp. 987-1007. 
Engle, R. and A. Patton “What good is a volatility model?” Quantitative Finance, Vol. 1 (2001), pp. 237245. 
Fama, E. and J. MacBeth “Risk return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests.” Journal of Political Economy, 
Vol. 71 (1973), pp. 607–636. 
Gatev, E., W.N. Goetzmann, and K.G. Rouwenhorst “Pairs trading: Performance of a relative-value 
arbitrage rule.” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 19 (2006), pp. 797–827. 
Heston, S. “A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications to bond and 
currency options.” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 6 (1993), pp. 327-343. 
Huck, N. “Pairs trading: Does volatility timing matter?” Applied Economics, Vol. 47 (2015), pp. 62396256. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

XXVII 
 
Jacobs, H. and M. Weber “On the determinants of pairs trading profitability.” Journal of Financial Markets, 
Vol. 23 (2015), pp. 75-97. 
Krauss, C. “Statistical arbitrage pairs trading strategies: Review and outlook.” Journal of economic 
surveys, forthcoming. 
Newey, W.K. and K.D. West “A simple positive-definite heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent 
covariance matrix.” Econometrica, Vol. 55 (1987), pp. 703-708. 
Ornstein, L. and G. Uhlenbeck “On the theory of brownian motion.” Physical Review, Vol. 36 (1930), pp. 
823–841. 
Papadakis, G. and P. Wysocki “Pairs trading and accounting information.” Working Paper, MIT Sloan 
School of Management, 2007. 
Pastor, L. and R. Stambaugh “Liquidity risk and expected stock returns.” Journal of Political Economy, 
Vol. 111 (2003), pp. 642-685. 
Perlin, M. “Evaluation of pairs-trading strategy at the Brazilian financial market.” Journal of Derivatives & 
Hedge Funds, Vol. 15 (2009), pp. 122-136. 
Stein, E. and J. Stein “Stock price distributions with stochastic volatility: An analytic approach.” Review of 
Financial Studies, Vol. 4 (1991), pp. 727-752. 
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny “The limits of arbitrage.” Journal of Finance, Vol. 52 (1997), pp. 35-55. 
Stambaugh, R., J. Yu, and Y. Yuan “Arbitrage asymmetry and the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle.” The 
Journal of Finance, Vol. 70 (2015), pp. 1903-1948. 
Vidyamurthy, G. “Pairs trading: Quantitative methods and analysis.” John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, 2004. 
Wurgler, J. and E. Zhurayskaya “Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks?” Journal of Business, 
Vol. 75 (2002), pp. 583-608. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

XXVIII 
 
Appendix 
 
Exhibit 1: The interdependences of the technical decision rules and the return of pairs trading 
 
 
Exhibit 1 illustrates the interdependencies of pairs trading. The rule-based trading algorithm influences the pair selection and the maximum return per 
trade. The pair selection determines the correlation and the pair volatility level. These levels, in turn, influence the return per trade and the trading 
frequency. The strategy’s total return is a function of the return per trade and the trading frequency. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

I 
 
Exhibit 2: Correlation and volatility levels over quintiles 
 
  
Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
Correlation 
-0.4885 
-0.0471 
0.2973 
0.5738 
0.8026 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
VOL_Q1 
VOL_Q2 
VOL_Q3 
VOL_Q4 
VOL_Q5 
Pair Volatility 
 
0.0134 
0.0269 
0.0434 
0.0727 
0.1892 
 
 
Exhibit 2 reports the median correlation, the median pair volatility, and the median pair volatility per 
quintile for all selected pairs during all identification periods between January 1990 and June 2014. Pair 
volatility is defined as sum of stock A’s and B’s volatility. 
 
Exhibit 3: Distribution of the price spread Xt during the identification and the trading period 
 
 
 
Exhibit 3 shows the probability density function of Xt during the identification period (DensityID_Period) and 
during the trading period (DensityTrade_Period). Xt is the spread between two normalized prices of a pair on 
day t. 2hist is calculated as two times the standard deviation of Xt during the identification period. Pairs 
trading initiates a new trade if Xt is smaller than - or bigger than + during the trading period. The 
figure on the right-hand side displays the probability density function of Xt if the volatility increases 
between the identification and the trading period. The probability density function DensityTrade_Period is now 
flatter and with fatter tails compared to DensityID_Period. The trading signal of 2hist, however, remains 
unchanged. Hence, the fatter tails increase the chance to initiate a new trade. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

II 
 
Exhibit 4: Classical selection criterion (SSD) 
 
Panel A: Decomposition of the SSD distance measure 
Variables 
Pair Volatility (std) 
Correlation (std) 
Constant 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Coefficient 
604.2384*** 
-27.8919*** 
81.6122*** 
  
p_val 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Observations 
1,440,000 
  
  
  
R-squared 
0.88 
  
  
  
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
  
  
  
 
Panel B: Comparison with fellow studies 
  
this study 
  Gatev et al. 
(2006) 
  Do and Faff (2010) 
  
Do and 
Faff 
(2012) 
  Papadakis and Wysocki (2007) 
  
  
    
    
    
  
    
    
  
  
Period 
1990/2014   07/1963-12/2002 
  1962–
1988 
  1989–
2002 
2003–
2009 
  19632009 
  19812006 
19811993 
19942006 
ExReturn 0.0037 
  0.0090 
  0.0086 
  0.0037 
0.0024 
  0.0085 
  0.0062 
0.0087 
0.0036 
t_val 
(11.03) 
  (9.29) 
  (8.51) 
  (2.99) 
(2.73) 
  (9.72) 
  (5.47) 
(6.81) 
(4.05) 
 
Exhibit 4, Panel A displays the results of a panel regression of the SSD distance measure on the standardized pair volatility and the standardized 
correlation coefficient. We control for pair fixed and time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the pair level and p-values (p_val) are reported 
in parentheses and adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by pair combination. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, 
respectively. Panel B benchmarks the monthly excess returns of the SSD portfolio with the returns of fellow papers. T-values (t_val) are reported in 
parentheses. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

III 
 
Exhibit 5: Return per trade 
 
Panel A: Natural Trades (Type 1) - Mean return per trade 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
Vola_Q1 
  0.3022*** 
0.2482*** 
0.2180*** 
0.1841*** 
0.1441*** 
Vola_Q2 
  0.4269*** 
0.3658*** 
0.3236*** 
0.2666*** 
0.1979*** 
Vola_Q3 
  0.5207*** 
0.4584*** 
0.4004*** 
0.3274*** 
0.2442*** 
Vola_Q4 
  0.5912*** 
0.5592*** 
0.4847*** 
0.4042*** 
0.3027*** 
Vola_Q5 
  0.7256*** 
0.6580*** 
0.6103*** 
0.5376*** 
0.3861*** 
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
  
  
  
Panel B: Incomplete Trades (Type 2) - Mean return per trade 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
Vola_Q1 
  0.0173*** 
0.0167*** 
0.0141*** 
0.0156*** 
0.0118*** 
Vola_Q2 
  0.0195*** 
0.0182*** 
0.0186*** 
0.0175*** 
0.0154*** 
Vola_Q3 
  0.0241*** 
0.0187*** 
0.0191*** 
0.0212*** 
0.0180*** 
Vola_Q4 
  0.0265*** 
0.0242*** 
0.0218*** 
0.0208*** 
0.0208*** 
Vola_Q5 
  0.0338*** 
0.0323*** 
0.0295*** 
0.0294*** 
0.0274*** 
 
Panel C: Overshooting Trades (Type 3) - Mean return per trade 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
Vola_Q1 
  -0.2343*** 
-0.1998*** 
-0.1705*** 
-0.1448*** 
-0.1125*** 
Vola_Q2 
  -0.3098*** 
-0.2733*** 
-0.2398*** 
-0.2015*** 
-0.1529*** 
Vola_Q3 
  -0.3554*** 
-0.3232*** 
-0.2834*** 
-0.2452*** 
-0.1846*** 
Vola_Q4 
  -0.3904*** 
-0.3563*** 
-0.3310*** 
-0.2866*** 
-0.2211*** 
Vola_Q5 
  -0.4668*** 
-0.4137*** 
-0.3808*** 
-0.3463*** 
-0.2664*** 
 
Panel D: Delisted Trades (Type 4) - Mean return per trade 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
Vola_Q1 
  0.0095* 
0.0134*** 
0.0138*** 
0.0153*** 
0.0145*** 
Vola_Q2 
  0.0008 
0.0126** 
0.0174*** 
0.0190*** 
0.0151*** 
Vola_Q3 
  -0.0175 
-0.0048 
-0.0016 
0.0162*** 
0.0167*** 
Vola_Q4 
  -0.1107*** 
-0.0395*** 
-0.0095 
-0.0107 
0.0088 
Vola_Q5 
  -0.1322*** 
-0.1110*** 
-0.0169 
-0.0766*** 
-0.0550*** 
 
Exhibit 5 shows the average return per trade for double sorted portfolios on pair volatility and correlation 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

IV 
 
between January 1991 and December 2014. Panel A displays the average return per trade for natural trades, 
which close after the full convergence of both stocks within the trading period. Panel B displays the average 
return per trade for incomplete trades, which are forcefully closed on the last day of the trading period. 
Panel C displays the average return per trade for overshooting trades, which are closed if prices diverge by 
more than 4hist. Panel D displays the average return per trade for delisted trades, which are closed if one 
stock is delisted while the pair is open. The trade universe includes all trades by pairs over time. Statistical 
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively. 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

V 
 
Exhibit 6: Level shifts and frequency 
 
Panel A: Average % of pairs that experience a volatility increase 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
  
    
  
  
  
  
Vola_Q1 
  61.08% 
60.69% 
55.25% 
46.78% 
33.06% 
Vola_Q2 
  53.12% 
49.41% 
43.60% 
36.43% 
25.05% 
Vola_Q3 
  46.81% 
42.58% 
36.24% 
30.08% 
20.47% 
Vola_Q4 
  42.17% 
35.73% 
29.66% 
24.21% 
16.43% 
Vola_Q5 
  36.09% 
28.48% 
22.02% 
18.74% 
12.11% 
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
  
  
  
  
Panel B: Average % of pairs that experience a correlation decrease 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
  
    
  
  
  
  
Vola_Q1 
  23.68% 
41.61% 
57.26% 
71.59% 
85.53% 
Vola_Q2 
  24.83% 
45.33% 
61.61% 
75.30% 
88.65% 
Vola_Q3 
  25.47% 
48.20% 
64.09% 
77.33% 
90.47% 
Vola_Q4 
  26.58% 
51.43% 
66.87% 
79.51% 
92.52% 
Vola_Q5 
  26.68% 
53.04% 
69.39% 
81.44% 
93.78% 
 
Panel C: Total number of trades 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
  
    
  
  
  
  
Vola_Q1 
  29238 
39390 
46821 
53662 
61083 
Vola_Q2 
  22933 
31443 
38007 
45015 
53477 
Vola_Q3 
  18814 
25949 
32051 
38480 
47633 
Vola_Q4 
  14378 
19762 
24873 
30808 
40435 
Vola_Q5 
  7576 
10955 
13740 
17306 
25206 
 
Exhibit 6, Panel A (B) shows the percentage of pairs with a volatility increase (correlation decrease) 
between the identification and the trading period within the 25 double sorted portfolios. The percentage 
reveals that a volatility increase or a correlation decrease, which are both beneficial for the total return, are 
more likely for some portfolios than for others. The analysis includes all trades of the 57.600 pairs (20 pairs 
per portfolio*10 sets*288 identification periods) during January 1991 and December 2014. Panel C reports 
the total number of trades for each of the 25 portfolios over all trading periods.  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

VI 
 
Exhibit 7: Average monthly trading return 
 
Panel A: Pairs trading profitability in calendar time 
 
 
 
Panel B: Alphas of each correlation and pair volatility quintile portfolio 
 
 
Exhibit 7, Panel A reports the average monthly raw returns of each double sorted trading portfolio on pair 
volatility and correlation between January 1991 and December 2014. Panel B displays the alpha from a 
time-series regression of the one-month pairs trading returns on a six-factor model, including Fama and 
French’s (1993) three factor model, a momentum factor, a short-term reversal factor, and Pastor and 
Stambaugh’s (2003) liquidity factor. We use Newey-West (1987) standard errors with lag six. Statistical 
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively. 
 
 
 
 
Corr_Q1
Corr_Q2
Corr_Q3
Corr_Q4
Corr_Q5
Q5-Q1
Q5-Q2
Vola_Q1
.0046***
.0037***
.0040***
.0051***
.0047***
0.0000
0.0010***
Vola_Q2
.0049***
.0035***
.0046***
.0052***
.0050***
0.0000
0.0015**
Vola_Q3
.0033***
.0038***
.0058***
.0057***
.0065***
0.0033*** 0.0027***
Vola_Q4
.0044***
.0058***
.0062***
.0065***
.0076***
0.0032**
0.0018
Vola_Q5
.0019*
.0043***
.0046***
.0056***
.0234*
0.0215
0.0191
Q4–Q1
-0.0002
0.0021*
.0023**
.0014*
.0030***
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Corr_Q1
Corr_Q2
Corr_Q3
Corr_Q4
Corr_Q5
Q5-Q1
Q5-Q2
Vola_Q1
.0046***
.0036***
.0039***
.0052***
.0047***
0.0011
0.0001**
Vola_Q2
.0047***
.0031***
.0045***
.0052***
.0048***
0.0017
0.0001***
Vola_Q3
.0028**
.0037***
.0059***
.0056***
.0066***
0.0029*** 0.0038***
Vola_Q4
.0040*
.0059***
.0066***
.0068***
.0076***
0.0017**
0.0036
Vola_Q5
0.0018
.0047***
.0053*
.0057***
0.0209
0.0162
0.0191
Q4-Q1
-0.0006
0.0023
0.0028**
0.0016*
0.0029***
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

VII 
 
Exhibit 8: Pairs trading in highly liquid markets 
 
Panel A: Average monthly returns of the S&P 100 (Jan 1990-Dec 2014) 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
  Q5-Q1 
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
Vola_Q1 
  0.0038*** 
0.0030*** 
0.0025*** 
0.0025*** 
0.0019*** 
  -0.0019** 
Vola_Q2 
  0.0055*** 
0.0040*** 
0.0040*** 
0.0028*** 
0.0031*** 
  -0.0024** 
Vola_Q3 
  0.0037** 
0.0049*** 
0.0036*** 
0.0039*** 
0.0030*** 
  -0.0007 
Vola_Q4 
  0.0035** 
0.0039*** 
0.0046*** 
0.0048*** 
0.0042*** 
  0.0007 
Vola_Q5 
  0.0023 
0.0025* 
0.0027** 
0.0033*** 
0.0034*** 
  0.0011 
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
Q5-Q1 
  -0.0015 
-0.0005 
0.0002 
0.0008 
0.0015** 
    
Q4-Q1 
  -0.0003 
0.0009 
0.0021* 
0.0023** 
0.0023*** 
    
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.01 
  
  
  
    
Panel B: Average Monthly returns of the NASDAQ 100 (Jan 1995-Dec 2014) 
  
  Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
  Q5-Q1 
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
Vola_Q1 
  0.0032** 
0.0046*** 
0.0051*** 
0.0045*** 
0.0020*** 
  -0.0012 
Vola_Q2 
  0.0022 
0.0048*** 
0.0055*** 
0.0046*** 
0.0057*** 
  0.0035 
Vola_Q3 
  0.0024 
0.0065** 
0.0065*** 
0.0055*** 
0.0072*** 
  0.0047 
Vola_Q4 
  0.0026* 
0.0076*** 
0.0112*** 
0.0066*** 
0.0067*** 
  0.0041** 
Vola_Q5 
  0.0070** 
0.0142 
0.0108* 
0.0063*** 
0.0074*** 
  0.0004 
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
Q5-Q1 
  0.0038 
0.0096 
0.0057 
0.0018 
0.0055*** 
    
Q4-Q1 
  -0.0006 
0.0030 
0.0061** 
0.0021 
0.0048*** 
    
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.01 
 
Exhibit 8, Panel A reports the average monthly raw returns for each double sorted trading portfolio on 
volatility and correlation between January 1991 and December 2014. The sample includes only the, at that 
time, current members of the S&P 100. For each quintile level, Q5-Q1 (Q5-Q2) reports the monthly return 
of a strategy that invests in the Q5 portfolio and sells the corresponding Q1 (Q2) portfolio. Likewise, Panel 
B displays the average monthly returns of NASDAQ 100 members between January 1995 and December 
2014. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

VIII 
 
Exhibit 9: Median percentage contribution of the long leg to the total return 
  
Corr_Q1 
Corr_Q2 
Corr_Q3 
Corr_Q4 
Corr_Q5 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Vola_Q1 
51.29% 
50.07% 
49.96% 
49.45% 
49.80% 
Vola_Q2 
49.01% 
48.91% 
48.15% 
48.66% 
49.21% 
Vola_Q3 
47.69% 
45.75% 
46.59% 
46.85% 
48.03% 
Vola_Q4 
41.87% 
41.36% 
43.05% 
43.97% 
46.21% 
Vola_Q5 
31.64% 
32.60% 
35.17% 
36.45% 
42.12% 
 
Exhibit 9 investigates the contribution of the short and the long leg separately and displays the median 
percentage contribution of the long leg to the total return between January 1991 and December 2014. A 
contribution rate above 0% but below 50% indicates that the long leg contributes to the total return, but less 
than the short leg. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

IX 
 
  
Internet Appendix 
for 
Idiosyncratic risk, costly arbitrage, and asymmetry: Evidence from pairs trading 
 
 
 
This document includes supplementary material to the paper. Section 1 describes the calculation of the 
return per trade, and Section 2 explains the return in calendar time for pairs trading. 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

X 
 
1 
Return calculation 
We define the return per trade as payoff of a pair’s round-trip. A pairs trader earns a positive return if the 
underlying price of the short position declines or the long position rises. Consider the following example: 
The historical standard deviation of a pair’s price spread is σhist = 0.05. Thus, we open the pair as soon as 
the difference |PA - PB| between the normalized price of stock A (PA) and the normalized price of stock B 
(PB) exceeds 0.1 (= 2σhist). For instance, PA,0 = 1 and PB,0 = 1 in t = 0, and PA,1 = 1.05 and PB,1 = 0.95 in t = 
1. Thus, we open the trade in t = 1. We initiate a short position in the ‘winner’ stock A with a capital 
commitment of CA,1 = -$1 and a long position in the ‘loser’ stock B with a capital commitment of CB,1 = 
+$1. In t = 2, the normalized prices of stock A and B fully converge to one: PA,2 = 1 (decreased by -4.76%) 
and PB,2 = 1 (increased by 5.26%). The capital commitments are: CA,2 = −$1 ∗(1 + ( −0.0476)) =
−0.9524, and CB,2 = +$1 ∗(1 + 0.0526) = $1.0526. As both normalized prices of stock A and B fully 
converge, we close the trade and receive a payoff of: (CA,2 −CA,1) + (CB,2 −CB,1) = $0.05 + $0.05 =
$0.10. The return of $0.10 represents the return per trade. 
2 
Calendar time return calculation 
Furthermore, we also calculate the monthly return in calendar time. We closely follow Gatev et al. (2006) 
return calculation: All positions are daily marked-to-market. We calculate the return 𝑟𝑖,𝑡, which is the return 
of stock i realizes between day t - 1 and t for all stocks in our portfolio. The stock weight wi,t can be 
interpreted as capital investment in stock i at day t-1 or as buy-and-hold strategy which reinvests daily 
returns until day t-1. At the opening day t = 1, the stock weight wi,t is defined as follows: 
wi,1 = I = {
1  for a long position
−1 for a short position
0  if the pair is closed
  
(A1) 
At the following days t >1, the stock weights wi,t are calculated as the product of the previous days’ capital 
investment:  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

XI 
 
wt,i = I ∗wt−1,i ∗(1 + rt−1,i) = I ∗(1 + rt−1,i) … (1 + r1,i) = I ∗∏
(1 + rt−1,i)
t−1
t=1
 
(A2) 
The pairs trader’s payoff of stock i on day t equals the weight (or capital investment in t-1) wi,t multiplied 
with the stock return ri,t between t-1 and t: 
Payofft,i = wt,i ∗rt,i 
(A3) 
For instance, the stock commitment in stock A in t = t - 1 is $1.25 (long position) and stock A increases 
from $20 in t = t – 1 to $21 in t = t (5% increase). Hence, the stock commitment in A in t is +$1.25 ∗
(1 + 0.05) = $1.3125. The payoff is: $1.3125 −$1.25 = $1.25 ∗0.05 = $0.0625.19 
The daily return of a pair P which includes stocks 𝑖∈𝑃, equals: 
rP,t =
∑
wt,i∗rt,i
i∈P
∑
|wt,i|
i∈P
=
∑
payofft,i
i∈P
∑
|wt,i|
i∈P
 
(A4) 
The daily pair return can be understood as sum of the daily payoffs divided by the total pair capital 
commitment.20 The daily returns are cumulated to monthly returns afterwards. Following Gatev et al. 
(2006) and Do and Faff (2010), we report the return on committed capital. The measure scales the 
portfolios payoff by the number of actively traded pairs.21  
Six portfolios, each starting in a subsequent month, are traded simultaneously at any time. As stock prices 
are likely to diverge further from their normalized prices over time, pairs are more likely to open late 
during the trading period. Therefore, we average the monthly returns of the six simultaneously traded 
portfolios. Figure A1 illustrates this process. 
[Insert Figure A1] 
                                                 
19 Another example for a short position: The stock commitment in stock B in t = t - 1 is -$2 (short position) and stock 
B decreases from $40 to $37.6 (6% decrease). Hence, the stock commitment in B in t is: −$2 ∗(1 + (−0.06)) =
−$1.88. The payoff is: −$1.88 −(−$2) = −$2 ∗−0.06 = $0.12. 
20 The pair return of our example pair P1, including stock A and B, equals:  r1,t =
$1.25∗0.05+(−$2∗−0.06)
|$1.25|+|−$2|
=
$0.0625+$0.12
|$1.25|+|−$2| =
$0.1812
$3.25 = $0.0562. 
21 Inactive pairs are neglected, as they do not require a capital commitment and can hence be invested in a risk-free 
asset. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063

XII 
 
Gatev et al. (2006) interpret the return of pairs trading as payoffs to a proprietary trading desk where 
different traders manage six pairs trading portfolios, whose identification and trading periods are each 
staggered by one month. Alternatively, the return can be interpreted as average return of an active pair 
across all open pairs within the same portfolio and across six portfolios, which trade simultaneously but 
start in consecutive months. We refer to Gatev et al. (2006) for further details on the return calculation. 
The calendar time return might considerably differ from the return per trade for three reasons. First, the 
monthly return reflects the combined effect of trading frequency and return per trade. Second, we scale the 
monthly return to the number of included active pairs in the portfolio. Third, a trade might be open for 
several months. Therefore, the pair earns only a fraction of the return per trade within one month. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2774063
