Queueing Dynamics and State Space Collapse in
Fragmented Limit Order Book Markets
Costis Maglaras
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
email: c.maglaras@gsb.columbia.edu
Ciamac C. Moallemi∗
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
email: ciamac@gsb.columbia.edu
Hua Zheng
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
email: hzheng14@gsb.columbia.edu
Current Version: July 10, 2017
Abstract
In modern equity markets, participants have a choice of many exchanges at which to trade.
Exchanges typically operate as electronic limit order books under a “price-time” priority rule
and, in turn, can be modeled as multi-class FIFO queueing systems. A market with multiple
exchanges can be thought as a decentralized, parallel queueing system. Heterogeneous traders
that submit limit orders select the exchange, i.e., the queue, in which to place their orders by
trading oﬀﬁnancial considerations against anticipated delays until their orders may ﬁll. These
limit orders can be thought as jobs waiting for service. Simultaneously, traders that submit
market orders select which exchange, i.e., queue, to direct their order. These market orders
trigger instantaneous service completions of queued limit orders. In this way, the “server” is the
aggregation of self-interested, atomistic traders submitting market orders.
Taking into account the eﬀect of investors’ order routing decisions across exchanges, we
ﬁnd that the equilibrium of this decentralized market exhibits a state space collapse property,
whereby: (a) the queue lengths at diﬀerent exchanges are coupled in an intuitive manner; (b) the
behavior of the market is captured through a one-dimensional process that can be viewed as a
weighted aggregate queue length across all exchanges; and (c) the behavior at each exchange can
be inferred via a mapping of the aggregated market depth process that takes into account the
heterogeneous trader characteristics. The key driver of this coupling phenomenon is anticipated
delay, as opposed to the queue lengths themselves. Analyzing a TAQ dataset for a sample of
stocks over a one month period, we ﬁnd empirical support for the predicted state space collapse.
Separately, using the data before and after Nasdaq’s natural fee-change experiment from 2015
we again ﬁnd agreement between the observed market behavior and the model’s predictions
around the fee change.
1.
Introduction
Motivation. Modern equity markets are highly fragmented. In the United States alone there are
over a dozen exchanges and about forty alternative trading systems where investors may choose
∗The second author acknowledges the support of NSF Grant CMMI–1235023.
1

to trade. Market participants, including institutional investors, market makers, and opportunistic
investors, interact within today’s high-frequency, fragmented marketplace with the use of electronic
algorithms that diﬀer across participants and types of trading strategies. At a high level, they
dynamically optimize where, how often, and at what price to trade, seeking to achieve their own
best execution objectives while taking into account short term diﬀerences or opportunities across
the various exchanges. Exchanges function as electronic limit order books, typically operating under
a “price-time” priority rule: resting orders are prioritized for trade ﬁrst based on their respective
prices, and then, at a given price, according to their time of arrival, i.e., in ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO)
order. The dynamics of an exchange can be understood as that of a multi-class system of queues,
where each queue is associated with a price level. Job arrivals into these queues correspond to new
limit orders posted at the respective prices. Market orders trigger executions which, in queueing
system parlance, correspond to service completions.
The market, consisting of multiple exchanges, can be viewed as a stochastic network that evolves
as a collection of parallel, multi-class queueing systems. Figure 1 depicts one side of the market at
one price level. Heterogeneous, self-interested traders optimize where to route their limit and market
orders, coupling the dynamics of these parallel queues. Studying the interaction eﬀects between
market fragmentation and high-frequency, optimized order routing decisions is an important issue
in understanding market behavior and trade execution, and is the main focus of this paper.1
At a point in time, conditions at the exchanges may diﬀer with respect to the best bid and oﬀer2
price levels, the market depth at various prices, recent trade activity, etc. Exchanges publish realtime information for each security that allow investors to know or compute these quantities. These,
in turn, imply diﬀerences in a number of execution metrics across exchanges, such as the probability
that an order will be ﬁlled, the expected delay until such a ﬁll, or the adverse selection associated
with a ﬁll. Exchanges also diﬀer with respect to their underlying economics. Under the “make-take”
pricing that is common, exchanges typically oﬀer a rebate to liquidity providers, i.e., investors that
submit limit orders that “make” markets when their orders get ﬁlled; simultaneously, exchanges
charge a fee to “takers” of liquidity that initiate trades using marketable orders that transact
against posted limit orders. Fees range in magnitude, and are typically between −$0.00103 and
1This paper will adopt the terminology encountered in ﬁnancial markets, both to help describe this domain that
may be of independent interest to the stochastic modeling community, and to highlight the close connection between
the model, the associated results, and the underlying application.
2The bid is the highest price level at which limit orders to buy stock of a particular security are represented at
an exchange; the oﬀer or the ask is the lowest price level at which limit order to sell stock are represented at the
exchange; the bid price is less than the oﬀered price. The diﬀerence between the oﬀer and the bid is referred to as
the spread. Exchanges may diﬀer in their bid and oﬀer price levels, and at any point in time the highest bid and the
lowest oﬀer among all exchanges, comprise the National Best Bid and Oﬀer (NBBO).
3Negative fees occur on “inverted” exchanges where payments are made to liquidity takers.
2

$0.0030 per share traded. Since the typical bid-oﬀer spread in a liquid stock is $0.01, the fees
and rebates are a signiﬁcant fraction of the overall trading costs, and material in optimizing over
routing decisions. Most retail investors do not have access to this information, but essentially all
institutional investors and market makers — that, taken together, account for almost all trading
activity — have access and do make use of this information. They employ so-called “smart order
routers” that take into account real-time state information and formulate an order routing problem
that considers various execution metrics in order to decide whether to place a limit order or trade
immediately with a market order, and accordingly to which venue(s) to direct their order. Investors
are heterogeneous; speciﬁcally they diﬀer with respect to the way that they trade oﬀmetrics such
as price, rebates, and delays, primarily driven by their intrinsic patience until they ﬁll their order.
From a stochastic modeling viewpoint, the aforementioned system consists of parallel multi-class
queues (the exchanges) that diﬀer in their economics and anticipated delays. These subsystems
are decentralized. Moreover, service capacity is neither centrally controlled nor dedicated as is
typical in production or service systems. Instead, it emerges by aggregating individual market
orders (service completions) directed to diﬀerent queues, themselves optimizing over heterogeneous
trade-oﬀs between economics and operational metrics related to queueing eﬀects.
Summary of results. First, the paper oﬀers a novel model for order routing in fragmented
markets that takes into account queueing phenomena in limit order books, as well as the atomistic
limit order placement and market order (service completions) routing decisions. This model explicitly leverages ideas for the economics of queues literature to capture the tradeoﬀbetween delay
and rebate capture in the routing decision of limit orders. It also incorporates, in a reduced-form,
the self-interested routing decisions of marker orders that comprise the service completion process.
The resulting model is a two-sided parallel queue system. The self-interested nature of the service completion process may be of independent interest; e.g., one possible application might be in
modeling personnel that work in retailing that may strategize over which customer to help next,
or self-interested drivers in a ride hailing network that can select where to drive their car when
they are not serving customers. The formulation of the limit order routing problem, importantly,
incorporates the heterogeneous preferences of the various market participants with respect to the
way they trade oﬀdelays (time) with the anticipated rebate (money).4
Second, from a methodological viewpoint, we study a deterministic and continuous ﬂuid model
associated with the above system, that takes into account the routing decisions of atomistic limit
4 Investors diﬀer in the urgency with which they seek to execute their orders, which is, in turn, captured by the
parameters of their selected execution algorithm, e.g., an algorithm with a target participation rate, say 5%, 10% or
20% of the market volume. Such an urgency parameter aﬀects how long will a trader be willing to wait until a limit
order would be ﬁlled, which would aﬀect the order placement decision.
3

order placements and market orders (service completions). The key result is to characterize the
structural form of the equilibrium state of this ﬂuid model and derive a form of state space collapse
(SSC) property.The market equilibrium and SSC are not the result of the price protection mechanism5 imposed in the U.S. equities market. Rather, they arise out of order routing decisions among
exchanges that oﬀer to trade at the same price level but at diﬀerent (rebate, delay) combinations.
We characterize this coupling eﬀect that yields a strikingly simplifying property whereby the behavior of the multi-dimensional market reduces to that of a one-dimensional system expressed in
terms of what we refer to as workload, which is an aggregate measure of the total available liquidity. In equilibrium, the workload is a suﬃcient statistic that summarizes the state of the market.
The expected delay at each exchange is proportional to the workload, where the proportionality
constant depends on exchange speciﬁc parameters. In equilibrium, if one exchange is experiencing
long delays, then the other exchanges will also be experiencing proportionally long delays. Conversely, if (out of equilibrium) one exchange has temporarily an atypically small associated delay
relative to its cost structure, the new order ﬂow will quickly take advantage of that delay/cost
opportunity and erase that diﬀerence.6 For N = 2 exchanges, we use a geometric argument to
prove that the ﬂuid model transient starting from an arbitrary initial condition converges to the
equilibrium state in ﬁnite time. We conjecture that a similar argument carries through when there
are N > 2 exchanges.
The speciﬁc form of our SSC result depends on our assumptions regarding
the routing of limit and market orders, as is typical of such results. The parameters that describe
the heterogeneity of trader preferences and the fees and rebates at the various exchanges dictate
the resulting equilibrium state.
Third, we empirically verify the state space collapse property for a sample of TAQ data for
the month of 9/2011 for the 30 securities that comprise the Dow Jones Index. While all being
liquid stocks, these securities diﬀer in their trading volumes, price, volatility, and spread. Our
methodological results suggest certain testable hypotheses, most notably regarding the eﬀective
dimensionality of the market dynamics, the linear relation between the expected delays across
exchanges, and the relation between expected delays and market-wide workload. These empirical
ﬁndings are summarized in § 4 and ﬁnd statistical support for the SSC prediction of our model,
despite its stylized assumptions. To our knowledge, this seems to be one of the ﬁrst empirical
veriﬁcations of SSC in a real and complex stochastic processing system.
The 1-dimensional workload characterization seems to oﬀer a tractable model for downstream
5Regulation NMS, see http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/regnms.htm.
6 A simpler version of this eﬀect is the familiar picture we encounter in highway toll booths or supermarket
checkout lines, where people join the shortest queue; in our model choice behavior is more intricate, and depends on
economics, anticipated delays, as well as trader heterogeneity.
4

analysis of questions that pertain to exchange competition (e.g., how to set fees or associated
volume tiers), policy questions that may aﬀect the routing decision problem or impose exogenous
transaction costs (e.g., a transaction tax), and market design questions (e.g., whether the coexistence of competing, diﬀerentially priced exchanges is beneﬁcial from a welfare perspective).
To that eﬀect, one of its predictions is that if a high-rebate exchange were to lower its rebate and
fee, the market response would be such that the queues and trading volumes would equilibriate
in such a way so as to reduce the anticipated delay for limit orders placed in that exchange when
compared to the delays encountered in other exchanges.
Lower fees would make the exchange
more attractive for the submission of market orders, possibly increasing volume. On the other
hand, lower rebates would reduce the attractiveness of the exchange for placing limit orders, which
would, all other things kept constant, leading to a reduction in queue sizes. Small queues, in turn,
discourage market order activity. Our model predicts the above opposing eﬀects would balance
out through their eﬀect on trading delays, which should decrease, as traders will be willing to wait
less to receive the smaller rebate. In 2015, NASDAQ ran a pilot experiment to precisely explore
this issue for a sample of 14 stocks. In § 4.4 we ﬁnd strong statistical support for our model’s
prediction. Our study complements several industry reports that studied market data before and
after this natural experiment, e.g., Hatheway (2015a,b); Pearson (2015) that had primarily focused
on descriptive statistics and ex-ante / ex-post comparisons of volume and depth comparisons.
Literature Survey.
There are two strands of literature that we brieﬂy review.
The ﬁrst is
on market microstructure and ﬁnancial engineering, and focuses on the structure and behavior of
limit order books. Apart from the classical market microstructure models, such as those proposed
by Kyle (1985), Glosten and Milgrom (1985) and Glosten (1987), our paper is related to several
strands of work. First is the set of papers that report on empirical analyses of the dynamics of
exchanges that operate as electronic limit order books, such as Bouchaud et al. (2004), Griﬃths
et al. (2000), and Holliﬁeld et al. (2004) and the review article Parlour (2008). Related to the above
work, there is a body of literature that studies the eﬀect of adverse selection, which factors in order
placement decisions; c.f., Keim and Madhavan (1998), Dufour and Engle (2000), Holthausen et al.
(1990), Huberman and Stanzl (2004), Gatheral (2010), and Soﬁanos (1995).
Second, there are several papers that study market fragmentation, exchange competition and
their eﬀect on market outcomes dating back to the work of Hamilton (1979), Glosten (1994, 1998),
and, more recently, Bessembinder (2003) and Barclay et al. (2003). A number of papers, including
O’Hara and Ye (2011), Jovanovic and Menkveld (2011), and Degryse et al. (2011), empirically
study the impact of exchange competition on available liquidity and market eﬃciency. Biais et al.
(2010) and Buti et al. (2011) consider the impact of diﬀerences in tick-size on exchange compe5

tition, while in the markets we consider, the tick-size is uniform. Foucault et al. (2005) describe
a theoretical model to understand make-take pricing when monitoring the market is costly. Malinova and Park (2010) empirically study the introduction of make-take rebates and fees in a single
market. Foucault and Menkveld (2008) studies the impact of smart order routing on market behavior in a setting with two exchanges and focusing, however, on smart order routing decisions by
traders submitting market orders aiming to optimize their execution price (i.e., in a setting where
exchanges operate without a price protection mechanism, like Reg NMS that applies to the U.S.
equities market, that would eliminate the opportunity from such routing decisions); their paper
does not consider the routing decisions of limit orders, and disregards queueing eﬀects. van Kervel
(2012) considers the impact of order routing in a setting where market makers place limit orders on
multiple exchanges simultaneously so as to increase execution probabilities. Their analysis ignores
economic and execution delay diﬀerences between venues. Soﬁanos et al. (2011) discuss smart order
placement decisions in relation to their all-in cost, introducing similar considerations to the ones
explored in this paper. More recently, Cont and Kukanov (2013) studied a smart order routing
control problem, where a trader decides how to split a non-inﬁnitesimal order size across multiple
venues, taking into account the delay and rebate diﬀerences across exchanges and operating under a
control horizon T. Our model considers traders that submit inﬁnitesimal order sizes, so the decision
of how to split their order is not relevant, but they are heterogeneous in terms of how they trade oﬀ
delay with rebates; our model also considers the routing of market orders and tries to characterize
the (stylized) market equilibrium.
Third, there is a growing body of work that develops models of limit order book dynamics
and studies optimal execution problems. Obizhaeva and Wang (2006), Rosu (2009), Alfonsi et al.
(2010), Parlour (1998), treat the market as one limit order book and use a model of market impact
and abstracts away queueing eﬀects. The high-frequency behavior of limit order books can probably
be best modeled and understood as that of a queueing system. This connection has been explored
in recent work, starting with Cont et al. (2010); see also Maglaras et al. (2014), Cont and Larrard
(2013), Lakner et al. (2013), Blanchet and Chen (2013), Stoikov et al. (2011), Guo et al. (2013),
and Lakner et al. (2014); this set of papers does not consider fragmentation.
The second strand of literature related to our work is on stochastic modeling and relates to the
asymptotic analysis tools that motivate our method of analysis and the area of queueing systems
with strategic consumers. So-called equivalent workload formulations and the associated idea of
state space collapse arise in stochastic network theory in the context of their approximate Brownian
model formulations. This idea has been pioneered by the work of Harrison (1988) and Harrison
(2000). Workload ﬂuid models were introduced in Harrison (1995). The condition that guarantees
6

that parallel server systems exhibit SSC down to one-dimensional systems was introduced by Harrison and Lopez (1999), and two papers that establish SSC results with optimized routing of order
arrivals are Stolyar (2005) and Chen et al. (2010). We model market order routing decisions via a
reduced form state dependent service rate process. Mandelbaum and Pats (1995) derive ﬂuid and
diﬀusion approximations for such queues. Our analysis is itself deterministic, building on ideas and
tools from the asymptotic analysis of queues. We do not provide a limit theorem to justify the
deterministic ﬂuid model we postulate as the system model, but instead focus on its analysis and
implications. SSC results tend to be pathwise properties, established via an asymptotic analysis
after an appropriate rescaling of time. In our system, arrival rates of limit and market orders vary
stochastically over time on a slower time scale than that of the transient ﬂuid model dynamics.
An asymptotic analysis on the slower time scale of the event rate variations, in the spirit of the so
called Pointwise-Stationary-Fluid-Models (PSFM), would establish such a pathwise SSC property
by exploiting the transient ﬂuid model results of this paper. Standard machinery for establishing
such results either exploit the work by Bramson (1998) or Bassamboo et al. (2004). Our model
seems to satisfy the key requirements that one would need to derive the PSFM and as a result the
sample path version of the SSC property, but we will not pursue this in this paper apart from a
short discussion in §3.5.
Optimal order placement decisions are made according to an atomistic choice model as per
Mendelson and Whang (1990). In the context of queueing models with pricing and service competition, there are several papers including those of Luski (1976), Levhari and Luski (1978), and
Li and Lee (1994). and Lederer and Li (1997). Cachon and Harker (2002) and So (2000) analyze
customer choice models that divert from the lowest cost supplier under M/M/1 system models.
Allon and Federgruen (2007) studied the competing supplier game in a setting where the oﬀered
services are partial substitutes. An extensive survey is provided in Hassin and Haviv (2003).
Most of the above papers look at static rules, where consumers make decisions based on steadystate expected delays. Chen et al. (2010) considers competing suppliers and arriving consumers
making decisions based on real-time information, like in our model, but where each supplier has his
own dedicated processing capacity; the resulting dynamics are diﬀerent and only couple through
order arrivals. The nature of the service completion process that emerges as the aggregation of
inﬁnitesimal self-interested contributions appears novel viz the existing literature. Finally, Plambeck and Ward (2006) study an assemble-to-order system, that involves a two-sided market fed by
product requests on one side and raw materials on the other, but such systems allow queueing on
both sides and the ﬂow of material is controlled by the system manager. Caldentey et al. (2009);
Gurvich and Ward (2014) study the dynamics of matching queues.
7

2.
Model
We propose a stylized model of a fragmented market consisting of N distinct electronic limit order
books simultaneously trading a single underlying asset. The model will take the form of a system of
parallel FIFO queues; new price and delay sensitive jobs arrive over time and optimize their routing
decisions; self-interested agents arrive over time and optimize where to route their market order
that triggers an instantaneous service completion at the respective queue (i.e., this routing decision
happens at the “end of the service time”). Our focus is to understand the eﬀect of optimized order
routing decisions on the interaction between multiple limit order books. We make a number of
simplifying assumptions that aid the tractability of our model studied in Sections 2–3.
One-sided market. We model one side of the market, which, without loss of generality, choose
to be the bid side, where investors post limit orders to buy the stock and wait to execute against
market orders directed by sellers.
Top-of-book only. Limit orders are distinguished by their limit price. We only consider limit
orders at each exchange posted at the national best bid price, the highest bid price available across
all exchanges – the “top-of-book.” A proﬁt-maximizing seller would only choose to trade at the top
of book, and, in fact, in the United States, this is enforced de jure by SEC Regulation NMS.
Fluid model. We consider a deterministic ﬂuid model, or “mean ﬁeld” model, where the discrete
and stochastic order arrival processes are replaced by continuous and deterministic analogues,
where inﬁnitesimal orders arrive continuously over time at a rate that is equal to the instantaneous
intensity of the underlying stochastic processes. This model can be justiﬁed as an asymptotic limit
using the functional strong law of large numbers in settings where the rates of order arrivals grow
large but the size of each individual order is small relative to the overall order volume over any
interval of time. It is well suited for characterizing transient dynamics in such systems, which is the
time scale over which queue lengths drain or move from one conﬁguration to another; this is also
the relevant time scale in order routing decisions. For liquid securities, orders arrive on a time scale
measured in milliseconds to seconds, while queueing delays are of the order of seconds to minutes.
Constant arrival rates. Market activity exhibits strong time-of-day eﬀects, typically over longer
time scales (e.g., minutes to hours) than what we focus on. The analysis of the next section assumes
that arrival rates are constant, and do not depend on time or the state at the exchanges.
Our model is illustrated in Figure 1. For each of the N exchanges, there is a (possibly empty)
queue of resting limit orders at the national best bid price. The vector of queue lengths at time t
is denoted by Q(t) ≜
 Q1(t), Q2(t), . . . , QN(t)
 ∈RN
+.
8

exchange 1
exchange 2
exchange N
Λ
?
market order
(“exchange 0”)
optimized
limit order ﬂow
λ1
λ2
λn
dedicated
limit order ﬂow
µ
?
market order ﬂow
Figure 1: A one-sided, top-of-book model of multiple limit order books. Limit orders (i.e., jobs) arrive
to each exchange (modeled by the respective queues) in (a) dedicated streams and (b) optimized limit
order placement decisions.
Liquidity is removed through the arrival of decentralized, self-interested
market orders, acting as service completions.
2.1.
Limit Order Routing
A continuous and deterministic ﬂow of investors arrives to the market with the intent of posting
an inﬁnitesimal limit order. This ﬂow consists of two types:
Dedicated limit order ﬂow arrives at rate λi ≥0 and is destined to exchange i, independent of
the state Q(t) at the various exchanges. This ﬂow could represent, for example, investors that may
not have the ability to route orders to all exchanges, or to make real-time order routing decisions.
Optimized limit order ﬂow arrives at a rate Λ > 0. Each inﬁnitesimal investor observes the
state of the market, Q(t), and optimizes over where to route the associated inﬁnitesimal order, or,
if conditions are unfavorable, not to leave a limit order and to trade instead with a market order
at the oﬀered (other) side of the market; this option is denoted by i = 0.
Once a limit order is posted at a particular exchange, it remains queued until it is executed
against an arriving market order. This disregards order cancellations. Cancellations occur, for
example, when time sensitive orders “deplete” their patience and cancel to cross the spread and
trade with a market order; when investors perceive an increased risk of adverse selection; etc. This
assumption simpliﬁes the order routing decision and leads to a tractable analysis.7
7Cancellations are common. Typical models of cancellations assume either that orders cancel according to an
exponential alarm clock leading to a cancelation process that is proportional to the queue length, or that there is
constant drift out of the bid queue due to cancelations, independent of the queue length. The ﬁrst oﬀers a reasonable
model for orders generated by algorithmic trading strategies used by institutional investors, such as VWAP, POV,
etc., but it is not a good way to model the behavior of orders posted by market makers. The latter account for most of
the orders in the queue, and, indeed, they tend to cancel using a state-dependent criterion as opposed to a time-based
9

Expected delay. All things being equal, an investor would prefer a shorter delay until an order
gets executed. Apart from price risk considerations, this is often due to exogenous constraints on
the speed at which the order needs to get ﬁlled; in many instances, a limit order may be a “child
order” that is part of the execution plan of a larger “parent order,” which itself needs to be ﬁlled
within a limited time horizon and under some constraints on its execution trajectory deﬁned by its
“strategy.” As will be seen in Section 4, the expected delays vary in the range of 1 to 1000 seconds.
Given Qi(t) and a market order arrival rate µi > 0, the expected delay in exchange i is
(1)
EDi(t) ≜Qi(t)
µi
.
The µi’s are assumed to be known, and, indeed, in practice, they can be approximated by observing
recent real-time trading activity at each exchange. When the investor decides not to place a limit
order but instead trade with a market order, the order is immediately executed and ED0 ≜0.
Rebates. Exchanges provide a monetary incentive to add liquidity by providing rebates for each
limit order that is executed. Over time, these have varied by exchange from −$0.0010 (a negative
liquidity rebate is, in fact, a fee charged to liquidity providers) to $0.0030 per share traded. As
mentioned earlier, they are signiﬁcant in magnitude when compared to the bid-ask spread of a
typical liquid stock of $0.01 per share, and represent an important part of the trading costs that
inﬂuence the order routing decisions. All things being equal, investors prefer higher rebates.
We denote the liquidity rebate of exchange i by ri. In the case where the investor chooses to
take liquidity (i = 0), a market order will, relative to a limit order, involve both paying the bid-oﬀer
spread and paying a liquidity-taking fee. The sum of these payments is denoted by r0 < 0.
In practice, order placement decisions depend on various factors in addition to the ones described
above. For example, an investor may have explicit views on the short-term movement of prices
(“short-term alpha”), and these can be relevant for the placement of limit orders; be sensitive to
adverse selection, or the anticipated price movement after the execution of a limit order; etc. In
order to maintain tractability, we will focus on the direct trade-oﬀbetween ﬁnancial beneﬁts and
delays. We will denote the ﬁnancial beneﬁt per share traded associated with exchange i by ˜ri and
refer to it as the eﬀective rebate; this includes the direct exchange rebate but possibly incorporates
other ﬁnancial considerations. All else being equal, a higher eﬀective rebate is preferable.
We denote the opportunity set of eﬀective rebate and delay pairs encountered by an investor
arriving at time t by E(t) ≜
 ˜ri, EDi(t)) : 0 ≤i ≤N
	. Investors are heterogeneous with respect to
one. The simple cancellation models described above would underestimate the expected delay until an order will get
ﬁlled in liquid securities. The incorporation of the diﬀerent cancellation behaviors, timer-based and state-dependent,
complicates the dynamics of the queue but leads to better agreement with data; Kukanov and Maglaras (2015).
10

their way of trading oﬀrebate against delay. Each investor is characterized by its type, denoted by
γ ≥0, that is assumed to be an independent identically distributed (i.i.d.) draw from a cumulative
distribution function F(·), that is diﬀerentiable and has a continuous density function, and selects
a routing decision i∗(γ) so as to maximize his “utility” according to the rule 8
(2)
i∗(γ) ∈
argmax
i∈{0,1,...,N}
γ˜ri −EDi(t).
In other words, γ is a trade-oﬀcoeﬃcient between price and delay, with units of time per dollar, that characterizes the type of the heterogeneous investors. Given the range of rebates and
expected delays, this trade-oﬀcoeﬃcient should roughly be in the range of 1 to 104 seconds per
$.01. Heterogeneity in γ across investors is an important feature of our model, which captures the
practical reality that investors diﬀer in their urgency to execute their orders, which, in turn, aﬀects
their patience and limit order placement behavior, implicitly or explicitly (through their choice of
algorithmic trading strategy and associated parameters; cf. Footnote 4). If at the time of an order
arrival the prevailing delays are long, then some investors may choose not to post a limit order
altogether but instead cross the spread and execute their order with a market order (the exchange
designated “0” in our model.
An equivalent formulation to (2), commonly used in the economic analysis of queues, is to
convert the delay into a monetary cost by multiplying it with a delay sensitivity parameter. Yet
another alternative interpretation would assume that investors diﬀer in terms of their expected
delay tolerance, i.e., the maximum length of time they are willing to wait for an order to be ﬁlled.
Given an estimate of the anticipated delays, investors with relatively longer delay tolerance would
try to place orders in high rebate exchanges, whereas others with shorter delay tolerance would
sacriﬁce high rebates and place their orders in exchanges with shorter delays (and lower rebates)
so as to maximize the probability that their order will get ﬁlled in time. Such a reformulation of
(2) would still involve a fundamental trade-oﬀbetween monetary rebate weighed against measures
of delay or execution risk. Overall, while (2) is a simpliﬁed criterion, it captures the fundamental
trade-oﬀbetween time and money, and it will ultimately yield structural results that are consistent
with our empirical analysis.
2.2.
Market Order Routing
Investors arrive to the market continuously at an aggregate rate µ > 0, seeking to sell an inﬁnitesimal quantity of stock instantaneously via a market order.
For an investor who arrives to the
8The criterion (2) is “static.” In practice, order routing decisions are “dynamic,” i.e., done and updated over the
lifetime of the order in the market.
11

market at time t when the queue length vector is Q(t), the routing decision is restricted to the set
of exchanges {i : Qi(t) > 0}. One important factor inﬂuencing this decision is that each exchange
charges a fee for taking liquidity, and these fees vary across exchanges. Typically the fee at an
exchange is slightly higher than the rebate, and the exchange pockets the diﬀerence as a proﬁt.
Fee and rebate data is given in Section 4. For the purposes of this discussion, we assume that the
fee on exchange i is equal to the rebate ri. Since a market order executes without any delay, it is
natural to route it to exchange i∗so as to minimize the fee paid:
(3)
i∗∈argmin
i∈{1,...,N}
{ri : Qi(t) > 0}.
In practice, routing decisions may diﬀer from those predicted by fee minimization for a number
of reasons: (a) Real order sizes are not inﬁnitesimal, and to trade a signiﬁcant quantity one may
need to split an order across many exchanges. (b) If an investor observes that liquidity is available
at an exchange, due to latency in receiving market data information or in transmitting the market
order to the exchange, that liquidity may no longer be present by the time the investor’s market
order reaches the exchange. This is accentuated if there are only a few limit orders posted at an
exchange. Both (a) and (b) create a preference for longer queue lengths. (c) If an exchange has
very little available liquidity, “clearing” the queue of resting limit orders is likely to result in greater
price impact. (d) There may be other considerations involved in the order routing decision, such
as diﬀerent economic incentives between the agent making the order routing decision and the end
investor. All of these eﬀects point to a more nuanced decision process than the fee minimization
suggested by (3), which we will capture through a reduced form “attraction” model that is often
used in marketing to capture consumer choice behavior. Speciﬁcally, given Q(t), the instantaneous
rate at which market orders to sell arrive at exchange i is denoted by µi(Q(t)) given by
(4)
µi(Q(t)) ≜µ
fi(Qi(t))
PN
j=1 fj(Qj(t)).
Equation (4) speciﬁes that the fraction of the total order ﬂow µ that goes to exchange i is proportional to the attraction function fi(Qi(t)), with fi(0) = 0, i.e., market orders will not route to an
exchange i with no liquidity. The discussion above suggests that fi(·) is an increasing function of
the queue length Qi, and a decreasing function of the size of the fee charged by the exchange.
In the remainder of this paper, we use a basic linear model of attraction that speciﬁes
(5)
fi(Qi) ≜βiQi,
12

where βi > 0 is a coeﬃcient that captures the attraction of exchange i per unit of available
liquidity. We posit (but our model does not require) that the βi’s be ordered inversely to the fees
of the corresponding exchanges. We will revisit this empirically in Section 4.
2.3.
Fluid Model
The deterministic ﬂuid model equations are the following: for each exchange i,
(6)
Qi(t) = Qi(0) + λit + Λ
Z t
0
χi
 Q(s)
 ds −
Z t
0
µi
 Q(s)
 ds.
The quantity χi
 Q(·)
 denotes the instantaneous fraction of arriving limit orders that are placed
into exchange i, deﬁned as
(7)
χi
 Q(t)
 ≜
Z
Gi
 Q(t)
 dF(γ),
where Gi
 Q(t)
 denotes the set of optimizing limit order investor types γ that would prefer exchange
i, i.e., the set of all γ ≥0 with γ˜ri −EDi(t) ≥γ˜rj −EDj(t) for all j̸ = i, given the expected delays
ED0(t) = 0 and EDj(t) = Qj(t)/µj
 Q(t)
, for j = 1, . . . , N, implied9 by Q(t).
3.
Equilibrium Analysis
Suppose that at some point in time a high rebate exchange has a very short expected delay relative
to other exchanges. Then, the routing logic in (2) will direct many arriving limit orders towards
this exchange, increasing delays and erasing its relative advantage viz the other exchanges. This
type of argument suggests that queue lengths will evolve over time and eventually converge into
some equilibrium conﬁguration where no exchange seems to have a relative advantage with respect
to its rebate/delay trade-oﬀtaking into account the investors’ heterogeneous preferences and the
diﬀerences in the fees and rebates across exchanges.
Expressing (6) in diﬀerential form, we have that ˙Qi(t) = λi + Λχi
 Q(t)
 −µi
 Q(t)
, for i =
1, . . . , N. Denoting such an equilibrium queue length vector by Q∗, we have that:
(8)
λi + Λχi(Q∗) = µi(Q∗),
i = 1, . . . , N.
9Here, we employ a “snapshot” estimate of expected delays that is consistent with our deﬁnition (1) and is often
used in practice. This disregards the fact that Q(t) and, as a result µi(Q(t)), may change over time, which would
naturally aﬀect the delay estimate. In what follows, we will mainly be concerned with the behavior of the system in
equilibrium, where Q(t) is constant and this distinction is not relevant.
13

These equations are coupled through the market order rates µi(Q∗) and the aggregated routing
decisions given by χi(Q∗) that take into account investor heterogeneity.
3.1.
Equilibrium Deﬁnition
For each possible price-delay trade-oﬀcoeﬃcient γ ≥0, πi(γ) denotes the fraction10 of type γ
investors who post limit orders to an exchange if i ∈{1, . . . , N}, or choose to use a market order if
i = 0. We require that the routing decision vector π(γ) ≜
 π0(γ), π1(γ), . . . , πN(γ)
 satisfy
(9)
πi(γ) ≥0,
∀i ∈{0, 1, . . . , N};
N
X
i=0
πi(γ) = 1.
Denote by π ≜
 πi(γ)

γ∈R+ a set of routing decisions across all investor types, and let P denote
the set of all π where π(γ) is feasible for (9), for all γ ≥0, and where each πi(·) is a measurable
function over R+. We have suppressed the dependence of π on the rate parameters (λ, Λ, µ) and
the queue length vector. We propose the following deﬁnition of equilibrium:
Deﬁnition 1 (Equilibrium). An equilibrium (π∗, Q∗) ∈P ×RN
+ is a set of routing decisions and queue
lengths that satisﬁes:
(i) Individual Rationality: For all γ ≥0, the routing decision π∗(γ) for type γ investors is an
optimal solution for
(10)
maximize
π(γ)
π0(γ) γ˜r0 +
N
X
i=1
πi(γ)

γ˜ri −
Q∗
i
µi(Q∗)

subject to
πi(γ) ≥0,
∀i ∈{0, 1, . . . , N};
N
X
i=0
πi(γ) = 1.
(ii) Flow Balance: For each exchange i ∈{1, . . . , N}, the total ﬂow of arriving market orders
equals the ﬂow of arriving limit orders, i.e.,
(11)
λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π∗
i (γ) dF(γ) = µi(Q∗).
Assuming that queue lengths are constant and given by Q∗, the expected delay on each exchange i is given by Q∗
i /µi(Q∗). The individual rationality condition (i) ensures that limit orders are routed in a way that is consistent with (2).
The ﬂow balance condition, (ii), ensures
that inﬂows and outﬂows at each exchange are balanced and that the queue length vector Q∗
10We will typically expect that πi(γ) ∈{0, 1}, i.e., all type γ investors will prefer a single exchange, unless there
are ties between exchanges.
14

remains stationary. Deﬁnition 1 is consistent11 with the informal system of equations (8) since
χi(Q∗) =
R ∞
0 π∗
i (γ) dF(γ).
3.2.
State Space Collapse
Given a vector of queue lengths Q, deﬁne the workload to be the scaled sum of queue lengths
given by W ≜PN
i=1 βiQi. The workload captures the aggregate market depth across all exchanges,
weighted by the attractiveness of each exchange. Orders queued at attractive exchanges (high βi,
typically corresponding to low ˜ri) are weighted more since these orders have greater priority to get
ﬁlled ﬁrst, and, therefore, more greatly impact the delays experienced by arriving limit orders at
all exchanges. In fact, from (1) and (4), the expected delay on exchange i is given by
(12)
EDi = W
µβi
.
That is, the 1-dimensional workload is suﬃcient to determine delays at every exchange. Theorem 1
below establishes something stronger: in equilibrium, the queue length vector Q∗, which is the state
of the N-dimensional system can be inferred from the equilibrium workload W ∗. This is a notion
of state space collapse.
Theorem 1 (State Space Collapse). Suppose that the pair (π∗, W ∗) ∈P × R+ satisfy
(i) π∗is an optimal solution for
(13)
maximize
π
Z ∞
0
(
π0(γ) γ˜r0 +
N
X
i=1
πi(γ)

γ˜ri −W ∗
µβi
)
dF(γ)
subject to
πi(γ) ≥0,
∀i ∈{0, 1, . . . , N},
∀γ ≥0,
N
X
i=0
πi(γ) = 1,
∀γ ≥0.
(ii) π∗satisﬁes
(14)
N
X
i=1

λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π∗
i (γ) dF(γ)

= µ.
11Strictly speaking, the informal deﬁnition (8) may not deal properly with situations where agents are indiﬀerent
between multiple routing decisions, while the formal Deﬁnition 1 handles this correctly. Under mild technical conditions we will adopt shortly (Assumption 1 and the hypothesis of Theorem 3) however, the mass of such agents is
zero and the two deﬁnitions coincide.
15

Then, (π∗, Q∗) is an equilibrium, where for each exchange i̸ = 0, Q∗is deﬁned by
(15)
Q∗
i ≜

λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π∗
i (γ) dF(γ)
 W ∗
µβi
.
Conversely, if (π∗, Q∗) is an equilibrium, deﬁne W ∗≜β⊤Q∗. Then, (π∗, W ∗) satisfy (i)–(ii).
Proof. Suppose that (π∗, W ∗) satisfy (i)–(ii). For Q∗given by (15), we have that
β⊤Q∗=
X
i̸=0
W ∗
µ

λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π∗
i (γ) dF(γ)

= W ∗.
Thus,
(16)
W ∗
µβi
= β⊤Q∗
µβi
=
Q∗
i
µi(Q∗).
Combining this with the fact that optimization problem in (i) is separable with respect to γ (i.e.,
it can be optimized over each π(γ) separately), it is clear that (π∗, Q∗) satisﬁes the individual
rationality condition (10). Further, rewriting (15),
λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π∗
i (γ) dF(γ) = µβiQ∗
i
W ∗= µ βiQ∗
i
β⊤Q∗= µi(Q∗).
Thus, (π∗, Q∗) satisﬁes ﬂow balance condition (11), and (π∗, Q∗) is an equilibrium.
For the converse, suppose that (π∗, Q∗) is an equilibrium and W ∗≜β⊤Q∗. Then,
W ∗
µβi
= β⊤Q∗
µβi
=
Q∗
i
µi(Q∗).
Given that (π∗, Q∗) satisﬁes (10), this implies that (π∗, W ∗) satisfy (i). Further, if we sum up all
N equations in (11), it is clear that (π∗, W ∗) satisfy (ii).
■
Condition (i) of Theorem 1 implies individual rationality when faced with delays implied by the
workload W ∗, cf. (10) and (12). Condition (ii), is a market-wide ﬂow balance equation. Given a
pair (π∗, W ∗) satisfying (i) and (ii), Q∗is determined as a function of workload W ∗through the
lifting map (15) that distributes the workload across exchanges in a way that takes into account
rebates, delays, and investor heterogeneity through the distribution F(·) of the trade-oﬀcoeﬃcient
γ. The lifting map corresponds to Little’s Law: each queue length is equal to the corresponding
aggregate arrival rate (dedicated and optimized) times the equilibrium expected delay.
16

3.3.
Equilibrium Characterization
Theorem 1 allows us to characterize the equilibrium behavior of N decentralized limit order books
through their 1-dimensional workload. The following assumption will turn out to be suﬃcient for
the existence of an equilibrium:
Assumption 1. Assume that
(i) The cumulative distribution function F(·) over the price-delay trade-oﬀcoeﬃcients γ is nonatomic with a continuous and strictly positive density on the non-negative reals.
(ii) The arrival rates (λ, Λ, µ) satisfy PN
i=1 λi < µ < Λ + PN
i=1 λi.
(iii) Each exchange i ∈{1, . . . , N} satisﬁes ˜ri > ˜r0.
The dedicated ﬂow PN
i=1 λi is not delay sensitive. Condition (ii) ensures that the queueing
system is stable (PN
i=1 λi < µ) and leads to a non-trivial equilibrium where queue lengths are
non-zero (µ < Λ + PN
i=1 λi). Condition (iii) says that if delays are zero, then the eﬀective rebate
of a limit order is always preferable to the cost of crossing the spread and paying a fee to trade
with a market order, ˜r0. Returning to condition (ii), given that µ < Λ + PN
i=1 λi, one would expect
non-zero queue lengths to build up in the system to discourage some optimizing investors from
placing a limit order and instead trade with a market order. Intuitively, one expects this to be the
most impatient investors, i.e., those of type γ ≤γ0, for some γ0, chosen to satisfy (14),
(17)
Λ
 1 −F(γ0)
 +
N
X
i=1
λi = µ.
Under conditions (i)–(ii) of Assumption 1, γ0 satisfying (17) exists and is uniquely determined by
(18)
γ0 ≜F −1
 
1 −µ −PN
i=1 λi
Λ
!
.
In order for all types γ ≤γ0 not to submit limit orders, the routing criterion (2) requires that
(19)
max
i̸=0
γ(˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi
≤0,
for all γ ≤γ0. Under Assumption 1(iii), the left side of (19) is increasing in γ. Hence, (19) is
satisﬁed if we ensure that type γ0 investors are indiﬀerent between market orders and limit orders.
17

Lemma 1. Under Assumption 1, suppose that (π∗, W ∗) is an equilibrium and deﬁne γ0 by (18).
Then,
(20)
max
i̸=0
γ0(˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi
= 0.
Further, suppose that for a given W ∗, (20) holds, and for each exchange i, deﬁne
(21)
κi ≜βi(˜ri −˜r0).
Then, an exchange i achieves the maximum in (20) if and only if i ∈argmaxj̸=0 κj.
(The proof of the Lemma is provided in Appendix.) The quantity κi is related to the desirability
of exchange i from the perspective of a limit order investor; κi is high when βi is high (resulting in
low delay) or when ˜ri is high (resulting in a high rebate). Lemma 1 suggests that maximizing κi
characterizes the behavior of type γ0 (the marginal) investors that are indiﬀerent between choosing
between a market order and a limit order. We refer to exchanges that achieve this maximum as
marginal exchanges. Thus, given a marginal exchange ¯i ∈argmaxj̸=0 κj, according to Lemma 1,
γ0(˜r¯i −˜r0) −W ∗
µβ¯i
= 0,
and therefore the equilibrium workload is W ∗= γ0µκ¯i. Theorem 2, whose proof can be found in
the Appendix, summarizes the discussion above and characterizes the equilibrium.
Theorem 2 (Equilibrium Characterization). Under Assumption 1, deﬁne γ0 by (18). Suppose that
the pair (π∗, W ∗) ∈P × R+ satisfy
(22)
W ∗≜γ0µ max
i̸=0
κi,
and
(23)
π∗
0(γ) = 1,
for all γ < γ0,
π∗
i (γ0) = 0,
for all i /∈A∗(γ0) ∪{0},
π∗
i (γ) = 0,
for all γ > γ0, i /∈A∗(γ),
where A∗(γ) ≜argmaxi̸=0 γ˜ri −W ∗/µβi. Then, (π∗, W ∗) is an equilibrium, i.e., satisﬁes (13)-(14).
Conversely, suppose that (π∗, W ∗) ∈P × R+ is an equilibrium, i.e., satisﬁes (13)-(14). Then,
W ∗must satisfy (22) and π∗must satisfy (23), except possibly for γ in a set of F-measure zero.
This characterization of the workload process and its dependence on model parameters can be
18

used as a point of departure to analyze market structure and market design issues, and competition
and welfare implications of the presence of many diﬀerentiated exchanges. Theorem 2 implies that
the equilibrium workload is unique, and that equilibrium routing policies are unique up to ties.
3.4.
Convergence of Fluid Model to Equilibrium Conﬁguration
We ﬁrst establish uniqueness of the equilibrium queue length vector Q∗in the next Theorem (its
proof is available in an extended version of the paper available at the authors’ websites), under the
following mild assumption:
Assumption 2. Assume that the eﬀective rebates {˜ri, i̸ = 0} are distinct, and, without loss of
generality, that the exchanges are labeled in an increasing order, i.e., ˜r0 < ˜r1 < · · · < ˜rN.
Theorem 3 (Uniqueness of Equilibria). Under Assumptions 1 and 2, there is a unique equilibrium
queue length vector Q∗.
Next we establish that the ﬂuid model queue length vector Q(t) converges to the unique equilibrium vector Q∗as t →∞. As in Section 2.3, deﬁne Gi
 W(t)
 ⊂R+ to be the set of optimizing
limit order investor types γ that would prefer exchange i given a workload level12 of W(t), i.e., the
set of all γ ≥0 with
γ˜ri −W(t)
µβi
≥γ˜rj −W(t)
µβj
,
for all j /∈{0, i};
γ˜ri −W(t)
µβi
≥γ˜r0,
and the instantaneous fraction of arriving limit orders that are placed into exchange i as
(24)
χi
 W(t)
 ≜
Z
Gi
 W(t)
 dF(γ).
Under Assumptions 1 and 2, (24) can be rewritten as
(25)
χi(W) =







F
 
WΓ+
i
µ
!
−F
 
WΓ−
i
µ
!
if Γ+
i ≥Γ−
i ,
0
otherwise,
12Note that in Section 2.3, Gi(·) and χi(·) were deﬁned to be functions of the vector of all queue lengths. However,
since they depend on the queue length of each exchange only through the expected delay and therefore the workload,
we will abuse notation and deﬁne these as functions of workload here.
19

where the constants Γ+
i , Γ−
i are deﬁned by
Γ+
i ≜







min
j>i
β−1
j
−β−1
i
˜rj −˜ri
if i < N,
∞
if i = N,
Γ−
i ≜max
(
β−1
i
˜ri −˜r0
, max
0<j<i
β−1
i
−β−1
j
˜ri −˜rj
)
.
Assumption 3. Suppose that, for all W > 0,
(26)
N
X
i=1
βi
dχi(W)
dW
< 0.
Assumption 3 is essentially a local stability drift condition13 that is easy to verify, and takes
the form of a tail condition on F(·). Speciﬁcally, using (25), we have that:
(27)
N
X
i=1
βi
dχi(W)
dW
=
N
X
i=1
 
Γ+
i
µ f
 
WΓ+
i
µ
!
−Γ−
i
µ f
 
WΓ−
i
µ
!!
I{Γ+
i ≥Γ−
i },
where f is the density associated with F. A suﬃcient condition for Assumption 3 is that
(28)
tΓ+
i f(tΓ+
i ) < tΓ−
i f(tΓ−
i ),
for all t > 0 and 1 ≤i ≤N such that Γ+
i > Γ−
i . This expression can be easily veriﬁed in a particular
problem instance, and it is satisﬁed for suﬃciently broad class of distributions.
Deﬁnition 2 (Elastic Distribution). The cumulative distribution function F is elastic if γf(γ) is a
strictly decreasing function over γ ≥0.
Examining (28), it is clear that elastic distributions will always satisfy Assumption 3. As an
example, note that decreasing generalized failure rate distributions; see, e.g., Lariviere (2006), are
included in the class of elastic distributions.
In general, even under Assumptions 1 and 2, the queue lengths Q(t) need not converge to
the unique equilibrium Q∗— it is easy to construct numerical counterexamples. However, the
13The workload process evolves according to the diﬀerential equation
˙W(t) = PN
i=1 βi ˙Qi(t) = PN
i=1 βiλi +
Λ PN
i=1 βiχi
 W(t)
−PN
i=1 βiµi
 Q(t)
, which is itself a function of W(t).
In equilibrium, where W(t) = W ∗,
we have ˙W(t) = 0, i.e., 0 = PN
i=1 βiλi + Λ PN
i=1 βiχi
 W ∗
−PN
i=1 βiµi
 Q∗
. Now, consider a small deviation from
equilibrium of the form Q(t) = (1 + ϵ)Q∗where ϵ is a small constant. Using the fact that µi
 (1 + ϵ)Q∗
= µi(Q∗),
the expression for ˙W(t), and a Taylor approximation for small ϵ we get that ˙W(t) = PN
i=1 βiλi + Λ PN
i=1 βiχi
 (1 +
ϵ)W ∗
−PN
i=1 βiµi
 Q∗
≈ΛϵW ∗PN
i=1 βi
dχi
 W ∗
dW
. Assumption 3 guarantees that
˙W(t) < 0 when ϵ > 0 and that
˙W(t) > 0 when ϵ < 0. That is, it is a necessary condition for local stability around W ∗. (Note that it not a suﬃcient
condition, since we only consider a restrictired form of perturbation in this discussion.) Assumption 3 extends that
condition to the entire state space.
20

following theorem illustrates that the additional condition of Assumption 3 is suﬃcient to guarantee
convergence to equilibrium when there are N = 2 exchanges:
Theorem 4. Suppose that there are N = 2 exchanges. Under Assumptions 1–3, given arbitrary
initial conditions Q(0) ∈RN
+, the queue lengths converge to the unique equilibrium Q∗.
(The proof of Theorem 4 is available in an extended version of the paper available at the
authors’ websites.) For N > 2, condition (26) is necessary for local stability of the equilibrium Q∗.
We conjecture that, as for N = 2, Assumption 3 is, in fact, also a suﬃcient condition when N > 2.
The state-space collapse result and its functional form hinge on the formulation of the order
routing models described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. The primary drivers of the dimension reduction
are: (a) the desirability to place an order at a given queue is decreasing in its anticipated delay, and
(b) that the attractiveness of an exchange for an incoming market order is increasing in its queue
length. Both drivers seem plausible even under diﬀerent models of order routing optimization logic
on both sides of the market, and one might expect these to lead to some form of state space collapse:
long queues would discourage new orders from joining while attracting more service completions,
thus reducing queue size; small queues would attract more arrivals but fewer service completions,
thus increasing queue size. For example, the same rationale holds if we replace the market order
routing model (4) with a model of the form µi(Q) ≜Mi + fi(Q), for each exchange i.
Here,
each Mi ≥0 represents “dedicated” market order ﬂow to exchange i that does not react to the
state of the system, while the fi(Q) term captures optimized order ﬂow. The detailed form of the
equilibrium of such a system would not coincide with the one derived here, however, at a high level,
one would expect similar results under diﬀerent modeling assumptions that satisfy (a)–(b).
3.5.
Sketch of Pointwise Stationary Fluid Model
In the preceding analysis we have assumed that the event rate parameters (Λ, λ, µ) are constant
over time. In such a setting, our results show that the queue length conﬁguration converges into an
equilibrium state, which is a function of the underlying rate parameters. A quick look at the data
will show that the underlying model parameters exhibit signiﬁcant variation over time. This could
result, for example, from the superposition of diﬀerent institutional (parent) orders that enter and
exit the market over time. Such changes in the underlying order ﬂow will translate into changes
in the arrival rates of limit and market orders into the order book, which, in turn, will aﬀect the
resulting equilibrium state. Table 1 studies the time scale of such parameter changes for a sample of
liquid stocks that comprise the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA). Speciﬁcally, for each interval
length τ, we compute the average trading rate µt, for an interval of length τ indexed by t. We
21

Interval Length
% obs. in ±2σt
% obs. in ±3σt
% obs. outside ±3σt
1 min
63.33%
79.23%
20.77%
3 min
32.56%
50.39%
49.61%
5 min
27.27%
35.06%
64.94%
10 min
13.16%
31.58%
68.42%
Table 1: The percentage of time that market order arrival rates estimated over an inverval of time fall
within the conﬁdence interval of what would have been predicted given the prior interval of time, across
the 30 DJIA stocks. These results suggest considerable variation in arrival rates past a few minutes.
Expected Delay (minutes)
Mean
Std. Dev.
1st Quartile
3rd Quartile
1.0884
0.8223
0.5510
1.3756
Table 2: Summary statistics of expected delay across the 30 names that comprise the DJIA and across
the 6 major exchanges listed in Table 4. Expected delay is measured according to (29) in Section 4.1.
then consider the average trading rate µt+1 over the subsequent interval, and test how often µt+1 is
within the conﬁdence interval µt ± kσt, for k = 2, 3. Assuming that market orders arrive according
to a Poisson process with rate µt, we set σt = √µt.
The data suggests that the trading rate
exhibits signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations after 5 or 10 minutes, but more consistent over the span of 1 to 3
minutes. Similar ﬁndings apply for the rates of limit order submissions. To interpret these results it
is instructive to recognize that the average queueing delays across liquid stocks (we will study later
on the 30 stocks that comprise the DJIA) is of the order of 1 minute, as illustrated by the summary
statistics in Table 2. Queueing delays are of the order of magnitude of the queueing transients, so
the parameters may be assumed to be constant in the time scale of the ﬂuid transients but exhibit
ﬂuctuations over longer time horizons.
The results above suggest an analysis over two time scales: a fast time scale, which is the nominal
clock of the system at which orders arrive at the market, and over which model parameters appear
to be constant, and a slower time scale over which parameters ﬂuctuate stochastically. Consider
a market where event rates are proportional to some constant n (e.g., the number of trades per
minute). Moreover assume that
µn(t) = nµ(t/an),
λn(t) = nλ(t/an)
and
Λn(t) = nΛ(t/an)
where an →∞and an/n →0 as n →∞.
So, rates grow large, and ﬂuctuate according to
µ(·), λ(·), Λ(·), but these ﬂuctuations occur in slower time scale. These rate processes are themselves
stochastic with suﬃcient continuity to allow for a tractable analysis. Let Qn(t) denote the queue
22

length process associated with the market of speed n. As n grows large, an argument based on
the results by Kurtz (1977/78) would establish that the queue length process, when rescaled by n,
Qn(t)/n converges to a deterministic limit that satisﬁes the ﬂuid model equations we have analyzed
thus far, and over which the model primitives (µ, λ, Λ) appear constant. If one where to study the
same model on the slower time scale over which rates ﬂuctuate, by studying the queue length
process over stretches of time proportional to an one would see that the queue length process seems
to always be equal to the equilibrium state that would correspond to the triple (µ(t), λ(t), Λ(t)).
The resulting model is a so-called “Pointwise-Stationary-Fluid-Model,” which is stochastic but
whose queue length conﬁguration appears (on the slower time scale) to be always in its equilibrium
state. In that sense, the SSC property established earlier can be shown to be a “pathwise” property
as opposed to a point in time result. (We will empirically explore this pathwise result in the next
section.) We will not fully ﬂush out the requisite analysis for establishing the above assertions, as
this would be lengthy and would not add to the emphasis of this paper. Standard machinery for
establishing such results either exploit the work by Bramson (1998) (an application of which for
the above parameter scaling can be found in Besbes and Maglaras (2009)), or Bassamboo et al.
(2004). Our model seems to satisfy the key requirements that one would need to derive the PSFM
and as a result the sample path version of the SSC property, but we will not pursue this in this
paper.
4.
Empirical Results
Motivated by our analysis and the fact that for liquid securities the markets experience high volumes
of ﬂow per unit time, one would expect the market to behave as if it is near its equilibrium state most
of the time, which would manifest itself as a strong coupling between the quote depths and dynamics
of competing exchanges. More precisely, the expected delay trajectories across exchanges and over
time should exhibit strong linear relationships, and behave like a lower dimensional process. Our
model suggests the coupling of the dynamics across exchanges should be best explained through
the relation of the respective expected delays as opposed to the queue lengths themselves. The
expected delay in exchange i is of the form Qi/µi(Q), from which we see that the queue length
aﬀects the delay in a non-linear way that should likely result in a worse ﬁt in the data according to
our model. Moreover, the workload process (a measure of weighted aggregate depth) should oﬀer
accurate estimates of delays and queue depths at diﬀerent exchanges, as stated in (12).
The precise form of our predictions is, of course, predicated on the structure of (2) and (4)–
(5) and the deterministic and stationary nature of the model we studied. In the sequel we will
23

explore whether our predictions are supported through empirical evidence from a representative
sample of market data that incorporates actual trading behaviors that are more complex, and its
dynamics are stochastic and non-stationary. We will also examine data of long periods of time,
thus empirically exploring the SSC predictions in a pathwise sense; cf., the short discussion in the
introduction and §3.5.
The ﬁrst few subsections will estimate our model primitives and empirically explore the predicted SSC result on a data set for all 30 constituent stocks of the DJIA over the duration of a one
month period in 2011 . In §4.4 we will explore a more recent sample of data in the beginning of
2015 where the Nasdaq run a natural experiment of reducing the rebates and fees for a sample of
stocks. In that context we will verify the validity of our model predictions around this exogenous
parameter change, and illustrate how our model could prove useful in studying such market design
and policy questions.
4.1.
Overview of the Data Set
We use trade and quote (TAQ) data, which consists of sequences of quotes (price and total available
size, expressed in number of shares, at the best bid and oﬀer on each exchange) and trades (price and
size of all market transactions, again expressed in number of shares), with millisecond timestamps.
Our trade and quote data is from the nationally consolidated data feeds (i.e., the CTS, CQS,
UTDF, and UQDF). We treat the depth at the bid or the ask at each exchange as if it is made up
of individual inﬁnitesimal orders, and we ignore the fact that the quantity actually arises from a
collection of discrete, non-inﬁnitesimal orders.
We consider the 30 component stocks of the DJIA over the 21 trading days in the month of
September 2011. A list of the stocks and some basic descriptive statistics are given in Table 3. In
§4.4 we will study a more recent, diﬀerent data set.
We restrict attention to the N = 6 most liquid U.S. equity exchanges: NASDAQ, NYSE,14
ARCA, EDGX, BATS, and EDGA. Smaller, regional exchanges were excluded as they account for
a small fraction of the composite daily volume and are often not quoting at the NBBO level. The
associated fees and rebates during the observation period of September 2011 are given in Table 4.
Throughout the observation period of our data set, the exchange fees and rebates were constant,
and similarly we will assume in our subsequent analysis that the eﬀective rebates {˜ri} and attraction
coeﬃcients {βi} for each stock were also constant throughout.
In contrast, the arrival rates (λ, Λ, µ) are time-varying. We will estimate these rates for each
14Note that the NASDAQ listed stocks in our sample (CSCO, INTC, MSFT) do not trade on the NYSE, hence for
these stocks only N = 5 exchanges were considered.
24

Symbol
Listing
Exchange
Price
Average
Bid-Ask
Spread
Volatility
Average
Daily
Volume
Low
High
($)
($)
($)
(daily)
(shares, ×106)
Alcoa
AA
NYSE
9.56
12.88
0.010
2.2%
27.8
American Express
AXP
NYSE
44.87
50.53
0.014
1.9%
8.6
Boeing
BA
NYSE
57.53
67.73
0.017
1.8%
5.9
Bank of America
BAC
NYSE
6.00
8.18
0.010
3.0%
258.8
Caterpillar
CAT
NYSE
72.60
92.83
0.029
2.3%
11.0
Cisco
CSCO
NASDAQ
14.96
16.84
0.010
1.7%
64.5
Chevron
CVX
NYSE
88.56
100.58
0.018
1.7%
11.1
DuPont
DD
NYSE
39.94
48.86
0.011
1.7%
10.2
Disney
DIS
NYSE
29.05
34.33
0.010
1.6%
13.3
General Electric
GE
NYSE
14.72
16.45
0.010
1.9%
84.6
Home Depot
HD
NYSE
31.08
35.33
0.010
1.6%
13.4
Hewlett-Packard
HPQ
NYSE
21.50
26.46
0.010
2.2%
32.5
IBM
IBM
NYSE
158.76
180.91
0.060
1.5%
6.6
Intel
INTC
NASDAQ
19.16
22.98
0.010
1.5%
63.6
Johnson & Johnson
JNJ
NYSE
61.00
66.14
0.011
1.2%
12.6
JPMorgan
JPM
NYSE
28.53
37.82
0.010
2.2%
49.1
Kraft
KFT
NYSE
32.70
35.52
0.010
1.1%
10.9
Coca-Cola
KO
NYSE
66.62
71.77
0.011
1.1%
12.3
McDonalds
MCD
NYSE
83.65
91.09
0.014
1.2%
7.9
3M
MMM
NYSE
71.71
83.95
0.018
1.6%
5.5
Merck
MRK
NYSE
30.71
33.49
0.010
1.3%
17.6
Microsoft
MSFT
NASDAQ
24.60
27.50
0.010
1.5%
61.0
Pﬁzer
PFE
NYSE
17.30
19.15
0.010
1.5%
47.7
Procter & Gamble
PG
NYSE
60.30
64.70
0.011
1.0%
11.2
AT&T
T
NYSE
27.29
29.18
0.010
1.2%
37.6
Travelers
TRV
NYSE
46.64
51.54
0.013
1.6%
4.8
United Tech
UTX
NYSE
67.32
77.58
0.018
1.7%
6.2
Verizon
VZ
NYSE
34.65
37.39
0.010
1.2%
18.4
Wal-Mart
WMT
NYSE
49.94
53.55
0.010
1.1%
13.1
Exxon Mobil
XOM
NYSE
67.93
74.98
0.011
1.6%
26.2
Table 3:
Descriptive statistics for the 30 stocks over the 21 trading days of September 2011. The
average bid-ask spread is a time average computed from our TAQ data set. The volatility is an average
of daily volatilities over Sept 2011. All the other statistics were retrieved from Yahoo Finance.
Exchange Code
Rebate
Fee
($ per share, ×10−4)
($ per share, ×10−4)
BATS
Z
27.0
28.0
DirectEdge X (EDGX)
K
23.0
30.0
ARCA
P
21.0†
30.0
NASDAQ OMX
T
20.0†
30.0
NYSE
N
17.0
21.0
DirectEdge A (EDGA)
J
5.0
6.0
Table 4: Rebates and fees of the 6 major U.S. stock exchanges during the September 2011 period, per
share traded. †Rebates on NASDAQ and ARCA are subject to “tiering”: higher rebates than the ones
quoted may be available to traders that contribute signiﬁcant volume to the respective exchange.
25

stock by averaging the event activity over one hour time intervals between 9:45am and 3:45pm
(i.e., excluding the opening 15 minutes and the closing 15 minutes).15 This yields T = 126 time
slots over the 21 day horizon of our data set. For each time slot t, exchange i, stock j, and side
s ∈{BID, ASK}, we estimated the corresponding queue length as the average number of shares
available at the NBBO, denote this by Q(s,j)
i
(t). Similarly, denote by µ(s,j)
i
(t) the arrival rate of
market orders to side s on exchange i for security j, in time slot t. The rates µs,j
i (t) are estimated
by classifying trades to be bid or ask side of the market, by matching trade time stamps with the
prevailing quote at the same time, i.e., using a zero time shift in the context of the well known
Lee-Ready algorithm. Given these parameters, we compute the following measure of expected delay
(29)
ED(s,j)
i
(t) ≜Q(s,j)
i
(t)
µ(s,j)
i
(t)
.
The above expression disregards the eﬀect of order cancellations from the bid and ask queues, as
well as the non-inﬁnitesimal nature of the order ﬂow; cf., the remarks in Footnote 6 on cancellations.
It serves as a practical proxy for expected delay that is commonly used in trading systems. For
each stock and each exchange, Figure 2(a) shows the expected delay, averaged across time slots and
the bid and ask sides of the market. Delays range from 5 seconds to about 5 minutes across the 30
stocks we studied, and we observe 2x to 3x variation in the delay estimates at diﬀerent exchanges
for the same security. Similarly, for each stock and each exchange, Figure 2(b) shows the average
queue lengths, or, the number of shares available at the NBBO, averaged across time slots and the
bid and ask sides of the market. Queue lengths range from 10 to 100,000 shares across securities,
and exhibit about a 10x variation in the queue sizes across exchanges for the same security. Deeper
queues correspond to longer delays.
Principle component analysis (PCA). The state space collapse result of our model predicts
that delays are coupled across exchanges and are restricted to a 1-dimensional subspace. Deﬁne the
empirically observed expected delay vector trajectories
n
ED(s,j)(t) : t = 1, . . . , T; s = BID, ASK
o
,
where ED(s,j)(t) was estimated in (29) and the trajectories consider all one hour time slots in
the 21 days of our observation period. A natural way to test the eﬀective dimensionality of this
vector of trajectories is via PCA by examining the number of principle components necessary to
explain the variability of the expected delay trajectories across exchanges and over time.
The
output of the PCA analysis is summarized in Table 5: the ﬁrst principle component explains
15The time intervals should be suﬃciently long so as to get reliable estimates of the event rates, and also long when
compared to the event inter-arrival times, so that one could expect that the transient dynamics of the market due to
changes in these rates settle down during these time intervals.
26

AA
AXP
BA
BAC
CAT
CSCO
CVX
DD
DIS
GE
HD
HPQ
IBM
INTC
JNJ
JPM
KFT
KO
MCD
MMM
MRK
MSFT
PFE
PG
T
TRV
UTX
VZ
WMT
XOM
10−1
100
Expected Delay (minutes, log scale)
ARCA
NASDAQ BATS EDGX NYSE EDGA
(a) Average expected delay across stocks and exchanges.
AA
AXP
BA
BAC
CAT
CSCO
CVX
DD
DIS
GE
HD
HPQ
IBM
INTC
JNJ
JPM
KFT
KO
MCD
MMM
MRK
MSFT
PFE
PG
T
TRV
UTX
VZ
WMT
XOM
101
102
103
104
105
Queue Length (shares, log scale)
ARCA
NASDAQ BATS EDGX NYSE EDGA
(b) Average queue length (number of shares at the NBBO) across stocks and exchanges.
Figure 2: Averages of hourly estimates of the expected delays and queue lengths for the Dow 30 stocks
on the 6 exchanges during September 2011. Results are averaged over the bid and ask sides of the
market for each stock. Queues do not include estimates of hidden liquidity at each of the exchanges.
27

% of Variance Explained
% of Variance Explained
One Factor
Two Factors
One Factor
Two Factors
Alcoa
80%
88%
JPMorgan
90%
94%
American Express
78%
88%
Kraft
86%
92%
Boeing
81%
87%
Coca-Cola
87%
93%
Bank of America
85%
93%
McDonalds
81%
89%
Caterpillar
71%
83%
3M
71%
81%
Cisco
88%
93%
Merck
83%
91%
Chevron
78%
87%
Microsoft
87%
95%
DuPont
86%
92%
Pﬁzer
83%
89%
Disney
87%
91%
Procter & Gamble
85%
92%
General Electric
87%
94%
AT&T
82%
89%
Home Depot
89%
94%
Travelers
80%
88%
Hewlett-Packard
87%
92%
United Tech
75%
88%
IBM
73%
84%
Verizon
85%
91%
Intel
89%
93%
Wal-Mart
89%
93%
Johnson & Johnson
87%
91%
Exxon Mobil
86%
92%
Table 5: Results of PCA: how much variance in the data can the ﬁrst two principle components explain.
around 80% of the variability of the expected delays across exchanges, and the ﬁrst two principle
components explain about 90%.
This is consistent with the hypothesis of low eﬀective dimension.
In contrast, when we conduct PCA for the vector trajectories of observed queue lengths
n
Q(s,j)(t) : t = 1, . . . , T; s = BID, ASK
o
, we ﬁnd relatively weaker evidence for a low eﬀective dimensionality. In this test, the ﬁrst principle component explains about 65% of the variability of
the queue lengths across exchanges, and the ﬁrst two principle components explain less than 80%.
A detailed report of the results can be found in Table 17 in the Appendix.
Intuitively, in the high ﬂow environment of our observation universe, i.e., where Λ and µ are
large, expected delay deviations from the equilibrium conﬁguration would be quickly erased by
optimized arriving limit and market orders. The equilibrium state itself changes over time as the
rates of events change, but the coupling across exchanges remains strong, and persists even if we
shorten the time period over which market statistics are averaged from 1 hour down to 15 minutes.16
4.2.
Estimation of the Market Order Routing Model
Deﬁne µ(s,j)
i
(t) to be the total arrival rate of market orders for security j and side s ∈{BID, ASK}
in time slot t directed to exchange i, and let µ(s,j)(t) be the total arrival rate across all exchanges
16For example, with 15 minute periods, the ﬁrst principle component still explains 69% of the overall variability
of the vector of delay trajectories (that are themselves four times longer), while the ﬁrst two principle components
explains 82% of the variability.
28

for (s, j) in time t. The attraction model of Section 2.2 for market orders suggests the relationship
(30)
µ(s,j)
i
(t) = µ(s,j)(t)
β(j)
i Q(s,j)
i
PN
i′=1 β(j)
i′ Q(s,j)
i′
,
where β(j)
i
is the attraction coeﬃcient for security j on exchange i. Note that our market order
routing model is invariant to scaling of the attraction coeﬃcients, hence we normalize so that the
attraction coeﬃcient for each stock on its listing exchange is 1. Given that {µ(s,j)
i
(t)}, {µ(s,j)(t)},
and {Q(s,j)
i
(t)} are observable, we estimated the β(j)
i ’s using a nonlinear regression on (30). The
results are given in Table 6. Note that all attraction coeﬃcient estimates are statistically signiﬁcant.
4.3.
Empirical Evidence of State Space Collapse
Our model postulates the investors make order placement decisions by trading oﬀdelay against
eﬀective rebates, and concludes that delays across exchanges, as measured by Q(s,j)
i
/µ(s,j)
i
are
linearly related.
It gives an expression for estimating delays in each exchange in terms of an
aggregate measure of market depth, which we call workload.
Veriﬁcation of linear dependence of expected delays via regression analysis.
Denote by
W (s,j)(t) the workload for side s of security j in time slot t, i.e.,
(31)
W (s,j)(t) ≜
N
X
i=1
β(j)
i Q(s,j)
i
(t),
and observe that using (30) the vector of expected delays can be written as
(32)
ED(s,j)(t) = W (s,j)(t)
µ(s,j)(t)
 
1
β(j)
1
, . . . ,
1
β(j)
N
!
.
In other words, the expected delays across diﬀerent exchanges are linearly related, and speciﬁcally,
for each security j, exchanges i, i′, and market side s,
(33)
ED(s,j)
i
(t) = β(j)
i′
β(j)
i
ED(s,j)
i′
(t),
for each time slot t.
Testing the pairwise linear relations in (33) explores whether (ED1, . . . , EDN)
live on a 1-dimensional space; this statistical test is based on the expected delay measurements
in (29), obtained by dividing the average observed queue size in each exchange with its respective
observed rate of trading, for all time slots, both sides of the market, and all the 30 component stocks
of the Dow Jones Industrial Average. For each stock and each exchange we have 126 measurements
29

Attraction Coeﬃcient
ARCA
NASDAQ
BATS
EDGX
NYSE
EDGA
Alcoa
0.73
0.87
0.76
0.81
1.00
1.33
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.03)
American Express
1.19
1.08
0.99
0.94
1.00
0.94
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.00)
(0.06)
Boeing
0.95
0.67
0.81
0.74
1.00
0.73
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.04)
Bank of America
0.94
1.04
1.01
0.77
1.00
1.43
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.04)
Caterpillar
0.82
0.78
1.13
0.70
1.00
0.58
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.04)
Cisco
0.95
1.00
1.06
0.98
-
1.45
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.02)
-
(0.03)
Chevron
0.70
0.93
1.17
0.65
1.00
0.75
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.05)
DuPont
0.90
0.98
0.98
1.03
1.00
1.00
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.06)
Disney
0.69
0.88
0.78
0.88
1.00
1.04
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.00)
(0.03)
General Electric
0.79
1.01
0.94
0.73
1.00
1.63
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Home Depot
0.76
0.98
0.79
0.84
1.00
1.02
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Hewlett-Packard
1.04
1.04
1.02
0.68
1.00
0.82
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
IBM
1.25
1.20
1.20
1.05
1.00
0.54
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.02)
Intel
0.83
1.00
0.96
0.84
-
1.04
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.02)
-
(0.03)
Johnson & Johnson
0.80
0.94
0.86
0.92
1.00
0.77
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
JPMorgan
0.78
0.99
0.93
0.84
1.00
0.91
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.02)
Kraft
0.72
0.89
0.83
0.73
1.00
1.06
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Coca-Cola
0.68
0.84
0.79
0.76
1.00
0.88
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.05)
McDonalds
0.90
0.86
1.03
0.82
1.00
0.82
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.04)
3M
0.89
0.67
0.62
0.66
1.00
0.57
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.04)
Merck
0.68
1.01
0.83
0.90
1.00
0.81
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.02)
Microsoft
0.83
1.00
1.02
0.95
-
1.41
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.02)
-
(0.03)
Pﬁzer
0.84
1.01
0.96
0.87
1.00
1.29
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Procter & Gamble
0.79
0.89
0.88
0.89
1.00
0.89
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
AT&T
0.62
0.94
0.75
0.59
1.00
1.00
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Travelers
0.80
0.69
0.69
0.84
1.00
0.80
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.03)
(0.00)
(0.03)
United Tech
1.18
0.89
0.79
0.87
1.00
0.53
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.03)
(0.00)
(0.04)
Verizon
0.77
0.95
0.88
0.72
1.00
0.85
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Wal-Mart
0.72
0.88
0.79
0.71
1.00
0.91
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
Exxon Mobil
0.89
1.13
0.97
0.89
1.00
1.35
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.10)
Table 6: Estimates of the attraction coeﬃcients βi from nonlinear regression. Note that the attraction
coeﬃcient of the listing exchange is normalized to be 1. We note that exchanges with lower fees (and
rebates) tend to have higher attraction coeﬃcients β.
30

in the respective time series per side of the market. The quality of the ﬁt of these linear regressions
will be an indirect indication of the goodness of ﬁt in (30). In more detail, we will perform a
cross-sectional regression. We will normalize the expected delay measurements at each exchange
by dividing them by the median expected delay of that security on a benchmark exchange (ARCA)
across all time slots and both sides of the market as follows
(34)
ED
(s,j)
i
(t) ≜
ED(s,j)
i
(t)
median
τ=1,...,T; s=BID,ASK

ED(s,j)
ARCA(τ)
,
where ED(s,j)
i
(t) was estimated in (29). We will perform a linear regression of the normalized left
side of (33), as a function of the normalized right side of (33), rescaled by the ratio of the attraction
coeﬃcients of the two exchanges.
Dependent Variable: EDexchange
NASDAQ OMX
BATS
DirectEdge X
NYSE
DirectEdge A
Intercept
0.27∗∗∗
0.28∗∗∗
0.24∗∗∗
0.28∗∗∗
0.36∗∗∗
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
Rescaled EDARCA
0.70∗∗∗
0.72∗∗∗
0.72∗∗∗
0.63∗∗∗
0.60∗∗∗
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
R2
70%
70%
52%
60%
52%
Note:
∗p < 0.1; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01
Table 7: Linear regressions of the normalized expected delay on a particular exchange, versus that of the
benchmark exchange (ARCA) rescaled by the ratio of the attraction coeﬃcients of the two exchanges.
The results of these regressions are summarized in Table 7. The R2 varies between 52% and
70% across the ﬁve exchanges. The results are statistically signiﬁcant and we are able to reject
the null hypothesis that the delay on a particular exchange has a zero regression coeﬃcient relative
to the rescaled delay on ARCA. These results statistically verify the linear dependence of delays
across diﬀerent exchanges suggested by (33).
While the regressions in Table 7 were performed cross-sectionally across all securities, similar
results hold if the analysis is performed on a security by security basis. Figure 3 depicts the delay
relationships in the case of Bank of America. It illustrates the strong linear relationship across all
exchanges over time and across signiﬁcant variations in prevailing market conditions; the latter is
manifested in the roughly two orders of magnitude variation in estimated expected delays.
A competing hypothesis is that queue lengths across exchanges are linearly related, that is, for
each security j, exchanges i, i′, and market side s,
(35)
Q(s,j)
i
(t) = cii′Q(s,j)
i′
(t),
31

0
300
600
900
1,200
0
300
600
900
1,200
rescaled ARCA delay (seconds)
NASDAQ delay (seconds)
(a) slope = 0.88, intercept = 6 × 10−3, R2 = 84%
0
300
600
900
1,200
0
300
600
900
1,200
rescaled ARCA delay (seconds)
BATS delay (seconds)
(b) slope = 0.80, intercept = 9 × 10−3, R2 = 79%
0
300
600
900
1,200
0
300
600
900
1,200
rescaled ARCA delay (seconds)
EDGX delay (seconds)
(c) slope = 1.04, intercept = 9 × 10−4, R2 = 71%
0
300
600
900
1,200
0
300
600
900
1,200
rescaled ARCA delay (seconds)
NYSE delay (seconds)
(d) slope = 1.11, intercept = −4 × 10−3, R2 = 63%
0
300
600
900
1,200
0
300
600
900
1,200
rescaled ARCA delay (seconds)
EDGA delay (seconds)
(e) slope = 0.90, intercept = 4 × 10−3, R2 = 73%
Figure 3: Scatter plots of the expected delay for Bank of America (BAC) on each exchange, versus the
delay on ARCA rescaled by the ratio of the attraction coeﬃcients of the two exchanges. The black lines
correspond to linear regressions with intercept.
32

for each time slot t. The following test explores such an alternative hypothesis. According to (35),
predicated on queue length estimates obtained in Section 4.1, i.e., Q(s,j)
i
(t) as the average number
of shares available at the NBBO for time slot t, exchange i, stock j, and side s ∈{BID, ASK},
we perform a cross-sectional linear regression of the queue length of each security on a particular
exchange, as a function of that on a benchmark exchange (ARCA). As before, we normalize the
queue lengths by dividing them by the median queue length of that security on a benchmark
exchange (ARCA) across all time slots and both sides of the market, i.e., we use
Q(s,j)
i
(t) ≜
Q(s,j)
i
(t)
median
τ=1,...,T; s=BID,ASK

Q(s,j)
ARCA(τ)

as the queue length measure in the regression. Our model would predict that queue lengths will not
exhibit such a strong linear dependence as we show earlier in terms of delays. Indeed, the results
provided in Table 8 show that the R2 we found was signiﬁcantly lower than that in Table 7, varying
between 13% and 26%.
Dependent Variable: Qexchange
NASDAQ OMX
BATS
DirectEdge X
NYSE
DirectEdge A
Intercept
0.84∗∗∗
0.39∗∗∗
0.25∗∗∗
0.57∗∗∗
0.05∗∗∗
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.01)
QARCA
0.74∗∗∗
0.45∗∗∗
0.29∗∗∗
0.96∗∗∗
0.24∗∗∗
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
R2
19%
20%
13%
26%
26%
Note:
∗p < 0.1; ∗∗p < 0.05; ∗∗∗p < 0.01
Table 8: Linear regressions of the normalized queue length on a particular exchange versus that of the
benchmark exchange (ARCA).
Residual analysis and accuracy of delay estimates based on the aggregate workload. The
SSC result culminated in relationship (32) that makes expected delay predictions in each exchange
based on the 1-dimensional aggregated workload process.
Speciﬁcally, given the market model
coeﬃcients β(j)
i
and a measurement of the queue sizes at the various exchanges, Q(s,j)
i
(t), one
can compute the workload via (31), and then construct estimates for the expected delays at the
various exchanges via (32).
We denote the resulting delay estimates by
ˆ
ED
(s,j)(t), where the ˆ
notation denotes in this context the estimate obtained via the one-dimensional workload process,
as opposed to measuring the actual expected delay ED(s,j)(t) via (29).
This prediction can be
tested again through a set of linear regressions between the workload delay estimate and the delay
estimate that uses information about the state of the exchange (queue length and trading rate). All
these regressions are statistically signiﬁcant and are accompanied with high R2 values. We do not
report on these results, instead we pursue a more detailed analysis of the residuals, i.e., the errors
33

R2
∗
R2
∗
R2
∗
Alcoa
75%
Home Depot
87%
Merck
78%
American Express
64%
Hewlett-Packard
77%
Microsoft
80%
Boeing
75%
IBM
63%
Pﬁzer
79%
Bank of America
80%
Intel
82%
Procter & Gamble
80%
Caterpillar
58%
Johnson & Johnson
83%
AT&T
77%
Cisco
87%
JPMorgan
88%
Travelers
67%
Chevron
67%
Kraft
79%
United Tech
47%
DuPont
82%
Coca-Cola
81%
Verizon
79%
Disney
78%
McDonalds
74%
Wal-Mart
85%
General Electric
82%
3M
62%
Exxon Mobil
81%
Table 9: The measure of performance R2
∗, which given the reduction of variability in expected delays
explained by the workload relationship (32).
between the workload and exchange-speciﬁc delay estimates, ED(s,j)(t) −ˆ
ED
(s,j)(t). We deﬁne the
quantity
R2
∗≜1 −
Var
ED(s,j)(t) −ˆ
ED
(s,j)(t)


Var
ED(s,j)(t)


,
for each security j. Here, Var(·) is the sample variance, averaged over all time slots t and both
sides of the market s. The quantity R2
∗measures the variability of the residuals unexplained by the
relationship (32), relative to the variability of the underlying expected delays. By its deﬁnition,
when R2
∗is close to 1, most of the variability of expected delays is explained by the relationship
(32). Numerical results for R2
∗across securities are given in Table 9. Typical values for R2
∗are
around 80%, highlighting the predictive power of the one-dimensional workload model as a means
of capturing the state of the decentralized fragmented market.
4.4.
Eﬀects of Fee Change: Evidence from the NASDAQ Fee Experiment
We conclude with a separate veriﬁcation of the predictions of our model in the context of a natural
experiment done by the NASDAQ exchange, whereby they made a signiﬁcant reduction of its fee
and rebate schedule for a subset of 14 stocks between February and May of 2015.17 NASDAQ
lowered the fees charged to liquidity takers from $0.0030 per share to $0.0005 per share, and
correspondingly, lowered the rebates rewarded to liquidity providers from $0.0029 per share to
$0.0004 per share.
To test the impact of this signiﬁcant reduction in the make-take fee on NASDAQ, we analyze
and compare trade and quote (TAQ) data of the 14 tested symbols in two separate time periods:
the pre-period of 01/12/2015–01/30/2015 and the post-period of 02/09/2015–02/27/2015, that is, 3
17The subset of stocks participating in the experiment are: AAL, BAC, FEYE, GE, GPRO, GRPN, KMI, MU,
RAD, RIG, S, SIRI, TWTR, ZNGA.
34

weeks before and after the initiation of the program at the beginning of February 2015, respectively.
Table 10 contains the fees charged on the 6 major exchanges in the tested periods, during which
only that of NASDAQ changed.
Exchange
Fee
($ per share, ×10−4)
NASDAQ OMX: January 2015
30.0
February 2015
5.0
BATS
30.0
DirectEdge X (EDGX)
30.0
ARCA
30.0
NYSE
27.0
DirectEdge A (EDGA)
-2.0
Table 10: Fees of the 6 major U.S. stock exchanges, per share traded, in January-February 2015 around
the time of the NASDAQ access fee experiment. Note that the fees here are diﬀerent from previous
ﬁgures in table 4 because they are in diﬀerent time periods.
A change in the per share fee and rebate will aﬀect the attractiveness of the exchange for traders
placing limit orders and traders sending aggressive market orders. Our model of market and limit
order routing makes some direct predictions on market outcomes, speciﬁcally suggesting that the
fee change will aﬀect both the trading rate and displayed depth at the exchange through their
impact on the expected delay experienced by limit orders.
In what follows, we will ﬁrst estimate the exchange attraction coeﬃcients before and after the fee
change. We will propose a structural model for the attractiveness of each exchange that explicitly
incorporates its prevailing fee. From this model, we expect that the attractiveness of NASDAQ is
increased after the fee reduction, and we verify this prediction. We then study the eﬀect of the fee
change in the routing of limit orders. In this case, our model predicts that the equilibrium expected
delay for limit orders to get ﬁlled on NASDAQ will decrease after the fee change. The empirical
analysis will again verify this prediction.
Put together these observations suggest that the impact of the fee change is best understood
through its structural impact to limit and market order routing policies, and their impact on
trading delays. The agreement of our predictions with the observed market response suggests that
our model could be useful in addressing either policy related questions or questions of exchange
competition that often involves changes in pricing (fee/rebate) decisions. Our ﬁndings complement
those reported by Hatheway (2015a,b) and Pearson (2015) on the impact of this fee change; these
studies are not predicated on an underlying model of order routing, and primarily focused on market
share and depth comparisons, before and after the fee change.
Attraction coeﬃcient βNASDAQ. The discussion in Section 2.2 suggested that the attractiveness of an exchange for market orders is a decreasing function of its fee. Our earlier analysis
35

focused on an observation period where fees were constant, which implied that the attractiveness
coeﬃcients of the exchanges were themselves constant throughout that time period. The NASDAQ
fee experiment allows us to proceed with a more nuanced analysis to examine the eﬀect of the
exchange fees on market order ﬂow. We postulate the following structural model for the routing of
market orders:
(36)
µ(s,j)
i
(t) = µ(s,j)(t)

ea(j)
i
+ri,tb(j)
Q(s,j)
i
(t)
PN
k=1

ea(j)
k +rk,tb(j)
Q(s,j)
k
(t)
.
In other words, we are postulating the attractiveness coeﬃcients take the form β(j)
i
= ea(j)
i
+ri,tb(j),
given parameters a(j)
i , b(j) that we estimate using 3 weeks of data before and after the fee change.
Our hypothesis is that the parameter b(j) is negative, i.e., an higher fee makes an exchange less
desirable, all other things being equal. The corresponding {µ(s,j)
i
(t)}, {µ(s,j)(t)}, and {Q(s,j)
i
(t)}
are estimated from the two trade and quote data samples as outlined in Section 4.1.
We normalize the results so that the parameter a(j)
ARCA of the benchmark exchange ARCA is
0. Finally, b(j) is estimated using nonlinear regressions on (36), based on the combined sample for
each security. Results are in Table 11. Indeed, the estimated {b(j)} coeﬃcients are negative for all
14 tested securities; 12 of these estimated coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level of
the corresponding 1-sided test. This agrees with our hypothesis.
b(j)
a(j)
NASDAQ
a(j)
EDGX
a(j)
BATZ
a(j)
NYSE
a(j)
EDGA
b NEGATIVE?
1-sided 5% test
AAL
-4.92
0.11
-0.02
0.27
0.09
YES
NO
BAC
-179.50
0.42
0.20
0.26
0.13
0.46
YES
YES
FEYE
-98.65
-0.30
-0.20
0.10
-0.32
YES
YES
GE
-93.50
0.15
-0.04
0.13
-0.01
0.27
YES
YES
GPRO
-50.15
-0.07
-0.21
0.07
-0.07
YES
YES
GRPN
-94.41
0.12
-0.07
0.25
0.00
YES
YES
KMI
-113.10
0.09
0.06
0.13
-0.18
-0.02
YES
YES
MU
-89.02
0.06
-0.02
0.14
0.19
YES
YES
RAD
-138.46
-0.05
-0.22
0.07
-0.29
-0.09
YES
YES
RIG
-76.56
-0.02
-0.02
0.04
-0.14
0.10
YES
YES
S
-162.59
-0.22
-0.29
0.04
-0.26
-0.38
YES
YES
SIRI
-69.31
0.13
-0.13
0.17
0.33
YES
YES
TWTR
-87.33
-0.14
-0.16
-0.01
-0.27
-0.23
YES
YES
ZNGA
-17.66
0.14
-0.28
0.14
0.41
YES
NO
Table 11: Estimates of b and ai in the attraction model (36) and hypothesis testing results on whether
the coeﬃcient b is negative. For each stock, the results are based on a combined sample that includes
both the pre-period and the post-period of the fee experiment.
We also directly estimate the βNASDAQ coeﬃcients before and after the fee change and compare.
This estimation is non-parametric in the sense that it is not predicated on (36), and estimates
36

βNASDAQ via nonlinear regressions the following:
(37)
µ(s,j)
i
(t) = µ(s,j)(t)
β(j)
i Q(s,j)
i
PN
i′=1 β(j)
i′ Q(s,j)
i′
,
based on the pre-period sample and the post-period sample, respectively. Our market order routing
model is invariant to scaling of the attraction coeﬃcients and in this section we normalize so that
the attraction coeﬃcient for each stock on the benchmark exchange ARCA is 1. Table 12 reports
and compares the estimated attraction coeﬃcients before and after the NASDAQ fee experiment
for individual stocks. Note that β(j)
NASDAQ - post is greater than β(j)
NASDAQ - pre for 12 out of the
14 tested securities. For all of these 12 names, the increments are statistically signiﬁcant under a
1-sided test at the 5% level. This is again consistent with our prediction.
β(j)
NASDAQ - pre
Std. Dev.
β(j)
NASDAQ - post
Std. Dev.
INCREASE?
1-sided 5% test
AAL
1.1478
0.0152
1.0787
0.0189
NO
NO
BAC
1.4516
0.0297
2.5617
0.0647
YES
YES
FEYE
0.6958
0.0136
0.9543
0.0156
YES
YES
GE
1.1339
0.0244
1.5250
0.0386
YES
YES
GPRO
0.9285
0.0196
1.0557
0.0250
YES
YES
GRPN
1.1035
0.0253
1.4288
0.0258
YES
YES
KMI
1.0814
0.0163
1.4780
0.0267
YES
YES
MU
1.0314
0.0124
1.3862
0.0186
YES
YES
RAD
0.9515
0.0302
1.3530
0.0368
YES
YES
RIG
0.9775
0.0230
1.1925
0.0239
YES
YES
S
0.9905
0.0453
1.0957
0.0429
YES
YES
SIRI
1.1787
0.0265
1.3045
0.0347
YES
YES
TWTR
0.9093
0.0235
1.0623
0.0269
YES
YES
ZNGA
1.2111
0.0337
1.1939
0.0332
NO
NO
Table 12: Estimates of the attraction coeﬃcient of individual stocks on NASDAQ before and after the
fee experiment, and hypothesis testing results on whether the attraction coeﬃcient increases under the
fee change.
Expected delay EDNASDAQ. Our limit order routing model suggests that traders tradeoﬀ
expected delay with rebate, and that in equilibrium, exchanges that oﬀer lower rebates will also
oﬀer lower expected delays for limit orders placed in the back of the queue at the best bid (top of
book) until they get ﬁlled.
As stated in (12), the expected delay satisﬁes EDi = W
µβi . We expect the workload W to remain
the same after NASDAQ reduces its make-take fee, as the equilibrium value of W depends on the
“marginal” exchange, which is likely to be the one with the lowest rebate, which is not NASDAQ;
we are assuming that the remaining model parameters remain the same. As described above, we
anticipate the attraction coeﬃcient βNASDAQ to increase after the fee change, which would result
in a lower expected delay EDNASDAQ after NASDAQ reduced its make-take fee. An alternative
37

justiﬁcation is that traders submitting orders into NASDAQ would expect lower expected delays
given that they are compensated with a lower rebate when their orders trade. In equilibrium, patient
traders will submit orders to higher rebate exchanges, which would result in a lower equilibrium
delay at NASDAQ after the fee change.
To test this hypothesis we will compare the normalized expected delay at NASDAQ before and
after the fee change. We ﬁrst compute the measure of expected delay along the lines of Section 4.1,
as
(38)
ED(s,j)
i
(t) ≜Q(s,j)
i
(t)
µ(s,j)
i
(t)
,
for side s, security j, on exchange i, in time slot t. We then use these measures to calculate an
aggregate, normalized estimate of the expected delay on NASDAQ, as follows:
(39)
˜
ED
(j)
NASDAQ = 1
2T
X
s∈{BID,ASK}
T
X
t=1
ED(s,j)
NASDAQ(t)
PN
k=1 ED(s,j)
k
(t)
.
For each stock, we can obtain two estimates
˜
ED
(j)
NASDAQ - pre and
˜
ED
(j)
NASDAQ - post based on the
pre-period sample and the post-period sample, respectively. Table 13 reports on these two statistics
for individual securities. We observe that the normalized expected delay on NASDAQ decreases
for all 14 tested securities; in 13 of these 14 cases, the reduction is statistically signiﬁcant. This
agrees with the prediction of our model.
˜
ED
(j)
NASDAQ - pre
Std. Err.
˜
ED
(j)
NASDAQ - post
Std. Err.
DECREASE?
1-sided 5% test
AAL
0.1978
0.0023
0.1886
0.0027
YES
YES
BAC
0.1556
0.0022
0.0963
0.0020
YES
YES
FEYE
0.2282
0.0037
0.1964
0.0031
YES
YES
GE
0.1688
0.0026
0.1265
0.0023
YES
YES
GPRO
0.2262
0.0053
0.2145
0.0057
YES
NO
GRPN
0.2030
0.0034
0.1700
0.0035
YES
YES
KMI
0.1646
0.0018
0.1265
0.0018
YES
YES
MU
0.2062
0.0023
0.1683
0.0024
YES
YES
RAD
0.1750
0.0038
0.1027
0.0030
YES
YES
RIG
0.1721
0.0022
0.1401
0.0024
YES
YES
S
0.1765
0.0063
0.1305
0.0034
YES
YES
SIRI
0.2150
0.0072
0.1558
0.0077
YES
YES
TWTR
0.1813
0.0026
0.1453
0.0035
YES
YES
ZNGA
0.1831
0.0062
0.1515
0.0054
YES
YES
Table 13: Estimates of the normalized expected delay on NASDAQ of individual stocks before and after
the fee experiment, and hypothesis testing results on whether the normalized expected delay decreases
under the fee change.
Linear relation EDNASDAQ = βARCA/βNASDAQ · EDARCA.
Last we examine how the
38

˜
ED
(j)
NASDAQ - pre
Std. Err.
˜
ED
(j)
NASDAQ - post
Std. Err.
DECREASE?
1-sided 5% test
AAL
1.0029
0.0109
0.9681
0.0139
YES
YES
BAC
0.9293
0.0121
0.5895
0.0137
YES
YES
FEYE
1.2431
0.0202
1.0567
0.0164
YES
YES
GE
1.0267
0.0160
0.7863
0.0169
YES
YES
GPRO
1.1619
0.0336
1.0842
0.0360
YES
NO
GRPN
1.0468
0.0191
0.8941
0.0168
YES
YES
KMI
0.9938
0.0100
0.7622
0.0108
YES
YES
MU
1.0318
0.0114
0.8699
0.0127
YES
YES
RAD
1.1165
0.0303
0.6757
0.0195
YES
YES
RIG
1.0361
0.0128
0.8614
0.0142
YES
YES
S
1.2665
0.0711
0.8699
0.0218
YES
YES
SIRI
1.4101
0.1685
1.4559
0.4852
NO
NO
TWTR
1.1077
0.0166
0.9034
0.0260
YES
YES
ZNGA
1.0337
0.0404
0.8984
0.0308
YES
YES
Table 14: Results in parallel to those in Table 13 when the expected delays are normalized by median
delay instead of by sum of delays.
fee change aﬀects the linear relation (33) in Section 4.3, which is one of the major conclusions
arising from our model,
(40)
ED(s,j)
i
(t) = β(j)
i′
β(j)
i
ED(s,j)
i′
(t).
Specially, we want to test that when considering the above linear relation between NASDAQ and
the benchmark exchange, ARCA, the slope of that linear relation before and after the fee change
will decrease, since we expect that the attraction coeﬃcient βNASDAQ should increase in response
to that change. We perform linear regressions for each security between the expected delays on
NASDAQ against that on the benchmark exchange ARCA before and after the fee change and report
the results in Table 15. We observe that the resulting slopes decrease for all 14 tested securities,
among which 8 are statistically signiﬁcant under a one-sided test at the 5% level. In addition, in a
cross-sectional linear regression the slope before the fee change was 0.78564∗∗∗(0.01571), R2 = 58%,
and 0.66384∗∗∗(0.01221), R2 = 62% after the fee change; the decrease in the slope is statistically
signiﬁcant.
References
A. Alfonsi, A. Fruth, and A. Schied. Optimal execution strategies in limit order books with general
shape functions. Quantitative Finance, 10:143–157, 2010.
G. Allon and A. Federgruen. Competition in service industries. Operations Research, 55(1):37–55,
2007.
39

slope (before)
Std. Err.
slope (after)
Std. Err.
DECREASE?
1-sided 5% test
AAL
0.6742
0.0308
0.5981
0.0392
YES
NO
BAC
0.6176
0.0299
0.3245
0.0269
YES
YES
FEYE
0.8773
0.0761
0.7950
0.0543
YES
NO
GE
0.7851
0.0384
0.4859
0.0349
YES
YES
GPRO
0.3744
0.0458
0.3314
0.0624
YES
NO
GRPN
0.9570
0.0418
0.8223
0.0234
YES
YES
KMI
0.8764
0.0289
0.5400
0.0255
YES
YES
MU
0.8313
0.0277
0.5741
0.0274
YES
YES
RAD
0.9439
0.0611
0.3090
0.0482
YES
YES
RIG
0.6571
0.0286
0.5360
0.0282
YES
YES
S
0.5740
0.1151
0.5406
0.0395
YES
NO
SIRI
1.3337
0.2686
(0.0001)
0.0135
YES
YES
TWTR
0.8406
0.0679
0.7470
0.0724
YES
NO
ZNGA
0.0546
0.0087
0.0425
0.0174
YES
NO
Table 15: Linear regression results of equation (40) and hypothesis testing results on whether the slope
decreases after the fee change on NASDAQ.
slope (before)
Std. Err.
slope (after)
Std. Err.
DECREASE?
1-sided 5% test
AAL
0.7960
0.0149
0.8121
0.0188
NO
NO
BAC
0.6774
0.0154
0.3789
0.0138
YES
YES
FEYE
1.3292
0.0428
1.0828
0.0288
YES
YES
GE
0.8285
0.0221
0.5942
0.0194
YES
YES
GPRO
0.7147
0.0375
0.6852
0.0453
YES
NO
GRPN
0.9706
0.0294
0.8040
0.0207
YES
YES
KMI
0.9253
0.0150
0.6436
0.0123
YES
YES
MU
0.9034
0.0152
0.6440
0.0140
YES
YES
RAD
1.0516
0.0440
0.4285
0.0366
YES
YES
RIG
0.7851
0.0199
0.6453
0.0177
YES
YES
S
0.6519
0.1113
0.6650
0.0299
NO
NO
SIRI
1.4071
0.2435
0.0017
0.0134
YES
YES
TWTR
1.1070
0.0354
0.8970
0.0390
YES
YES
ZNGA
0.0584
0.0091
0.0550
0.0178
YES
NO
Table 16: Results in parallel to those in Table 15 when the linear regressions are performed without
intercept.
M. J. Barclay, T. Hendershott, and T. D. McCormick. Competition among trading venues: Information and trading on electronic communications networks. Journal of Finance, 58:2637–2666,
2003.
A. Bassamboo, J.M. Harrison, and A. Zeevi. Dynamic routing in large call centers: Asymptotic
analysis of an LP-based method. Operations Research, 10:1074–1099, 2004.
O. Besbes and C. Maglaras. Revenue optimization for a make-to-order queue in an uncertain market
environment. Operations Research, 57(6):1438–1450, 2009.
H. Bessembinder. Quote-based competition and trade execution costs in NYSE listed stocks. Journal of Financial Economics, 70:385–422, 2003.
40

B. Biais, C. Bisière, and C. Spatt. Imperfect competition in ﬁnancial markets: An empirical study
of Island and Nasdaq. Management Science, 56(12):2237–2250, 2010.
J. Blanchet and X. Chen. Continuous-time modeling of bid-ask spread and price dynamics in limit
order books. Working paper, 2013.
J.-P. Bouchaud, Y. Gefen, M. Potters, and M. Wyart.
Fluctuations and response in ﬁnancial
markets: The subtle nature of ‘random’ price changes. Quantitative Finance, 4:176–190, 2004.
M. Bramson. State space collapse with applications to heavy-traﬃc limits for multiclass queueing
networks. QUESTA, 30:89–148, 1998.
S. Buti, B. Rindi, Y. Wen, and I.M. Werner. Tick size regulation, intermarket competition and
sub&penny trading. Working paper, 2011.
G. Cachon and P. Harker. Competition and outsourcing with scale economies. Management Science,
48:1314–1333, 2002.
R. Caldentey, E. Kaplan, and G. Weiss. Fcfs inﬁnite bipartite matching of servers and customers.
Adv. of Applied Probability, 41(3):695–730, 2009.
Y-J. Chen, C. Maglaras, and G. Vulcano. Design of an aggregated marketplace under congestion
eﬀects: Asymptotic analysis and equilibrium characterization. Working paper, 2010.
R. Cont and A. Kukanov. Optimal order placement in limit order markets. Working paper, 2013.
R. Cont and A. De Larrard. Price dynamics in a markovian limit order market. SIAM Journal of
Financial Mathematics, 4(1):1–25, 2013.
R. Cont, S. Stoikov, and R. Talreja. A stochastic model for order book dynamics. Operations
Research, 58:549–563, 2010.
H. Degryse, F. de Jong, and V. van Kervel. The impact of dark trading and visible fragmentation
on market quality. Working paper, 2011.
A. Dufour and R. F. Engle. Time and the price impact of a trade. Journal of Finance, 55:2467–2498,
2000.
T. Foucault and A. J. Menkveld. Competition for order ﬂow and smart order routing systems.
Journal of Finance, 63:119–158, 2008.
T. Foucault, O. Kadan, and E. Kandel. Limit order book as a market for liquidity. Review of
Financial Studies, 18:1171–1217, 2005.
41

J. Gatheral. No-dynamic-arbitrage and market impact. Quantitative Finance, 10:749–759, 2010.
L. Glosten. Is the electronic order book inevitable? Journal of Finance, 49:1127–1161, 1994.
L. Glosten. Competition, design of exchanges and welfare. Working paper, 1998.
L. R. Glosten.
Components of the bid/ask spread and the statistical properties of transaction
prices. Journal of Finance, 42:1293–1307, 1987.
L. R. Glosten and P. R. Milgrom. Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market with
heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics, 14:71–100, 1985.
M. D. Griﬃths, B. F. Smith, D. A. S. Turnbull, and R. W. White. The costs and the determinants
of order aggressiveness. Journal of Financial Economics, 56:65–88, 2000.
X. Guo, A. De Larrard, and Z. Ruan. Optimal placement in a limit order book. Working paper,
2013.
I. Gurvich and A. Ward. On the dynamic control of matching queues. Stochastic Systems, 4(2):
479–523, 2014.
J. L. Hamilton. Marketplace fragmentation, competition, and the eﬃciency of the stock exchange.
Journal of Finance, 34:171–187, 1979.
J. M. Harrison. Brownian models of queueing networks with heterogeneous customer populations.
In W. Fleming and P. L. Lions, editors, Stochastic Diﬀerential Systems, Stochastic Control Theory
and Applications, volume 10 of Proceedings of the IMA, pages 147–186. Springer-Verlag, New York,
1988.
J. M. Harrison. Balanced ﬂuid models of multiclass queueing networks: a heavy traﬃc conjecture.
In F. Kelly and R. Williams, editors, Stochastic Networks, volume 71, pages 1–20. Proceedings of
the IMA, 1995.
J. M. Harrison. Brownian models of open processing networks: Canonical representation of workload. Ann. Appl. Prob., 10:75–103, 2000.
J. M. Harrison and M. J. Lopez. Heavy traﬃc resource pooling in parallel- server systems. Queueing
Systems, 33:339–368, 1999.
R. Hassin and M. Haviv. To Queue or not to Queue: Equilibrium Behavior in Queueing Systems.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA, 2003.
F. Hatheway. Nasdaq access fee experiment. Nasdaq, Technical report, 2015a.
42

F. Hatheway. Nasdaq access fee experiment. Nasdaq, Technical report, 2015b.
B. Holliﬁeld, R. A. Millerz, and P. Sandas. Empirical analysis of limit order markets. Review of
Economic Studies, 71:1027–1063, 2004.
R. W. Holthausen, R. W. Leftwich, and D. Mayers. Large-block transactions, the speed of response,
and temporary and permanent stock-price eﬀects. Journal of Financial Economics, 26:71–95,
1990.
G. Huberman and W. Stanzl. Price manipulation and quasi-arbitrage. Econometrica, 72:1247–1275,
2004.
B. Jovanovic and A. J. Menkveld. Middlemen in limit-order markets. Working paper, 2011.
D. B. Keim and A. Madhavan. The cost of instituional equity trades. Financial Analysts Journal,
54:50–59, 1998.
A. Kukanov and C. Maglaras. A limit order queue model with traders with heterogeneous behaviors.
Working paper, Columbia University, 2015.
Thomas G. Kurtz. Strong approximation theorems for density dependent Markov chains. Stochastic
Processes Appl., 6(3):223–240, 1977/78. ISSN 0304-4149.
A. S. Kyle. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica, 53:1315–1335, 1985.
P. Lakner, J. Reed, and S. Stoikov. High frequency asymptotics for the limit order book. Working
paper, 2013.
P. Lakner, J. Reed, and F. Simatos. Scaling limit of a limit order book model via the regenerative
characterization of lévy trees. Working paper, 2014.
M. A Lariviere. A note on probability distributions with increasing generalized failure rates. Operations Research, 54(3):602–604, 2006.
P. Lederer and L. Li. Pricing, production, scheduling and delivery -time competition. Operations
Research, 45:407–420, 1997.
D. Levhari and I. Luski. Duopoly prcing and waiting lines. European Economic Review, 11:17–35,
1978.
L. Li and Y. Lee. Pricing and delivery-time performance in a competitive environment. Management
Science, 40:633–646, 1994.
43

I. Luski. On partial equilibrium in a queueing system with two servers. The Review of Economic
Studies, 43:519–525, 1976.
C. Maglaras, C. Moallemi, and H. Zheng. Optimal execution in a limit order book and an associated
microstructure market impact model. Working paper, 2014.
K. Malinova and A. Park. Liquidity, volume, and price behavior: The impact of order vs. quote
based trading. Working paper, 2010.
A. Mandelbaum and G. Pats. State-dependent queues: approximations and applications. In F. Kelly
and R. Williams, editors, Stochastic Networks, volume 71, pages 239–282. Proceedings of the IMA,
1995.
H. Mendelson and S. Whang. Optimal incentive-compatible priority pricing for the m/m/1 queue.
Oper. Res., 38(5):870–883, 1990.
A. Obizhaeva and J. Wang. Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand dynamics. Working
paper, 2006.
M. O’Hara and M. Ye. Is market fragmentation harming market quality?
Journal of Financial
Economics, 100(3):459–474, June 2011.
C. Parlour. Limit order markets: A survey. Handbook of Financial Intermediation & Banking
A.W.A. Boot and A. V. Thakor eds., 2008.
C. A. Parlour. Price dynamics in limit order markets. Review of Financial Studies, 11:789–816,
1998.
P. Pearson. Takeways from the NASDAQ pilor program. ITG Technical Report, 2015.
E. L. Plambeck and A. R. Ward. Optimal control of a high-volume assemble-to-order system. Math.
Oper. Res., 31(3):453–477, 2006.
I. Rosu. A dynamic model of the limit order book. Review of Financial Studies, 22:4601–4641,
2009.
K. So.
Price and time competition for service delivery.
Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management, 2(4):392–409, 2000.
G. Soﬁanos. Specialist gross trading revenues at the New York Stock Exchange. Working paper,
1995.
44

G. Soﬁanos, J. Xiang, and A. Youseﬁ. Smart order routing: All-in shortfall and optimal order
placement. Goldman Sachs, Equity Executions Strats, Street Smart, 42, 2011.
S. Stoikov, M. Avellaneda, and J. Reed. Forecasting prices from level-i quotes in the presence of
hidden liquidity. Algorithmic Finance, Forthcoming, 2011.
A. L. Stolyar. Optimal routing in output-queued ﬂexible server systems. Probability in the Engineering and Informational Sciences, 19:141 – 189, 2005.
V. van Kervel. Liquidity: What you see is what you get? Working paper, 2012.
S. H. Zak. Systems and Control. Oxford University Press, 2003.
A.
Proofs: Equilibrium Characterization
Proof of Lemma 1. For γ ≥0, deﬁne L(γ) ≜maxi̸=0 γ(˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi . Clearly L is a continuous
function, and under Assumption 1(iii), it is also increasing. We wish to show that L(γ0) = 0.
Suppose that L(γ0) < 0. Then, there exists ¯γ > γ0 with L(γ) < 0 for all γ ∈[0, ¯γ]. Thus, in
equilibrium, investors with types γ ∈[0, ¯γ] strictly prefer placing market orders, i.e., π∗
i (γ) = 0 for
i̸ = 0. Then,
N
X
i=1

λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π∗
i (γ) dF(γ)

=
N
X
i=1
λi + Λ
Z ∞
¯γ0
 N
X
i=1
π∗
i (γ)
!
dF(γ) ≤
N
X
i=1
λi + Λ
 1 −F(¯γ)
 < µ,
where the last inequality follows from (17) and Assumption 1(i). This contradicts the ﬂow balance
equation (14).
Alternatively, suppose that L(γ0) > 0.
Then, there exists ¯γ < γ0 with L(γ) > 0 for all
γ ∈[¯γ, ∞). Thus, in equilibrium, investors with types γ ∈[¯γ, ∞) strictly prefer not placing market
orders, i.e., π∗
0(γ) = 0. Then,
N
X
i=1

λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π∗
i (γ) dF(γ)

=
N
X
i=1
λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
(1 −π∗
0(γ)) dF(γ)
≥
N
X
i=1
λi + Λ
 1 −F(¯γ)
 > µ,
where the last inequality follows from (17) and Assumption 1(i). This contradicts the ﬂow balance
equation (14). Thus, we must have L(γ0) = 0 and (20) holds.
45

Now, suppose exchange i achieves the maximum in (20). Then, from the right side of (20), it
follows that κi = βi(˜ri−˜r0) = W ∗
µγ0 . Further, for any exchange j, (20) implies that κj = βj(˜rj −˜r0) ≤
W ∗
µγ0 = κi. For the converse, if
(A.1)
κi = max
j̸=0 κj,
and there exists an exchange j satisfying
0 = γ0(˜rj −˜r0) −W ∗
µβj
> γ0(˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi
,
then
κj = βj(˜rj −˜r0) = W ∗
µγ0
> βi(˜ri −˜r0) = κi,
which contradicts with (A.1).
■
Proof of Theorem 2. Suppose (π∗, W ∗) satisﬁes (22)–(23). We want to show that (π∗, W ∗) is an
equilibrium, i.e., it must satisfy (13)–(14).
We ﬁrst establish (13). In particular, we will establish that for any π ∈P and all γ,
π0(γ)γ˜r0 +
N
X
i=1
πi(γ)

γ˜ri −W ∗
µβi

≤π∗
0(γ)γ˜r0 +
N
X
i=1
π∗
i (γ)

γ˜ri −W ∗
µβi

.
Equivalently,
(A.2)
N
X
i=1
πi(γ)

γ (˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi

≤
N
X
i=1
π∗
i (γ)

γ (˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi

.
If γ ≤γ0 and i̸ = 0, using (22) and Assumption 1(iii), we have that
γ (˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi
= γκi −γ0 maxj̸=0 κj
βi
≤γ0κi −γ0 maxj̸=0 κj
βi
≤0
(A.3)
Since, by (23), π∗
i (γ) = 0 for i̸ = 0, we have that (A.2) holds for all γ < γ0. For γ = γ0, note
that equality holds in (A.3) iﬀκi = maxj̸=0 κj, i.e., i ∈A∗(γ0). Thus, (A.2) also holds for γ = γ0.
Finally, if γ > γ0 and i̸ = 0,
(A.4)
γ (˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi
= γκi −γ0 maxj̸=0 κj
βi
≥γκi −γ maxj̸=0 κj
βi
≥0.
Thus, (A.2) continues to hold.
46

Next, we establish (14). By (23), 1 −π∗
0(γ) = 0 when γ < γ0 and 1 −π∗
0(γ) = 1 when γ > γ0.
Thus,
Z ∞
0
 1 −π∗
0(γ)
 dF(γ) =
Z ∞
γ0
dF(γ) = 1 −F(γ0).
Using this and (17),
µ =
N
X
i=1
λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
 1 −π∗
0(γ)
 dF(γ)
=
N
X
i=1
λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
 N
X
i=1
π∗
i (γ)
!
dF(γ)
=
N
X
i=1

λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π∗
i (γ) dF(γ)

.
Thus, (π∗, W ∗) satisﬁes (14) as well and is an equilibrium.
Now suppose (π∗, W ∗) is an equilibrium. We would like to show that (π∗, W ∗) must satisfy
(22)–(23), except possibly for γ in a set of F-measure zero.
First, by Lemma 1, we have that
γ0˜r0 = max
i̸=0
γ0˜ri −W ∗
µβi
= γ0˜r¯i −W ∗
µβ¯i
,
where ¯i ∈argmaxj̸=0 κj. By solving for W ∗, (22) follows immediately.
Next, we verify (23). Deﬁne M to be the set of γ ≥0 such that π∗(γ) does not satisfy (23).
Deﬁne ¯π ∈P to be a set of routing decisions such that (¯π, W ∗) satisﬁes (23), such a ¯π can easily
be constructed by solving the optimization problem for A∗(γ) for each γ ≥0. Deﬁne
∆(γ) ≜π∗
0(γ)˜r0 +
N
X
i=1
π∗
i (γ)

γ˜ri −W ∗
µβi

−¯π0(γ)˜r0 −
N
X
i=1
¯πi(γ)

γ˜ri −W ∗
µβi

=
N
X
i=1
π∗
i (γ)

γ (˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi

−
N
X
i=1
¯πi(γ)

γ (˜ri −˜r0) −W ∗
µβi

,
for γ ≥0. Following the same arguments as in (A.3)–(A.4), it is easy to see that
(A.5)
∆(γ) = 0
if γ /∈M,
∆(γ) < 0
if γ ∈M and γ̸ = γ0.
47

On the other hand, Since π∗is optimal for the program (13), we have that
(A.6)
0 ≤
Z ∞
0
∆(γ) dF(γ) =
Z
M
∆(γ) dF(γ) =
Z
M∩[0,γ0)
∆(γ) dF(γ) +
Z
M∩(γ0,∞)
∆(γ) dF(γ),
where, for the ﬁnal equality, we use the fact that the point {γ0} has F-measure zero under Assumption 1(i). Together, (A.5)–(A.6) imply that M has F-measure 0.
■
B.
Proofs: Equilibrium Convergence
In this appendix, we prove the convergence of the queue length process Q(t) to the unique equilibrium vector Q∗at t →∞, in the two-dimensional case.
We ﬁrst provide the proof of Theorem 3, which establishes uniqueness of the equilibrium queue
length vector Q∗.
Proof of Theorem 3. Suppose
 π(1), Q(1) and
 π(2), Q(2) are both equilibria.
Deﬁne W (ℓ) ≜
β⊤Q(ℓ), for ℓ∈{1, 2}. By Theorem 1, both
 π(1), W (1) and
 π(2), W (2) satisfy (13)-(14). By
Theorem 2, we have that
(B.1)
W (1) = W (2) = W ∗≜γ0µ max
i̸=0
κi.
Now, suppose that γ < γ0. Theorem 2 states that π(1)
i
(γ) = π(2)
i
(γ) = 0 for i̸ = 0, except
possibly on a set of γ of F-measure zero. On the other hand, if γ > γ0, by Theorem 2, π(1)(γ) and
π(2)(γ) can only diﬀer when A∗(γ) contains at least two exchanges (ignoring a set of γ of at most
F-measure zero). Suppose {i, j} are two exchanges such that {i, j} ⊂A∗(γ), i.e., a type-γ investor
is indiﬀerent between exchanges i and j. Then,
(B.2)
γ(˜ri −˜rj) = W ∗
µβi
−W ∗
µβj
.
The right hand side of (B.2) is independent of γ, and ˜ri −˜rj̸ = 0, by the assumption that the
eﬀective rebates are distinct. Then, {i, j} ⊂A∗(γ) for at most a single value of γ. As there are
only ﬁnitely many pairs of exchanges, we have that |A∗(γ)| = 1 except for possibly ﬁnitely many
γ > γ0. Then, under Assumption 1(i), π(1)(γ) and π(2)(γ) diﬀer on a set of γ of at most F-measure
zero.
48

Combining these facts with the ﬂow balance condition (11), we have that
Q(1)
i
= Q(1)
i
× µβi
µβi
×
W ∗
β⊤Q(1) = µi
 Q(1)W ∗
µβi
=

λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π(1)
i
(γ) dF(γ)
 W ∗
µβi
=

λi + Λ
Z ∞
0
π(2)
i
(γ) dF(γ)
 W ∗
µβi
= Q(2)
i ,
for i = 1, . . . , N, i.e., the equilibrium queue lengths are unique.
■
Next we prove the convergence of the queue length process Q(t) to the unique equilibrium vector
Q∗at t →∞, in the two-dimensional case.
As in Section 2.3, deﬁne χi(W(t)) to be the instantaneous fraction of arriving limit orders that
are placed into exchange i. The evolution of the queue length process Q(t) is characterized by the
following system of ordinary diﬀerential equations,
(B.3)
˙Qi(t) = λi + Λχi(W(t)) −µi(Q(t)),
i = 1, . . . , N.
In the remainder of this appendix, we focus on the two dimensional cases, i.e., N = 2. Also, without
loss of generality, we assume λi = 0, for i = 1, 2.18
The fact that the equilibrium queue length vector exhibits state space collapse and leads us
to consider a new coordinate system in which workload W ≜β⊤Q is one of the new coordinates.
In the two dimensional case, the workload W together with the sum of queue lengths S ≜1⊤Q
characterize the individual queue lengths and vice versa. Thus, the convergence of (W(t), S(t))
to (W ∗, S∗) where W ∗≜β⊤Q∗and S∗≜1⊤Q∗, is equivalent to the convergence of the queue
length process Q(t) to the unique equilibrium vector Q∗. We perform the change of coordinates
and rewrite the original ordinary diﬀerential equations in terms of W and S as follows:
(B.4)







˙W(t) = Λβ⊤χ(W(t)) −µ(β1 + β2) · I{W(t)̸=0} + µβ1β2S(t)
W(t)
· I{W(t)̸=0},
˙
S(t) = Λ1⊤χ(W(t)) −µ · I{S(t)̸=0}.
We will restrict attention to this new (W, S) coordinate system for the remainder of this appendix.
18The proof that follows can be easily adapted to all other cases where λ1, λ2 > 0 and, λ1 + λ2 < µ.
49

B.1.
Overview of the Proof for (W (t), S(t)) Convergence
In the following we prove that under Assumptions 1–3, given arbitrary initial conditions (W(0), S(0)) ∈
R2
+, the process (W(t), S(t)) converges to the unique equilibrium (W ∗, S∗) at t →∞.
Deﬁne the set W+ ≜{(W, S) : W = W ∗, S > S∗}, i.e., the upper half of the vertical line
W = W ∗in R2. We will show that (W(t), S(t)) either hits the set W+ or enters a local stability
region within a ﬁnite time, starting from any initial point.
This will imply that (W(t), S(t))
returns to set W+ with ﬁnite inter-arrival times, if it has not entered the local stability region.
Each recurrence corresponds to a point on the upper half of the vertical line W = W ∗in R2, i.e.,
to a value of S ≥S∗. We then show that each recurrence has a smaller (closer to S∗) S value than
the previous appearance in set W+. Moreover, the step size is bounded away from zero as long
as the trajectory is outside the local stability region. This ensures there are ﬁnite iterations until
(W(t), S(t)) enters the local stability region, and thus has to converge.
Accordingly, the proof will be organized around the following main steps, each of which corresponds to one of Lemmas 3-5 in the following subsection:
1. Lemma 3 (Local Stability). There exists ε > 0, such that if (W(0), S(0)) is in the set
Wlocal ≜{(W, S) : |W −W ∗| < ε, |S −S∗| < ε},
then (W(t), S(t)) converges to (W ∗, S∗).
2. Lemma 4 (Finite Inter-arrival Time). Starting from any initial point, a sample path either
enters the local stability region Wlocal or hits the set W+ in ﬁnite time; in the latter case,
starting from any point in W+ the sample path must, in ﬁnite time, either
(i) reach the set Wlocal,
(ii) return to the set W+.
3. Lemma 5 (Guaranteed Decay). There exists ϕ > 0, such that if τ1 < τ2 are times where
(W(τ1), S(τ1)), (W(τ2), S(τ2)) ∈W+ and (W(t), S(t))̸ ∈Wlocal for t ∈[τ1, τ2],
then S(τ2) ≤S(τ1) −ϕ.
This method of proving (W(t), S(t)) convergence shows that each sample path is a decaying
spiral in R2 centered around the unique equilibrium point (W ∗, S∗). Analyzing the spiral, we show
50

that each rotation takes ﬁnite time, and has a guaranteed decay towards the equilibrium along the
S coordinate at times when the set W+ is hit.
Therefore, the spiral enters the local stability region after ﬁnite iterations and within ﬁnite time,
at which point it much converge to the unique equilibrium.
B.2.
Proving (W (t), S(t)) Convergence
We begin with a lemma that provides a series of bounds on the trajectory. First, we postulate that
(W(t), S(t)) should be within the ﬁrst quadrant R2
+, since both components are positive weighted
sum of the queue lengths. Second, the ratio S(t)/W(t) is bounded by the largest and smallest of
{1/βi}i=1,2. Recall that we assume attraction coeﬃcients are distinct. Without loss of generality,
assume that β1 > β2 and deﬁne C ≜{(W, S) : S/W ∈[1/β1, 1/β2]}. The trajectory should be
conﬁned within this cone. Third, we provide a lower bound W and an upper bound W on the
workload W(t) and argue that after ﬁnite time the workload will be restricted within that range.
As a result, after ﬁnite time an inequality with respect to the vector of routing fractions χ(W(t))
holds, which will be useful in proving convergence later on.
Lemma 2 (Bounded Trajectory). There exists ζ ∈(0, µβ2) and W, W ∈[0, +∞) with W < W, such
that given initial conditions S(0) = 1⊤Q(0) and W(0) = β⊤Q(0) where Q(0) ∈R2
+, there exists
ﬁnite time Tb ∈[0, +∞) such that at any time t > Tb,
(1) the trajectory is contained within R2
+
T C T B where B ≜{(W, S) : W ∈[W, W]};
(2) Λβ⊤χ(W(t)) −µ(β1 + β2) ≤−ζ.
Proof. Since Q(t) ∈R2
+, it is obvious that (S(t), W(t)) ∈R2
+. Moreover, for all Q = Q(t) ∈R2
+,
(B.5)
1⊤Q ≤β1
β2
Q1 + Q2 = 1
β2

β⊤Q

,
1⊤Q ≥Q1 + β2
β1
Q2 = 1
β1

β⊤Q

.
Therefore 1/β1 ≤S(t)/W(t) ≤1/β2.
For the third bound, we will use the following deﬁnitions of W and W: Pick an arbitrary
0 < ζ < µβ2. Because of the monotonicity assumption, and that Λβ⊤χ(0) −µβ2 ≥Λβ2 −µβ2 > 0,
Λβ⊤χ(W)−µβ2 →−µβ2 as W →∞, there will be a unique workload value satisfying Λβ⊤χ(W)−
µβ2 = −ζ, which we denote as W. Also because of the monotonicity assumption, and the fact that
Λβ⊤χ(W) −µ(β1 + β2) →−µ(β1 + β2) as W →∞, if Λβ⊤χ(0) −µ(β1 + β2) ≥−ζ, there will be a
51

unique workload value satisfying Λβ⊤χ(W) −µ(β1 + β2) = −ζ, which we denote as W. Otherwise,
we deﬁne W = 0. In both cases, Λβ⊤χ(W) −µ(β1 + β2) ≤−ζ.
For W ≥W,
(B.6)
˙W = Λβ⊤χ(W) −µ(β1 + β2) + µβ1β2
S
W
≤−ζ −µβ1 + µβ1β2
1
β2
= −ζ.
So if the trajectory starts with W(0) > W, it decreases and goes under W within ﬁnite time
(W(0) −W)/ζ. And since at W = W, ˙W ≤−ζ, as soon as the trajectory goes below W, it will
stay below W.
If W = 0, then we always have W ≥W. If W > 0, for W ≤W,
(B.7)
˙W = Λβ⊤χ(W) −µ(β1 + β2) + µβ1β2S
W
≥ζ + µβ1β2
1
β1
= ζ + µβ2.
So if the trajectory starts with W(0) < W, it increases and goes above W within ﬁnite time
(W −W(0))/(ζ + µβ2). And since at W = W,
˙W ≥ζ + µβ2, as soon as the trajectory goes
above W, it will stay above W. Therefore, (W(t), S(t)) ∈B after ﬁnite time Tb = max{0, (W(0) −
W)/ζ, (W −W(0))/(ζ + µβ2)}.
When (W(t), S(t)) ∈B, W(t) ≥W. Because of the monotonicity assumption,
(B.8)
Λβ⊤χ(W(t)) −µ(β1 + β2) ≤Λβ⊤χ(W) −µ(β1 + β2) ≤−ζ.
■
The bounded region of R2
+
T C T B is divided into four quadrants according to the signs of ˙W
and ˙S as follows:
First, the vertical line W = W ∗divides the space into two half-spaces in which S is monotonically changing. This is because
(B.9)
1⊤χ(W) = χ1(W) + χ2(W)
= P

max
i=1,2 γ˜ri −W
µβi
> γ˜r0

,
52

is strictly decreasing in W, and, at the equilibrium,
(B.10)
˙S = ˙Q1 + ˙Q2 = Λ1⊤χ(W ∗) −µ = 0.
Thus,
˙S > 0,
when W < W ∗,
˙S = 0,
when W = W ∗,
˙S < 0,
when W > W ∗.
Second, denote by ¯S(W) for which ˙W = 0 at a given workload W, in other words,
(B.11)
¯S(W) ≜
W
µβ1β2

µ(β1 + β2) −Λβ⊤χ(W)

.
Because of the monotonicity assumption, ¯S(W) > 0 for all W > W. We can rewrite ˙W in terms of
¯S(W) as
(B.12)
˙W = Λβ⊤χ(W) −µ(β1 + β2) + µβ1β2 ¯S(W)
W
+ µβ1β2(S −¯S(W))
W
= µβ1β2(S −¯S(W))
W
.
Thus,
˙W > 0,
when S > ¯S(W),
˙W = 0,
when S = ¯S(W),
˙W < 0,
when S < ¯S(W).
For later reference, we clockwise index the four quadrants by even numbers and the bordering
regions in between by odd numbers, as listed below and illustrated in the following ﬁgure. These
nine regions are mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive:
• Region 1:
W = W ∗, S > ¯S(W),
• Region 2:
W > W ∗, S > ¯S(W),
• Region 3:
W > W ∗, S = ¯S(W),
• Region 4:
W > W ∗, S < ¯S(W),
• Region 5:
W = W ∗, S < ¯S(W),
• Region 6:
W < W ∗, S < ¯S(W),
• Region 7:
W < W ∗, S = ¯S(W),
53

• Region 8:
W < W ∗, S > ¯S(W),
• Region 9:
W = W ∗, S = ¯S(W).
As indicated by the following lemma, the system of ordinary diﬀerential equations in (B.4) is
locally asymptotically stable. So there exists a local stability region around the equilibrium such
that all points inside the region converge.
Lemma 3 (Local Stability). There exists ε > 0, such that if (W(0), S(0)) is in the set
Wlocal ≜{(W, S) : |W −W ∗| < ε, |S −S∗| < ε},
then (W(t), S(t)) converges to (W ∗, S∗).
Proof. For W > 0, S > 0, the Jacobian matrix corresponding to the system of ordinary diﬀerential
equations in (B.4) is
J(W, S) =

Λβ⊤∂χ(W)
∂W
−µβ1β2 S
W 2
µβ1β2 1
W
Λ1⊤∂χ(W)
∂W
0


Denote λ1, λ2 as its two eigenvalues, then
(B.13)
λ1 + λ2 = tr(J(W, S)) = Λβ⊤∂χ(W)
∂W
−µβ1β2
S
W 2 < 0.
(B.14)
λ1 · λ2 = det(J(W, S)) = −Λµβ1β21⊤∂χ(W)
∂W
> 0.
So both of the eigenvalues have negative real parts and the system is locally asymptotically stable
(Zak, 2003).
■
Now we are ready to set out the argument for convergence. As laid out in the overview of
Section B.1, the next step is to show that the trajectory returns to the set W+ and thus to region 1
with ﬁnite inter-arrival time as long as it does not enter the local stability region.
Lemma 4 (Finite Interarrival Time). There exists ﬁnite time Tr ∈(0, +∞), such that for any
(W(0), S(0)) ∈R2
+
T C T B, there exists time 0 < t < Tr where (W(t), S(t)) ∈W+ or (W(t), S(t)) ∈
Wlocal.
Proof. To prove that the trajectory starting from time t and with any initial point will reach
region 1 after ﬁnite time, we will show that, starting from any point in any of the nine regions,
54

unless the trajectory enters the local stability region, it will reach the next numbered region within
ﬁnite time, and thus the trajectory has to return to region 1 within ﬁnite time. Therefore the
trajectory will keep returning to region 1 with a ﬁnite interval of time (unless it enters the local
stability region). In the following we discuss the cases region by region:
• Region 1:
W = W ∗, S > ¯S(W), then
˙W > 0, ˙S = 0. So the trajectory instantly exits
region 1 and reaches region 2.
• Region 2:
W > W ∗, S > ¯S(W), then
˙W > 0, ˙S < 0. So the trajectory can only reach
region 3 if the trajectory leaves region 2.
Since ¯S(W) is continuous and ¯S(W ∗) = S∗, for ε−∈(0, ε), there exists a small δε−> 0
such that for W ∈(W ∗, W ∗+ δε−), | ¯S(W) −S∗| < ε−. For W ∈(W ∗, W ∗+ min{δε−, ε}),
if S −S∗< ε, then the trajectory converges because of local stability. Otherwise, without
entering the local stability region, for these W values, ˙W = µβ1β2
S−¯S(W)
W
> µβ1β2 ε−ε−
W ∗+ε. So
the trajectory will exceed W ∗+ min{δε−, ε} within ﬁnite time.
For W > W ∗+ min{δε−, ε}, denote
(B.15)
Sδ(S, W) ≜S −¯S(W).
Since W > W,
(B.16)
¯S′(W) =
1
µβ1β2

µ(β1 + β2) −Λβ⊤χ(W)

−
W
µβ1β2
Λβ⊤∂χ(W)
∂W
> 0.
Then,
(B.17)
˙Sδ = ˙S −¯S′(W) · ˙W < Λ1⊤χ(W) −Λ1⊤χ(W ∗),
W > W ∗+ min{δε−, ε}.
We know 1⊤χ(W) is strictly decreasing and W is bounded away from W ∗, therefore Sδ will
decrease to 0, i.e., the trajectory will reach region 3, within ﬁnite time.
• Region 3:
W > W ∗, S = ¯S(W), then
˙W = 0, ˙S < 0. So the trajectory instantly exits
region 3 and reaches region 4.
• Region 4:
W > W ∗, S < ¯S(W), then ˙W < 0, ˙S < 0. So the trajectory can can only reach
regions 3, 5, or 9 if the it leaves region 4.
For W ∈(W ∗, W ∗+min{δε−, ε}), if −ε < S −S∗< ε−, then the trajectory converges because
55

of local stability. Otherwise for these W values,
˙W = µβ1β2
S−¯S(W)
W
< −µβ1β2 ε−ε−
W ∗+ε. The
trajectory will go to W = W ∗and reach region 5 within ﬁnite time.
For W > W ∗+ min{δε−, ε},
(B.18)
˙S = Λ1⊤χ(W) −Λ1⊤χ(W ∗),
W > W ∗+ min{δε−, ε}.
Since 1⊤χ(W) is strictly decreasing, W is bounded away from W ∗, and S is bounded below
by the line S =
1
β1 W ∗, the trajectory will leave this region within ﬁnite time.
• Region 5:
W = W ∗, S < ¯S(W), then ˙W < 0, ˙S = 0. So the trajectory instantly exists
region 5 and reaches region 6.
• Region 6:
W < W ∗, S < ¯S(W), then ˙W < 0, ˙S > 0. Thus, the trajectory can only reach
region 7 if it leaves region 6.
Since ¯S(W) is continuous and ¯S(W ∗) = S∗, for ε−∈(0, ε), there exists a small δ′
ε−> 0
such that for W ∈(W ∗−δ′
ε−, W ∗), | ¯S(W) −S∗| < ε−. For W ∈(W ∗−min{δ′
ε−, ε}, W ∗), if
0 > S −S∗> −ε, then the trajectory converges because of local stability. Otherwise, without
entering the local stability region, for these W values, ˙W = µβ1β2
S−¯S(W)
W
< −µβ1β2 ε−ε−
W ∗. So
the trajectory will go below W ∗−min{δ′
ε−, ε} within ﬁnite time.
For W < W ∗−min{δ′
ε−, ε},
(B.19)
˙Sδ = ˙S −¯S′(W) · ˙W > Λ1⊤χ(W) −Λ1⊤χ(W ∗),
W < W ∗−min{δ′
ε−, ε}.
Since 1⊤χ(W) is strictly decreasing and W is bounded away from W ∗, Sδ will increase to 0,
i.e., the trajectory will reach region 7, within ﬁnite time.
• Region 7:
W < W ∗, S = ¯S(W), then ˙W = 0, ˙S > 0. So the trajectory instantly exists
region 7 and reaches region 8.
• Region 8:
W < W ∗, S > ¯S(W), then
˙W > 0, ˙S > 0. The trajectory can only reach
regions 1, 7, or 9 if it leaves region 8.
For W ∈(W ∗−min{δ′
ε−, ε}), if −ε−< S −S∗< ε, then the trajectory converges because of
local stability. Otherwise for these W values, ˙W = µβ1β2
S−¯S(W)
W
> µβ1β2
ε
W ∗. The trajectory
will exceed W ∗within ﬁnite time.
56

For W < W ∗−min{δ′
ε−, ε},
(B.20)
˙S = Λ1⊤χ(W) −Λ1⊤χ(W ∗),
W < W ∗−min{δ′
ε−, ε}.
Since 1⊤χ(W) is strictly decreasing, W is bounded away from W ∗, and S is bounded above
by the line S =
1
β2 W ∗, the trajectory will leave this region within ﬁnite time.
• Region 9:
If (W(t), S(t)) is in region 9, then the trajectory has already converged.
■
The ﬁnal step is to show that between two successive times when the trajectory returns to
region 1, the S coordinate gets closer to the equilibrium value S∗. Furthermore, the step size is
bounded away from zero as long as the trajectory does not enter the local stability region.
Lemma 5 (Guaranteed Decay). There exists ϕ > 0, such that for any (W(0), S(0)) ∈W+ T R2
+
T C T B,
If t1 > 0 is a time with (W(t1), S(t1)) ∈W+/Wlocal, then S(0) −S(t1) > ϕ.
Proof. If (W(t1), S(t1)) ∈W+/Wlocal, the trajectory has cycled back to region 1 without entering
the local stability region. Along its path, trajectory will ﬁrst reaches the lower half of the vertical
line W = W ∗, i.e., region 5, and then return to region 1. We denote the time that the trajectory
hits region 5 as t5 ≜inf{s > t : W = W ∗, S < ¯S(W)}.
The idea of the proof is to ﬁrst show that the trajectory gets closer to the equilibrium when
it reaches region 5, i.e., (S(0) −S∗) −(S∗−S(t5)) > ϕr for some ϕr > 0; and then make an
analogous claim about the other half of the journey; and thus prove that the trajectory, when
keeping returning to region 1, always moves closer to the equilibrium with a positive step size.
Denote t3 ≜inf{s > t : S = ¯S(W)}, i.e., the time that the trajectory reaches region 3. For
any W ∈[0, W(t3)], since W is ﬁrst strictly increasing in region 2 and then strictly decreasing in
region 4, it should be passed by the trajectory twice, once in region 2 and once in region 4. We
denote
(B.21)
t4(W(τ)) ≜inf{s > t3 : W(s) = W(t)},
τ ∈[0, t3].
Since W(τ) = W(t4(W(τ))),
(B.22)
˙W(τ) = ˙W(t4(W(τ))) · t′
4(W(τ)) · ˙W(τ),
τ ∈[0, t3].
57

(B.23)
t′
4(W(τ)) =
1
˙Wt4(W(τ))
,
τ ∈[0, t3).
We deﬁne the following function,
(B.24)
F(τ) ≜S(τ) + S(t4(W(τ))) −2 ¯S(W)(τ),
τ ∈[0, t3].
We are about to show for any τ ∈(0, t3), there exists a time ν ∈[τ, t3) such that F(ν) > 0, i.e., there
exists arbitrarily close point to (W(t3), S(t3)) such that the trajectory is closer to line S = ¯S(W)
in region 4 than in region 2. By contradiction, for any τ ∈(0, t3), if F(ν) ≤0, ∀ν ∈[τ, t3), then,
(B.25)
˙F(ν) = ˙S(ν) + ˙S(t4(Wν)) · t′
4(W(ν)) · ˙W(ν) −2 ¯S′(W(ν)) · ˙W(ν)
= ˙S(W(ν)) + ˙S(W(ν)) ·
1
˙W(t4(Wν)) · ˙W(ν) −2 ¯S′(W(ν)) · ˙W(ν)
= ˙S(Wτ) · ˙Wτ ·
 
Wτ
µβ1β2(Sτ −¯S(Wτ)) +
Wτ
µβ1β2(St4(Wτ) −¯S(Wτ))
!
−¯S′(Wτ) · ˙Wτ
=
˙S(W(ν)) · ˙W(ν) · W(ν)
µβ1β2
·
F(ν)
(S(ν) −¯S(W(ν))) · (S(t4(W(ν))) −¯S(W(ν)))
−¯S′(W(ν)) · ˙W(ν) < 0.
Then,
(B.26)
F(t3) −F(τ) =
Z t3
τ
˙F(ν)dν < 0,
which contradicts with the fact that F(t3) = 0 and F(τ) ≤0.
Now we are about to show (S(0) −S∗) −(S∗−S(t5)) > 0, i.e., F(0) > 0. By contradiction, if
F(0) ≤0, and choose τ as a point that is close to (W(t3), S(t3)) with F(τ) > 0. By continuity of
F(·), it has to be zero at some points between region 3 and region 5. Denote tequal ≜sup{0 < s <
τ : W(s) = W(t4(W(s))} as the closest to (W(τ), S(τ)) among such points. At tequal, F(tequal) = 0
and
(B.27)
˙F(tequal) = −¯S′(W(tequal)) · ˙W(tequal) < 0
so there has to be some time between tequal and τ such that the two distances equate, which
contradicts with the fact that tequal is the closest to (W(τ), S(τ)) among such points. In fact, with
such argument we can make a stronger claim: F(τ) > 0 for all τ ∈[0, t3).
58

We still need to show that not only F(0) > 0, but also there exists a ϕr > 0 such that F(0) > ϕr
as long as the trajectory does not enter the local stability region, i.e., either |W(t) −W ∗| > ε or
|S(t) −¯S(W(t))| > ε for any (W(t), S(t)).
Recall from equation (B.25) that
(B.28)
˙F(τ) =
˙S(τ) · ˙W(τ) · W(τ)
µβ1β2
·
F(τ)
(S(τ) −¯S(W(τ))) · (S(t4(W(τ))) −¯S(W(τ)))
−¯S′(W(τ)) · ˙W(τ).
Deﬁne
(B.29)
G(τ) ≜
˙S(τ) · ˙W(τ) · W(τ)
µβ1β2(S(τ) −¯S(W(τ))) · (S(t4(W(τ))) −¯S(W(τ))),
τ ∈[0, t3].
Then,
(B.30)
˙F(τ) = G(τ) · F(τ) −¯S′(W(τ)) · ˙W(τ).
Note that G(0) = 0, and because of continuity of G(·), for a small εG such that
(B.31)
0 < εG < β2ζ(ε −ε−)
W ∗(W ∗+ ε) −β2∆
W ∗
where 0 < ∆< ζ(ε−ε−)
W ∗+ε , there exists tG > 0 such that for t ∈[0, tG), |G(t)| < εG.
Recall that for W ∈[W ∗, W ∗+ min{δε, ε}), ˙W > µβ1β2(ε−ε−)
W ∗+ε
. At the same time, the starting
position in region 1 satisﬁes S(0) ≤W ∗/β2. S(τ) ≤S(0) ≤W ∗/β2 for all τ ∈[0, t1], because
the trajectory ﬁrst decreases until it reaches region 5 and then increases to return to region 1 at a
lower level. Therefore, we also have ˙W < µβ1β2(W ∗/β2+ε−)
W ∗
. Then for time τ ∈[0, (W ∗+min{δ,ε})W ∗
µβ1β2(W ∗/β2+ε−)),
W ∈[W ∗, W ∗+ min{δ, ε}).
F(τ) < S(τ) ≤W ∗/β2 is bounded.
So is ¯S′(W(τ)) >
1
µβ1β2

µ(β1 + β2) −Λβ⊤χ(W)

≥
ζ/µβ1β2.
For τ ∈[0, min{tG, (W ∗+min{δ,ε})W ∗
µβ1β2(W ∗/β2+ε−)}),
(B.32)
˙F(τ) < εGF(τ) −
ζ∗
µβ1β2
µβ1β2(ε −ε−)
W ∗+ ε
<
 
β2ζ(ε −ε−)
W ∗(W ∗+ ε) −β2∆
W ∗
!
· W ∗
β2
−ζ(ε −ε−)
W ∗+ ε
= −∆.
59

Therefore,
(B.33)
F(0) > F(0) −F

min

tG, (W ∗+ min{δ, ε})W ∗
µβ1β2ε

> ∆· min

tG, (W ∗+ min{δ, ε})W ∗
µβ1β2ε

.
We can make analogous claims on (S∗−S(t5)) −(S(t1) −S∗), i.e., on the other half of the
trajectory from region 5 back to region 1, and thus prove that in each cycle the trajectory gets
closer to the equilibrium with a positive step size as long as it does not enter the local stability
region and therefore has to converge.
■
C.
Auxiliary empirical results
% of Variance Explained
% of Variance Explained
One Factor
Two Factors
One Factor
Two Factors
Alcoa
62%
77%
JPMorgan
68%
82%
American Express
68%
80%
Kraft
74%
84%
Boeing
52%
66%
Coca-Cola
71%
82%
Bank of America
73%
84%
McDonalds
64%
76%
Caterpillar
31%
51%
3M
31%
51%
Cisco
76%
87%
Merck
76%
86%
Chevron
38%
59%
Microsoft
74%
90%
DuPont
59%
74%
Pﬁzer
76%
84%
Disney
74%
83%
Procter & Gamble
72%
81%
General Electric
80%
91%
AT&T
69%
81%
Home Depot
85%
92%
Travelers
75%
85%
Hewlett-Packard
71%
84%
United Tech
39%
55%
IBM
27%
53%
Verizon
76%
87%
Intel
74%
86%
Wal-Mart
77%
85%
Johnson & Johnson
71%
82%
Exxon Mobil
54%
69%
Table 17: Results of PCA for queue lengths trajectories: how much variance in the data can the ﬁrst
two principle components explain.
60
