 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947 
1 
 
 
EXECUTION OF PAIRS TRADING STRATEGY: SOME PROPOSITIONS# 
 
 
TAMAL DATTA CHAUDHURI* AND PRIYAM SINGH**  
 
 
 
JULY 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
* Principal, Calcutta Business School, Diamond Harbour Road, Bishnupur – 743503, 24 
Paraganas (South). Email id-tamalc@calcuttabusinessschool.org, tamal5302@yahoo.com. 
Mobile No. 9831054204. 
 
** Assistant Manager, Retail Lending Credit, Housing Development Finance Corporation Ltd, 
Brooke House, 2nd Floor, 9, Shakespeare Sarani, Kolkata - 700071, and PGDM, Calcutta 
Business School, Diamond Harbour Road, Bishnupur – 743503, 24 Paraganas (South).  
E mail id - Itsmeprim@gmail.com.  Mobile No. 9681637281. 
 
(All correspondence should be made with Itsmeprim@gmail.com) 
 
# The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of Calcutta 
Business School or HDFC Ltd. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Stock prices are subject to both systematic risk and unsystematic risk. While unsystematic risk 
can be reduced to some extent by portfolio diversification, systematic risk is external to a firm 
and in a sense reflects market sentiment and the existing macroeconomic condition. In this paper 
we ask the question, is there some way in which savers/traders could control this latter risk and 
still expect reasonable returns from the market? The answer lies in Pairs Trading which involves 
trading the ratio of prices of two stocks which belong to the same sector and whose prices are 
highly correlated. Ideally, the ratio of the price of the two such stocks should be steady. 
However, given the inherent randomness of stock price movements, this ratio tends to fluctuate. 
The fundamental basis of Pairs Trading is that although there would be fluctuations in the ratio 
of the prices, this ratio would be mean reverting. Thus if the ratio rises the trading strategy would 
be to short the faster moving stock and long the slower moving stock. This paper is written from 
the trading point of view. It differs from the existing literature as it provides a framework for a 
trader to profit in the short run by using technical analysis. The three technical indicators that we 
use in our study are Momentum, Bollinger Band and Moving Average Convergence Divergence 
(MACD).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947 
3 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
Stock prices are subject to both systematic risk and unsystematic risk. While unsystematic risk 
can be reduced to some extent by portfolio diversification, systematic risk is external to a firm 
and in a sense reflects market sentiment and the existing macroeconomic condition. In this paper 
we ask the question, is there some way in which savers/traders could control this latter risk and 
still expect reasonable return from the market? The answer lies in Pairs Trading which involves 
taking the ratio of prices of two stocks which belong to the same sector and whose prices are 
highly correlated. Ideally, the ratio of the price of the two such stocks should be steady. 
However, given the inherent randomness of stock price movements, this ratio tends to fluctuate. 
The fundamental basis of Pair Trading is that although there would be fluctuations in the ratio of 
the prices, this ratio would be mean reverting. Thus if the ratio rises, it is expected that it would 
fall and if the ratio falls, then it is expected to rise. If the ratio rises, it implies that price of one 
stock is rising at a faster rate than the other one, in spite of the fact that they are from the same 
sector and are having highly correlated prices. The trading strategy in this case is to short the 
faster moving stock and long the slower moving stock. The expectation is that the stock, whose 
price is rising faster, will fall, and the stock whose price is not rising that fast, will continue to 
rise. Thus it is expected that there will be profit on both legs of the transaction. Similarly, if the 
ratio falls, then we long the faster falling one and short the slower falling one. Given that the 
strategy involves stocks that belong to the same sector, the ratio controls for systematic risk and 
consequently opens up opportunities for arbitrage.  
This paper is written from the trading point of view. It differs from the existing literature as it 
provides a framework for a trader to profit in the short run by using technical analysis. Since the 
trade has two legs, a long position and a short position, the short run time span also helps in 
minimizing transaction costs. As we are using technical analysis, we are not going for long run 
forecasting.  
The ratio of two share prices can rise or fall depending on the relative movement of the 
numerator and the denominator. Table 1 shows the various possibilities. 
  
    Table 1 
The ratio of 
prices rises 
This can happen when  
 
Numerator rises, Denominator falls 
 
Numerator rises at a faster rate than the Denominator  
 
Denominator falls at a faster rate than the Numerator  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

4 
 
The ratio of 
prices falls 
This can happen when 
 
Denominator rises, Numerator falls 
 
 
 
Denominator falls at a slower rate  than the Numerator  
 
Denominator rises at a faster rate than the Numerator 
 
Note that the movement in the price ratio not only depends on the absolute rises and falls in the 
two prices, but also on their rate of change. This is why we introduce technical analysis in pair 
trading.   
 
2. OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY 
The paper proposes a framework for pairs trading using technical analysis of share prices. Our 
focus is on pair trading between stocks from the same sector. The premise is that sectoral 
perception would be identical for both the stocks and they would be influenced in an identical 
fashion by the external environment. For example, given their business models, both TCS and 
Infosys would be open to exchange rate fluctuations and the market would factor that in. The 
absolute level of prices would be different for the two companies, depending on their 
fundamentals, but the relative valuation should be stable.  If the value of the ratio of the two 
prices increases or decreases, it would give rise to an opportunity for arbitrage where opposite 
trading positions of buy and sell would be taken for the two shares. Due to arbitrage by traders, 
market prices would change and the value of the pair would revert back to its previous stable 
position. Profits would be booked in the process. This has been denoted as the mean reverting 
property of a pair of prices.  
The plan of the paper is as follows. Technical indicators that we will use in the study are 
described in Section 3. A literature review is presented in Section 4. The methodology and some 
propositions on execution of pair trading are examined in Section 5 and Section 6 concludes the 
paper. 
 
3. METHODOLOGY 
This section focuses on three technical indicators that we will use in our study. They are 
Momentum, Bollinger Band and Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD). Our belief 
is that pair trading is a short term arbitrage strategy based on a mean reversal property and these 
technical indicators will be helpful in identifying arbitrage opportunities.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

5 
 
A brief description of the three indicators is in order. The Momentum indicator measures the 
amount that a security’s price has changed over a given time span. It may be defined as the ratio 
of today’s price compared to the price x-periods ago, i.e. (Close/close x-time periods ago)*100. 
It can also be defined as a percentage change in prices. Figure 1 shows a typical Momentum 
diagram. 
Figure 1: Momentum 
 
Source: Metastock 
The lower window gives the actual movement in prices of a stock over a period of time and the 
upper window gives the Momentum. It shows the rate of increase in prices. Observe that the 
value of Momentum fluctuates and this property we will use later in our analysis. Empirically, 
prices cannot keep increasing at an increasing rate, and after a short run, it loses steam. As a 
matter of fact, absolute level of prices also does not keep increasing continuously. There are 
short term and long term cycles. Looking at numerous charts on momentum for various stocks, 
an additional insight is that if the momentum of a stock is on the rise, the actual stock price rises 
for a few days and then falls. Or in other words, if a stock price is rising and the momentum is 
also on the rise, then price reversal takes a few days’ time, other things remaining the same. 
Same is the case when the stock price is falling and momentum is rising. If on the other hand, 
stock prices are rising, but momentum is falling, then price reversal will happen shortly.  
Bollinger Band is constructed as an envelope around a 20 day moving average of the actual 
price; the upper band being +2*standard deviations away from the moving average and the lower 
band being -2*standard deviations away. Since the spacing between the bands is based on the 
standard deviation, the bands widen when the security becomes more volatile. They band 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

6 
 
contracts when the security becomes less volatile. A study of charts on Bollinger Bands has led 
us to make the following observations. 
 a. 
When the actual price hugs the upper band, prices fall after that, and when it hugs the 
lower bound, it is time for prices to rise; 
b. 
When the band narrows along a trend, it is time for a reversal; a narrowing of the band 
implies consolidation and reversal; 
c. 
When the actual prices move outside the band, it implies that the trend will continue. 
d.  
The trend of the band is also important to take into consideration for price reversal. 
Figure 2 gives an example of a Bollinger Band of a stock and the above four observations.   
Figure 2: Bollinger Band  
 
Source: Metastock 
 
MACD is an oscillator and is calculated by subtracting the value of a 26 day exponential moving 
average from a 12 day exponential moving average. A 9 day exponential moving average of the 
above difference (trigger line) is imposed on top of the MACD line. If the MACD line intersects 
the trigger line from above then it is a sell signal and if it intersects from below then it is a buy 
signal. We also have to note whether the intersection is taking place below or above the zero 
line. If MACD falls below zero then the stock is oversold. If MACD rises above zero, then the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

7 
 
stock is overbought. We then have to work out our buy sell decisions. One should be careful in 
buying in an overbought situation and selling in an oversold situation.  
Figure 3: MACD 
 
Source: Metastock 
In this paper, our demonstration of pair trading will rely fully on the above three technical 
indicators along with actual price movement. For our analysis we will consider the following 
pair of India companies listed in both the Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock 
Exchange: 
i. Punjab National Bank and Bank of Baroda 
ii. Cipla Limited and Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories 
iii. Hero Motocorp and Bajaj Auto 
iv. Infosys Ltd. and TCS 
 
4. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Insights on pairs trading can be found in Gatev et al. (2006) and in books by Vidyamurthy (2004) 
and Whistler (2004). Classical study of pair trading strategy involving stocks of Royal Dutch and 
Shell was discussed by Reverre (2001). Mean reverting Gaussian Markov chain model for the 
spread which is observed in Gaussian noise was proposed as an analytical model for pair trading 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

8 
 
strategy by Elliotty et al. (2005). Unlike the traditional pair trading strategy, Bock and Mestel 
(2008) implemented Markov regime switching approach in statistical arbitrage trading rule and 
found positive returns with DJ STXX 600 universe.   
In the literature mentioned above, the three main methods for choice of pairs discussed are the 
distance method, the cointegration method and the stochastic spread method. The distance 
method is used in Gatev et al (2006) and Nath (2003) for empirical testing whereas the 
cointegration method is detailed in Vidyamurthy (2004). The stochastic spread approach has 
been proposed by Elliotty et al (2005). Under the distance method, the co-movement in a pair is 
measured by what is known as the distance, or the sum of squared differences between two 
normalized price series. Trading is triggered when the distance reaches a certain threshold, as 
determined during a formation period. In Gatev et al (2006), the pairs are selected by choosing, 
for each stock, a matching partner that minimizes the distance. The trading trigger is two 
historical standard deviations as estimated during the formation period. Nath (2003) keeps a 
record of distances for each pair in the universe, in an empirical distribution format, so that each 
time an observed distance crosses a trigger of fifth percentile, a trade is entered for that pair. Risk 
control is instigated by limiting a trading period at the end of which positions have to be closed 
out regardless of outcomes. In overall, the distance approach purely exploits the statistical 
relationship of a pair, at a price level.  
The cointegration approach outlined in Vidyamurthy (2004) is an attempt to parameterize pairs 
trading, by exploring the possibility of cointegration (Engle and Granger, 1987). Cointegration is 
the phenomenon that two time series that are both integrated of order 1can be linearly combined 
to produce a single time series that is integrated of order 0. As the combined time series is 
stationary, this is desirable from the forecasting perspective. The paper observes that as the 
logarithm of two stock prices are often assumed to follow a random walk, or be non-stationary, 
there is a good chance that they will be co-integrated. If that is the case, cointegration results can 
be used to determine how far the spread is away from its equilibrium so that long/short positions 
can be entered to profit from the mispricing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

9 
 
5. METHODOLOGY, ANALYSIS and STRATEGY 
The definitions given in Table 2 will be used in the analysis to follow. 
Table 2 
Momentum of 
Numerator (N) 
Momentum 
Rising (R) 
NR 
Momentum 
Falling (F) 
NF 
Momentum 
Constant (C) 
NC 
Momentum of 
Denominator (D) 
Momentum 
Rising (R) 
DR 
Momentum 
Falling (F) 
DF 
Momentum 
Constant (C) 
DC 
 
The momentum positions defined in Table 2, combined with the alternatives given in Table 1, 
will determine profitability of trading position. The entry exit points will be given by the other 
technical indicators. As an example, let us consider pair trading in Cipla Limited and Dr. 
Reddy’s Laboratories (DRL). The analysis will be done in terms of Figure 4 where the pair price 
has price of shares of DRL in the numerator and the price of shares of Cipla in the denominator.  
In the figure, the bottom most panel gives the movement in prices of the two shares. The second 
panel gives the movement in momentum of the individual stocks. The third panel plots the pair 
value of the two prices along with its Bollinger Band. The top most panel gives the MACD of 
the pair of prices.  
A few observations are in order.  
1. The third panel from the bottom shows the mean reversal pattern of the pair of prices; 
2. When the pair touches the upper (lower) band of the Bollinger Band, the pair value falls 
(rises); 
3. The band narrows or widens depending on the volatility of the pairs; 
4. A sudden upward movement in the pair, causes the band to widen; 
5. As a consequence, MACD jumps to the overbought zone; 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

10 
 
Figure 4: Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories and Cipla Ltd. Stock Prices, Pair of Prices, 
Momentum, MACD and Bollinger Band 
 
 
 
 
Source: Metastock and Authors’ own construction 
 
In the time zone A, the price of DRL is rising and that of Cipla is falling. This has caused the 
pair value to jump thus leading to sudden widening of the Bollinger Band and MACD rising to 
the overbought zone. This movement in prices has led the momentum of Cipla to fall 
drastically and that of DRL to be stable. This is an ideal situation to profit from the pair. The 
Bollinger Band says that the pair value will fall and MACD is also giving sell signal. So we 
short DRL and long Cipla. Observe that we make a profit as subsequently prices of shares of 
DRL has fallen and that of Cipla has gone up. So we observe the movements in the band and 
profit outside the band. Here we make profit on both legs. The basic entry or exit is suggested 
by Bollinger Band and MACD. We feel that the success of the strategy lies in tracking the 
momentum.  
DRL 
CIPLA 
A 
B 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

11 
 
If we turn to time zone B, we observe the opposite movements to time zone A. Here the pair 
value is falling and moving towards the lower band of the Bollinger Band. Although the actual 
prices of the two shares are rising, Cipla is rising at a faster rate than DRL. This is shown by 
momentum of Cipla rising and that of DRL falling. So short Cipla and long DRL. The moment 
we move to the right of time zone B where the ratio has bounced back from the lower band of 
the Bollinger Band, reverse the strategy.  
The momentum position to generate profit is summarized in Table 3. 
Table 3 
Strategy when  
ratio of prices rises 
This can happen when  
Momentum position to generate 
profit 
Short N 
Long D 
Numerator rises, Denominator falls 
NR DF    - profit from momentum 
reversal – may take a few days 
Short N 
Long D 
Numerator rises at a faster rate than 
the Denominator rise 
NF DR    - profit as momentum 
reversal has taken place – profit 
booking immediate 
Short N 
Long D 
Denominator falls at a faster rate than 
the numerator fall 
NR DF     - profit from momentum 
reversal – may take a few days 
 
 
 
The ratio of prices 
falls 
This can happen when 
 
Long N 
Short D 
Denominator rises, Numerator falls 
NF DR      - profit from 
momentum reversal – may take a 
few days 
Long N 
Short D 
Denominator falls at a slower rate  
than the Numerator fall 
NR DF       - profit as momentum 
reversal has taken place – profit 
booking immediate 
Long N 
Short D 
Denominator rises at a faster rate 
than the Numerator rise 
NR DF        - profit from 
momentum reversal – may take a 
few days 
Source: Authors’ own construction 
We thus have the following propositions. 
Proposition 1 
i. When the ratio of stock prices of two companies from the same sector are rising, and 
ii. If stock prices of both the companies are rising, and  
iii. If numerator stock price is rising faster than the denominator stock price given by the 
difference in momentum, and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

12 
 
iv.  If the momentum of the faster one is rising, and the slower one is falling;  
Then a pair trade of Short N and long D can be executed. 
Proposition 2 
i. When the ratio of stock prices of two companies from the same sector are falling, and 
ii. If stock prices of both the companies are falling, and  
iii. If the numerator stock price is falling faster than the denominator stock price given by the 
difference in momentum, and 
iv. If the momentum of faster one is falling, and the other is rising; 
then a pair trade of Long N and Short D can be executed. 
Proposition 3 
i. When the ratio of stock prices of two companies from the same sector are falling, and 
ii. If numerator stock price is falling and denominator stock price is rising, and 
iii. If the momentum of numerator stock price is falling, and the momentum of the 
denominator stock price is rising, and  
then a pair trade of Long N and Short D can be executed. 
Proposition 4 
i. 
When the ratio of stock prices of two companies from the same sector are rising, and 
ii. 
If numerator stock price is rising and denominator stock price is falling, and 
iii. 
If the momentum of numerator stock price is rising, and the momentum of the 
denominator stock price is falling;  
then a pair trade of Short N and Long D can be executed. 
Proposition 5 
i. 
When the ratio of stock prices of two companies from the same sector are rising, 
and 
ii. 
If both the individual stock prices are both falling, and  
iii. 
If the denominator stock price is falling faster than the numerator stock price, and 
iv. 
If the momentum of numerator stock price is rising, and the momentum of the 
denominator stock price is falling; 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

13 
 
then a pair trade of Short N and Long D can be executed.  
Proposition 6 
i. 
When the ratio of stock prices of two companies from the same sector are falling, 
and 
ii. 
If both the individual stock prices are both rising, and  
iii. 
If the denominator stock price is rising faster than the numerator stock price, and 
iv. 
If the momentum of numerator stock price is falling, and the momentum of the 
denominator stock price is rising; 
then a pair trade of long N and Short D can be executed.  
Based on the analysis provided above, an interested reader can work out profit making 
opportunities from Figures 5, 6 and 7 where all the technical indicators are shown for three 
different sets of companies.  
6. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Pairs trading is an arbitrage strategy for profit making by taking opposite positions (buy/sell) in 
two financial assets. In the case of shares of companies, it works when the shares chosen are of 
companies from the same sector. Given that the systematic risk faced by both companies from 
the same sector would be identical, the strategy hinges on deviation of the ratio of prices from a 
mean and reversal to the mean. The purpose of this paper was to integrate technical analysis with 
pair trading and show that technical indicators do help in profit making from pair trade. It 
showed that in some cases the trade could give immediate results and in some cases time would 
be required. We have to keep in mind that as this is an arbitrage strategy, keeping the position 
open for a long time would not yield results and would be expensive.  
Pairs trades can be performed between two companies under the same ownership and also 
between spot and futures. Our future research will explore the possibilities along these lines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

14 
 
References: 
 
1. Bock, M. and Mestel, R. (2008), A regime-switching relative value arbitrage rule, 
University of Graz, Institute of Banking and Finance, (Working Paper) 
 
2. Gatev, Evan, William N. Goetzmann, K. Geert Rouwenhorst (2006), Pairs Trading: 
Performance of a Relative Value Arbitrage Rule, Yale School of Management, 
International Center for Finance, Yale ICF Working Paper No. 0803. 
 
3. Gatev, E. (2006), Pairs trading: Performance of a relative value arbitrage rule. Retrieved 
from http://rfs.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2005/12/31/rfs.hhj020.full.pdf. 
 
4. Nath, Purnendu, (2003), High Frequency Pairs Trading with U.S. Treasury Securities: 
Risks and Rewards for Hedge Funds, Working Paper, London Business School. 
 
5. Reverre, S. (2001), The Complete Arbitrage Desk-book, Chapter 10, 2001 (McGraw Hill: 
New York). 
 
6. Elliotty, Robert J., John Van Der Hoekz and William P. Malcolm, (2005), Pairs trading, 
Quantitative Finance, Vol. 5, No. 3, 271–276  
 
7. Vidyamurthy, G. (2004), Pairs trading - quantitative methods and analysis. New Jersey: 
John Wiley. 
 
8. Whistler, M., (2004), Trading Pairs—Capturing Profits and Hedging Risk with Statistical 
Arbitrage Strategies, Wiley, New York. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

15 
 
Figure 5: Bank of Baroda and Punjab National Bank Stock Prices, Pair of Prices, 
Momentum, MACD and Bollinger Band 
 
 
 
Source: Metastock and Authors’ own construction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOB 
PNB 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

16 
 
Figure 6: Hero Motocorp and Bajaj Auto Stock Prices, Pair of Prices, Momentum, MACD 
and Bollinger Band 
 
 
 
 
Source: Metastock and Authors’ own construction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HERO 
BAJAJ 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947

17 
 
Figure 7: Infosys Ltd. and TCS Stock Prices, Pair of Prices, Momentum, MACD and 
Bollinger Band 
 
 
 
 
Source: Metastock and Authors’ own construction 
 
 
 
 
INFOSYS 
TCS 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2630947
