 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903 
 
REITs and Market Microstructure:  
A Comprehensive Analysis of Market Quality 
 
 
 
 
Pawan Jain 
College of Business 
University of Wyoming 
Laramie, WY-82071 
Phone: 307-220-1900 
Fax: (307) 766-5090 
Email: pjain@uwyo.edu 
 
 
Mark Sunderman* 
Professor and Morris Fogelman Real Estate Chair of Excellence 
Department of Finance, Insurance and Real Estate 
Fogelman College of Business and Economics, University of Memphis 
Memphis, TN 38152-3120 
Phone: (901) 678-5142 
Fax:  (901) 678-1714 
msndrman@memphis.edu 
 
 
K. Janean Westby-Gibson 
Department of Finance, Insurance and Real Estate 
Fogelman College of Business and Economics, University of Memphis 
Memphis, TN 38152-3120 
Janean2@aol.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accepted for publication in Journal of Real Estate Research   
 
 
*Corresponding Author. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903 
1 
 
REITs and Market Microstructure: 
A Comprehensive Analysis of Market Quality 
 
Abstract 
This study analyzes the market quality differences, in terms of liquidity and volatility, between 
real estate investment trusts (REITs) and non-REIT common stocks. The 2008 financial crisis has 
significantly influenced the market quality for REITs. Our findings reveal intraday patterns 
indicating a lower liquidity, higher volatility, and greater price impact for REITs than non-REITs 
for the pre-crisis period. These relationships reverse during the post-crisis period with REITs 
becoming more liquid, less volatile, and cheaper to trade than non-REITs. Further, we document 
that post-crisis trading interest in REITs has increased significantly as reflected by increased 
volume, number of trades, and number of quotes.  
JEL classification: G12; G14; R33 
Keywords: REITs, Liquidity, Volatility, Intra-day, GARCH, Financial Crisis 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903 
2 
 
REITs and Market Microstructure: 
A Comprehensive Analysis of Market Quality 
 
1.  Introduction 
The ability of real estate investment trusts (REITs), as real estate investments, to be traded 
in the secondary market as common stocks has intrigued researchers since the early 1990s. The 
fact that REITs are traded on the secondary markets makes them more liquid than traditional real 
estate investments. However, REITs may not necessarily be perfect substitutes for conventional 
equity due to their unique institutional features. Specifically, the dividend distribution requirement 
and greater level of institutional ownership for REITs limits managerial discretion (Jensen 1986) 
and improves corporate governance (Chung, Fung, and Hung, 2012). 1,2 This implies a lower level 
of asymmetric information and, therefore, different risk characteristics as compared to non-REIT 
common stocks. These different characteristics make REITs more attractive to general investors 
due to their potential for adding diversification benefits to stock portfolios (Huang and Zhong, 
2013; Chun, Sa-Aadu, and Shilling, 2004). However, any diversification benefits must be weighed 
against market microstructure differences, such as stock market liquidity and price volatility, 
which may translate into higher trading costs (Cannon and Cole, 2011; Bertin, Kofman, 
Michayluk, and Prather, 2005).3   
This paper investigates the impact of the 2008 financial crisis on REIT market quality. 
Hoffmann, Post, and Pennings (2013) argue that the 2008 financial crisis was one of the worst 
stock market crashes during the past several decades. The authors further document that individual 
investors were hit hard by the financial crisis which almost halved their portfolio values within a 
few months. Malmendier and Nagel (2011) document that this dramatic shock to investor wealth 
permanently shifted investors’ return expectations and risk tolerance. Case and Shiller (2003), 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

3 
 
Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2005), and Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) argue that if common 
stocks depreciate in value some speculators, either irrationally or rationally, extrapolate that stocks 
no longer represent an attractive investment opportunity and shift to  REITs. Prior research has 
also documented that REITs tend to have low risk, serve as an inflation hedging instrument, and 
have characteristics similar to defensive stocks. REITs are an attractive investment vehicle during 
highly volatile market conditions (Goetzmann and Ibbotson, 1990, Glascock, Michayluk, and 
Neuhauser, 2004, Jain, 2015, Cotter and Roll, 2015). Our hypothesis is that this flight to quality 
during the 2008 financial crisis results in higher trading volume and lower volatility due to price 
competition, and better REIT market quality as compared to non-REIT stocks.    
Using high frequency intraday data, our analyses confirm that REITs have lower pre-crisis 
period liquidity and substantially higher price volatility than non-REIT stocks as documented by 
earlier studies. However, we find that liquidity for REITs has improved significantly during the 
post-crisis period. Our results further show that, while the 2008 financial crisis dramatically 
increased price volatility for all common stocks, REITs were much less affected as compared to 
matching non-REIT stocks. We also document improved trading interest in REITs during the postcrisis period as reflected by increased volume, number of trades, and number of quotes. We find 
similar results for our intraday analyses. We show that our results are robust across different 
measures of market quality, REIT and non-REIT matching algorithms, and estimation methods. 
During the period of heightened volatility investors fleeing risky securities found the long-term 
diversification benefits of REITs more attractive, improving the overall market quality of REITs.4 
 
2. Literature Review 
2.1.  REIT Liquidity: Historical Trend  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

4 
 
The explosive growth in the REIT market in the 1990s led many researchers to test whether 
the REIT microstructure environment changed accordingly. The ability of REITs to trade in the 
stock market makes them more attractive to investors as compared to other forms of real estate 
investments. Asset-pricing literature posits that illiquidity carries a price (Amihud and Mendelson, 
1991, Brennan and Subrahmanyam, 1996) which can result in a less efficient risk-return trade-off 
for REITs assuming that REITs are, ceteris paribus, less liquid than other common stocks. If the 
influence of REIT liquidity levels on returns is significant enough, the average investor may not 
consider REITs as appropriate substitutes for common stocks. Bhasin, Cole and Kiely (1997) find 
a decline in REIT percentage bid–ask spreads during the 1990–1994 period. Below, Kiely and 
MacIntosh (1996) and Cole (1998) document improved REIT liquidity between 1992 and 1994 
and between 1991 and 1993, respectively.5  
Clayton and MacKinnon (2000) extend the literature by analyzing REIT liquidity for the 
period from 1993–1996. They find that self-advised, self-managed REITs exhibited liquidity 
declines during that period. More recently, Cannon and Cole (2011) analyze daily data for the 
period of 1988-2007. They find that REIT liquidity “improved during the early and mid-1990s, 
deteriorated during the late 1990s, and then improved dramatically during 2000–2006.”6 All of the 
above studies analyze the REIT liquidity during the pre-2008 financial crisis period.  
REITs’ dependence on external financing can curtail their ability to exploit profitable 
investment opportunities (Mooradian and Yang, 2001).  This constraint is likely to be more severe 
during market crises (Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi, 2011). At such times, capital providers 
may withdraw, forcing companies to liquidate their positions prematurely and leading to a 
deterioration of liquidity in the market. These liquidity dry-ups can occur simultaneously across 
asset types which forces investors to undertake other trades with greater expected risk-adjusted 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

5 
 
returns.7 On the other hand, Ooi, Wong, and Ong (2012) find that bank lines of credit insure REITs 
against credit rationing at the broad market level. Therefore, these possible liquidity dry-ups may 
not be as prominent in REITs.8  
We contribute to the REIT literature by analyzing the impact of the financial crisis on 
REITs’ stock market liquidity. Bhasin, Cole, and Kiely (1997), Ling and Naranjo (2003), and 
Clayton and MacKinnon (2002) argue that part of the increased investors’ interest in REITs in the 
last couple decades stemmed from desiring liquid access to the real estate asset class, especially 
during times of stock market downturns. Case and Shiller (2003), Case, Quigley, and Shiller 
(2005), and Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) argue that if stock markets depreciate in value, 
some speculators, either irrationally or rationally, extrapolate that stocks no longer represent an 
attractive investment opportunity and shift to  REITs. By examining REIT liquidity during and 
after the 2008 financial crisis, we empirically test the above theories. 
The literature tends to support that REITs have low risk, serve as an inflation hedging 
instrument, and have characteristics similar to defensive stocks which might make REITs an 
attractive investment vehicle in highly volatile market conditions (Goetzmann and Ibbotson, 1990; 
Glascock, Michayluk, and Neuhauser, 2004; Jain, 2015; Cotter and Roll, 2015). This flight to 
quality should result in higher trading volume for REITs, resulting in better liquidity. We analyze 
these arguments and test the following hypothesis: 
H1: REIT liquidity improved during the post-crisis period. 
2.2.  Are REITs less liquid than non-REIT common stocks? 
Another interesting area of research is the substitutability of REITs for non-REIT common 
stocks. The literature in this area has conflicting predictions. Nelling, Mahoney, Hildebrand and 
Goldstein (1995) document REIT liquidity to be similar to that of other common stocks.9 However, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

6 
 
Ghosh, Miles and Sirmans (1996) find that REITs may not be as liquid as comparably sized nonREIT stocks.10 Since these studies consider a period before 1995, their findings are questionable 
in the current period.11 Hence, comparing REIT and non-REIT common stock liquidity during the 
pre- and post-financial crisis periods can provide some interesting insights about the 
substitutability of these investment vehicles. Since REIT income is derived from real property 
earnings, REITs’ long term return characteristics must be identical to traditional real estate 
investments (Giliberto, 1990). Hence, we expect that during periods of extreme volatility and low 
interest rates, such as the recent financial crisis, investors would value the long term diversification 
benefits of REITs. Additionally, Jain (2015) argues that the 2008 financial crisis increased the 
information asymmetry in the stock market. Danielsen, Harrison, Van Ness, and Warr (2014) argue 
that the regulatory distribution requirements force REITs to frequently raise capital in the public 
markets, which makes REITs more transparent (having lower information asymmetry) as 
compared to non-REIT stocks. This reduction in information asymmetry should increase the 
attractiveness of REITs as an investment opportunity. As investors flee from opaque common 
stocks to REITs, liquidity for REITs in comparison to non-REITs should improve. We test the 
following hypothesis: 
H2: REITs have higher liquidity than non-REITs during the post-crisis period. 
2.3.  REIT Volatility  
Understanding the evolution of volatility is very important as volatility is not only a major 
determinant of options prices (Foucault 1999, Hasbrouck and Saar, 2002) but also plays an 
important role in execution strategies and investment decisions (Fleming, Kirby, and Ostdiek, 
2003). Despite its importance, not until recently has REIT idiosyncratic risk attracted the attention 
of real estate researchers. Ooi, Wang, and Webb (2009) posit that the tendency of real estate 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

7 
 
markets to be localized and segmented has led to wide acceptance of the notion that real estate 
assets and property-related stocks, such as REITs, may be more exposed to idiosyncratic risk than 
typical common stocks. They find that idiosyncratic risk is priced and dominates the market beta 
in explaining REIT returns. Sun and Yung (2009) support these findings. However, Chiang, Jiang, 
and Lee (2009) find a negative relation between REIT returns and idiosyncratic volatility.12 
The prior literature ignores the evolution of REIT volatility over time. We extend the 
literature by presenting a comprehensive analysis of REIT volatility during the real estate market 
peak, bubble burst, and subsequent financial crisis. We analyze the evolution of REIT volatility 
during these periods and extend this analysis by presenting intraday volatility patterns and 
document the changes induced by the financial crisis. Investors fleeing risky securities during the 
recent financial crisis would find REITs, and their relatively low risk and inflation hedging 
abilities, more attractive. Hence, we expect a lower volatility for REITs as compared to non-REIT 
common stocks during the recent financial crisis. We test the following hypothesis: 
H3: REITs have lower volatility than non-REITs during the post-crisis period. 
2.4.  Intraday patterns for REIT liquidity and volatility 
Finally, motivated by the literature on investment flows and optimal trading, we examine 
the intraday patterns for several market quality variables. Speed of trading has increased over the 
past decade and trades now happen within a few milliseconds (Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld, 
2011). Hence, an intraday analysis of liquidity and volatility can have significant implications for 
how investors choose to time their trades, to minimize trading costs or price impact. While there 
exists a rich literature analyzing the intraday patterns for various microstructure parameters (see 
McInish and Wood, 1992), we could only find one study analyzing intraday patterns for REITs 
(Bertin, Kofman, Michayluk, and Prather, 2005). These authors also compare the intraday patterns 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

8 
 
for REITs with matching non-REIT stocks. While they show that REITs have a well-defined Ushape pattern for percentage spreads, they do not find a well-specified intraday pattern for 
volatility.13 The authors further show that REITs have lower liquidity than non-REIT common 
stocks. However, these results are derived using the data from the 1996 period. As shown by Jain 
(2005), technological advancements have dramatically changed trading; therefore, the relevance 
of results based on the data from 1996 is questionable. Current stock market microstructure 
research typically excludes REITs from analyses of market quality due to their unique 
characteristics discussed above.14 Hence, the liquidity and volatility differences between REITs 
and common stocks warrant a more in-depth analysis. In addition, we argue that the 2008 financial 
crisis might have a significant impact on investors’ trading behavior and thus, the intraday patterns 
that define stock market quality. The identification of post-financial crisis intraday liquidity and 
volatility patterns of REITs can also provide guidance on the optimal timing of trades to minimize 
trading costs or price impact. 
3. Data and Measures of Liquidity and Volatility 
We obtain the ticker symbols and the market capitalization for all stocks that were actively 
traded from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database. We cross-reference the 
REITs with the January issue of each year (2005 through 2011) of National Association of Real 
Estate Investment Trusts’ (NAREIT’s) StockWatch. REITs not listed on StockWatch are deleted 
from the final sample. We also delete the stocks that are not traded in at least two consecutive 
years and stocks with no market capitalization available. Since mortgage REITs are different than 
both non-mortgage REITs and other common stocks, we remove these from our final sample.15 
The remaining REITs and non-REIT common stocks are matched based on the previous year-end 
market capitalization.16 The resulting sample contains 214 REITs and 1,093 matching non-REIT 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

9 
 
stocks over the entire sample period.  
We obtain the intraday data on stock prices, trading volume, trade prices, best bid and ask 
quotes and the respective volume supplied for every five-minutes of trading from the New York 
Stock Exchange (NYSE) Trades and Quotes (TAQ) database for all REITs and non-REIT 
matching stocks listed on the NYSE for the period from January 2005 to June 2011.17 
3.1.  Liquidity Measures 
In the words of Kyle (1985) ‘‘liquidity is a slippery and elusive concept, in part because it 
encompasses a number of transactional properties of markets, these include tightness, depth, and 
resiliency.’’ Kyle (1985) defines three components of bid-ask spread – tightness, depth and 
resiliency. Tightness is the distance between the bid and ask quotes. Depth, defined as the volume 
supplied by each order, basically represents how many shares an investor can trade at a given price 
without causing a change in price. Resiliency represents how quickly the market can return back 
to its original state after a large order. In simple terms, markets are liquid if a trader can trade 
quickly at a minimum cost of trading. 
Trading volume, most recently studied by Bertin, Kofman, Michayluk and Prather (2005), 
has been revealed as a significant activity-based measure of liquidity. However, in this paper, we 
base our analysis of volume on the number of trades, because Jones, Kaul and Lipson (1994) find 
that this is a better measure of information asymmetry. In addition, we also analyze the average 
trade size and trading volume. 
We estimate four different measures of time-lapse-weighted liquidity: quoted spread, 
relative spread, effective spread and relative effective spread; for each stock at the end of every 
five minutes of trading as follows: 
 𝑄𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑑 = ∑
∆𝑡𝑖(𝐴𝑠𝑘𝑖 – 𝐵𝑖𝑑𝑖)
𝑡
𝑖=1
∑
∆𝑡𝑖
𝑡
𝑖=1
                                                                       (1) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

10 
 
𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑= 𝑅𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑑=
∑
∆𝑡𝑖[(𝐴𝑠𝑘𝑖−𝐵𝑖𝑑𝑖)
(𝐴𝑠𝑘𝑖+ 𝐵𝑖𝑑𝑖
2
)
]
𝑡
𝑖=1
∑
∆𝑡𝑖
𝑡
𝑖=1
                                                                 (2) 
where ∆𝑡𝑖 is defined as the time lapse between quotes. 
While quoted spread, often called bid-ask spread, is the most widely used measure of 
liquidity; it is not without critics (Grossman and Miller, 1988 and Lee, Mucklow and Ready, 
1993).18 Relative spread, sometimes referred to as percentage spread, more accurately reflects the 
percentage cost of trading by scaling the size of the spread to the fundamental value of the stock, 
as reflected by the quote midpoint. Higher values for spreads indicate lower liquidity and vice 
versa. 
𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑= 𝐸𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑑= ∑
 𝑉𝑂𝐿𝑖 2|𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖−𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖|
𝑡
𝑖=1
∑
𝑉𝑂𝐿𝑖
𝑡
𝑖=1
                                          (3) 
𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑= 𝑅𝐸𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑑=
∑
𝑉𝑂𝐿𝑖[𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖
𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖
] 
𝑡
𝑖=1
∑
𝑉𝑂𝐿𝑖
𝑡
𝑖=1
                        (4) 
where VOLi is the trading volume, and Midpointi is defined as  
𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖= 𝐵𝑖𝑑−𝐴𝑠𝑘 𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 =
(𝐴𝑠𝑘𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖𝑑𝑖)
2
                                                                
Effective spread is the difference between the price at which a trader buys a stock and the 
fundamental value of the stock as reflected by the quote-midpoint (Smith and Whaley 1994). This 
measure quantifies the cost of an order by taking two measures into account; price movement and 
the market impact due to widening of the spread resulting from the size of the order itself. 
Therefore, effective spread can be considered an estimate of the trader’s actual execution cost and 
the gross revenue earned by the liquidity provider. Relative effective spread scales the effective 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

11 
 
spread by the quote midpoint, and hence, presents a better characterization of a stock’s liquidity 
provisions. Higher values for spreads indicate lower liquidity and vice versa. 
3.2.  Volatility Measures 
We calculate time-lapse-weighted price volatility for each stock at the end of every five 
minutes of trading as follows: 
𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦= 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑜𝑙   
= 𝑆𝑄𝑅𝑇 
{
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
∑
∆𝑡𝑖
[
 
 
 
 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖
2 −(
𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖
2
𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑖)
𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑖−1
]
 
 
 
 
𝑡
𝑖=1
∑
∆𝑡𝑖
𝑡
𝑖=1
}
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             (5)  
Time-lapse-weighted price volatility presents a more accurate assessment of price volatility 
as it captures the movement in stock prices by taking into account the number of trades and the 
time lapse between subsequent price movements.  
4. Results 
4.1.  Descriptive Statistics 
Exhibit 1 reports the descriptive statistics for the various market quality parameters for 
REITs and comparable non-REIT firms matched on total market capitalization. We report the 
means for the full sample period, the pre-crisis period from January 2005 to July 2008 and the 
post-crisis period from August 2008 to June 2011.19 All values presented are calculated by taking 
the time-lapse-adjusted averages for each five-minute period of trading and then across stocks. 
The last column (Post-Pre) presents the difference in means for REITs between the pre-crisis and 
post-crisis periods. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

12 
 
////////// Insert Exhibit 1 about Here ////////// 
The results, summarized in Columns (1) and (2) (full sample period), show that shares of 
REITs have about 5% lower trading volume (VOLUME) than shares of comparable non-REIT 
stocks. We also find that the REITs are traded less than their non-REIT counterparts as reflected 
by the lower number of trades (NTRDS). The combined effect of VOLUME and NTRDS reflect 
that the average trade size for REITs is significantly lower than non-REIT stocks. As already 
established, REITs are widely held by institutional investors. To reduce price impact, it appears 
that these sophisticated investors are slicing their larger orders into several smaller trades to get 
better execution quality, resulting in a lower average trade size and a larger number of trades. We 
also find that REITs have lower number of quotes (NQUOTES) as compared to non-REIT 
matching stocks.  
Columns (1) and (2) further report that REITs are more liquid than non-REIT stocks, as 
reflected by lower quoted spreads (QSPRD) and relative spreads (RSPRD). However, REITs also 
experience a higher price impact compared to matching non-REIT stocks as reflected by higher 
effective spreads (ESPRD) and relative effective spreads (RESPRD). Additionally, REITs are 
nearly 50% more volatile than matched non-REIT stocks over the full sample period.  
These results contradict the findings of Bertin, Kofman, Michayluk, and Prather (2005) 
that REITs have lower liquidity and trading volume as compared to non-REIT stocks. We test 
whether these contradictory results are due to the financial crisis of 2008 by dividing our sample 
into pre- and post-financial crisis periods. The results of this analysis are reported in Exhibit 1, 
Columns (3) through (6). We find that during the pre-crisis period (Columns (3) and (4)), REITs 
have 42% less VOLUME and nearly 29% less NTRDS as compared to non-REIT stocks. We also 
find that the NQUOTES for REITs are almost 35% less than those for non-REIT stocks. These 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

13 
 
results reflect the low level of trading interest in REITs during the pre-financial crisis period as 
compared to their non-REIT counterparts.  
Our pre-crisis liquidity measures, QSPRD and RSPRD, are significantly higher for REITs 
reflecting that the REITs have lower liquidity than the non-REIT stocks. Hence, our contradictory 
results (as compared to Bertin, Kofman, Michayluk, and Prather, 2005) are due to the financial 
crisis. We also find that pre-crisis period price impact for REITs is higher than the non-REIT 
stocks as reflected by higher ESPRD and RESPRD. REITs are also nearly 2.5 times more volatile 
than non-REIT stocks for every five minutes of trading.  
Columns (5) and (6) further show that the financial crisis has significantly impacted both 
trading activity and market quality for REITs and non-REIT stocks. We find that trading volume 
for REITs during the post-crisis period is nearly 3 times the trading volume during the pre-crisis 
period. We also find that the NTRDS for REITs has increased by almost 4 times while NQUOTES 
has increased by more than 3.5 times during the post-crisis period as compared to their pre-crisis 
level. Comparing the trading activity for REITs with non-REIT stocks during the post-crisis 
period, we find that VOLUME and NTRDS for REITs are much higher than those for non-REIT 
stocks.20 While the liquidity (QSPRD and RSPRD) has substantially declined for non-REIT stocks 
and slightly improved for REITs during the post-crisis period, REITS are almost 50% more liquid 
than non-REIT stocks during the post-crisis period. These findings support our hypotheses 1 
(REITs have higher liquidity during the post-crisis period) and 2 (REITs have higher liquidity than 
non-REITs during the post-crisis period). We also document that non-REIT stocks experienced a 
much higher increase in volatility as compared to REITs during the post-crisis period, making nonREIT stocks about 23% more volatile as compared to REITs, which is consistent with hypothesis 
3 (REITs have lower volatility than non-REITs during the post-crisis period). The last column in 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

14 
 
Exhibit 1 reports the statistical significance of the positive impact of financial crisis on REIT 
trading activity as measured by trading volume, number of trades, number of quotes, and market 
quality as measured by liquidity, price impact and volatility. The most striking finding is that, 
while the trading interest and market quality during the pre-crisis period is higher for non-REIT 
matching stocks; REITs have higher trading activity and better market quality during the postcrisis period.   
4.2. Intraday analysis of market quality 
In this section, we analyze the evolution of various liquidity and volatility measures across 
a trading day by dividing the trading day into 77 five-minute intervals. Exhibits 2 through 9 
summarize the intraday patterns for each of the market quality parameters across the 77 intraday 
trading intervals. For most of our liquidity and volatility measures, we observe well-established 
U-shape patterns (see McInish and Wood, 1992). 
In Exhibits 2 through 4, we present the intraday trading pattern for trading volume, number 
of trades, and number of quotes, respectively, for the pre- and post-crisis periods. We observe that 
trading volume for REITs is lower than non-REIT stocks throughout the trading day during the 
pre-crisis period; however, REIT trading volume is significantly higher than that of non-REIT 
stocks during the post-crisis period. Additionally, REITs are quoted and traded less frequently than 
non-REIT stocks during the pre-crisis period. This relationship is reversed during the post-crisis 
period, with REITs having twice as many quotes and trades as their non-REIT counterparts. These 
results suggest that, while intraday trading in both REITs and non-REITs has increased following 
the financial crisis, the level of trading in REITs has been significantly higher than that of nonREITs during the post-crisis period. 
Exhibits 2 and 3 report that REIT trading volume is highest at the end of each trading day 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

15 
 
and reaches the minimum at about 1:30 p.m.  Non-REIT stocks show a similar pattern; however, 
they do have higher pre-crisis trading volume and greater number of trades than REITs throughout 
the trading day.  In contrast to the pre-crisis period, the trading volume and number of trades for 
REITs are significantly higher than non-REITs throughout the post-crisis day.  
Exhibit 4 illustrates the five-minute average for the number of quotes during the trading 
day. While the pre-crisis patterns for both REITs and non-REITs are similar and have the 
previously mentioned U-shaped pattern, the post-crisis trading day for both REITs and non-REITs 
begins with the highest number of quotes and then declines to a minimum at around 1:30 p.m., 
with a steady rebound to the end of day value. As with trading volume and number of trades, the 
pre-crisis number of quotes for REITs is lower as compared to non-REITs while the post-crisis 
period number of quotes is higher for the REITs than for non-REIT firms. 
////////// Insert Exhibits 2 through 4 about Here ////////// 
Exhibits 5 and 6 illustrate the intraday patterns for our key liquidity measures – time-lapseweighted quoted spread and time-lapse-weighted relative spread. Exhibit 5 shows that during the 
pre-crisis period REITs were less liquid as compared to non-REIT matching stocks throughout the 
day. This relationship reverses during the post-crisis period with REITs having higher liquidity 
than non-REIT matching stocks. We also observe a more pronounced inverted U-shaped pattern 
for quoted spreads for both REITs and non-REITs during the pre-crisis period. In Exhibit 6, we 
find similar results for relative spreads with REITs having lower liquidity than non-REITs during 
the pre-crisis period. However, during the post-crisis period, REITs become nearly twice as liquid 
as non-REIT matching stocks as reflected by lower relative spreads throughout the trading day. 
The intraday patterns for price impact as measured by time-lapse-weighted effective and 
relative effective spreads are shown in Exhibits 7 and 8. We observe that the effective spreads are 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

16 
 
larger at the start of the trading day and decline significantly during the first half of trading during 
the pre-crisis period. After this initial decline, the level of effective spread starts increasing for the 
rest of the trading day for both, REITs and non-REITs. The U-shaped pattern for effective spreads 
is more pronounced for REITs during the pre-crisis period. The most striking observation is that 
REITs experience a larger price impact than non-REITs during the pre-crisis period. However, this 
relationship reverses during the post-crisis period, with REITs experiencing lower price impact 
than non-REITs.  
Exhibit 9 presents the intraday patterns for volatility. Both REITs and non-REITs 
demonstrate high price volatility during the start and end of the trading day, during both subperiods, forming a U-shaped pattern for the entire trading day. The U-shaped patterns are more 
pronounced during the post-crisis period. The pre-crisis price volatility for REITs is much higher 
than non-REITs. However, during the post-crisis period REITs display much lower price volatility 
than non-REITs throughout the trading day.  
///////// Insert Exhibits 5 through 9 about Here ////////// 
4.3. Regression analysis  
We follow the Stoll (2000) model to formally test the liquidity differences between REITs 
and non-REIT matching common stocks. Market orders demand liquidity while limit orders supply 
liquidity. The liquidity demanders incur a cost for immediate trading due to market frictions. These 
frictions are measured by the price premium paid by the liquidity demander for an immediate 
transaction (Demsetz, 1968; Stoll, 2000). Market sell orders are usually executed at the bid price, 
while market buy orders are usually executed at the ask price. The bid-ask spread represents the 
instantaneous cost of a round trip trade and is a measure of market frictions. Demsetz (1968) and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

17 
 
Stoll (2000) model the cross-sectional relation of spreads to firms' trading characteristics in the 
following equation: 
𝑅𝑆𝑃𝑅𝐷=∝0+ 𝛽1𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑉𝑂𝐿+ 𝛽2𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑁𝑇𝑅𝐷+ 𝛽3𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑀𝑉 + 𝛽4𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑃𝑅𝐼𝐶𝐸+ 𝛽5𝑃𝑅𝐼𝑉𝐴𝑅+ 𝜀  (6) 
where RSPRD is the time-weighted relative spread for each five-minute trading interval, VOL is 
the volume traded, and NTRD is the number of trades for each five-minute trading interval. MV is 
the stock's market value, PRICE is the stock's price at the end of each five-minute trading interval, 
PRIVAR is the price volatility during the five-minute trading period, and 𝜀 is the error term.21 
To formally test the differences in liquidity between REITs and non-REIT matching stocks 
we add a dummy variable, REIT, to the above model specification and analyze it separately for 
pre- and post-crisis periods. Hence, our final regression model takes the following form: 
𝑅𝑆𝑃𝑅𝐷=∝0+ 𝛽1𝑅𝐸𝐼𝑇+ 𝛽2𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝑉𝑂𝐿+ 𝛽3𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝑁𝑇𝑅𝐷+ 𝛽4𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝑀𝑉 + 𝛽5𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝑃𝑅𝐼𝐶𝐸+
              𝛽6𝑃𝑅𝐼𝑉𝐴𝑅+ 𝜀                                                                                                                                (7)  
We estimate the above regression model for both the pre- and post-crisis periods. Results 
of the analyses are summarized in Exhibit 10. We find that relative spreads are negatively related 
to measures of trading activity, such as volume (LOG VOL) and number of trades (LOG NTRDS).  
Relative spreads are positively related to a stock’s volatility (PRIVAR). Consequently, stocks with 
higher trading volume and number of trades and lower volatility have lower spreads (higher 
liquidity). We also find that relative spreads are lower for larger firms and firms with higher stock 
prices. These results are consistent with Stoll (2000) and Cannon and Cole (2011). 
The coefficient for REIT shares is statistically significant and positive during the pre-crisis 
period and statistically significant and negative during the post crisis period. This suggests that 
REITs have higher pre-crisis RSPRD and lower post-crisis RSPRD liquidity than non-REIT 
matching firms. This result is robust to alternate model specifications and is consistent with the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

18 
 
univariate results presented in the previous sections. Hence, REITs have lower pre-crisis liquidity 
but higher post-crisis liquidity as compared to non-REIT matching common stocks. This result is 
consistent with our hypothesis 2. 
////////// Insert Exhibit 10 about Here ////////// 
4.4. GARCH analysis  
Exhibit 1 shows that REITs have higher pre-crisis and lower post-crisis volatility as 
compared to non-REIT matching stocks. We formally test these volatility differences using several 
GARCH models.22 We control for various factors proposed in the literature that can explain 
volatility: spreads (Hasbrouck, 1999), depth (Ahn, Bae, and Chan, 2001), trading volume (Gallant, 
Rossi, and Tauchen, 1992), number of trades (Jones, Kaul and Lipson, 1994), and Monday, to 
control for the weekend effect (French, 1980; Foster and Viswanathan, 1990). 
Following Jain and Jiang (2014), we use two different model specifications to analyze the 
effect of the recent financial crisis on volatility and compare REIT and matching non-REIT 
common stock volatility. First, we consider the following two stage auto-regressive model 
proposed by Schwert (1989). In the first stage the unexpected return is estimated using the 
following regression model: 
𝑅𝑡= ∑
∝𝑘𝐷𝑘
5
𝑘=1
+ ∑
𝛽𝑗𝑅𝑡−𝑗
12
𝑗=1
+ 𝜀𝑡                                                                                                     (8)             
where 𝑅𝑡 is the return on a stock for time t, and 𝐷𝑘  is a day-of-the-week dummy for day k. To 
avoid measurement errors due to the bid-ask bounce, we calculate returns from the average of bidask prices (mid-quote) at the end of each five minutes of trading. The 12 lagged returns are 
included to account for short-term movements in conditional expected returns. The absolute value 
of the residual, εt, constitutes the estimate of the volatility for a stock at time t.  
In the second stage we run the following regression model to analyze the return volatility: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

19 
 
|𝜀𝑖,𝑡| = 𝛼0 + 𝛽1𝑅𝐸𝐼𝑇t + 𝛽2𝑅𝑆𝑃𝑅𝐷t + 𝛽3𝐷𝐸𝑃𝑇𝐻t + 𝛽4𝑉𝑂𝐿t + 𝛽5𝑁𝑇𝑅𝐷t + 𝛽6𝑀t +
              ∑
𝛿𝑖,𝑗|𝜀𝑖,𝑡−𝑗|
12
𝑗=1
+ 𝜇𝑖,𝑡+1                
 
                                                                   (9) 
where REIT is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for REITs and zero otherwise, RSPRD 
is the time-lapse-weighted average relative spread, DEPTH is the time-lapse-weighted average 
volume at the best bid and best ask, ATS is the average trade size, VOL is the volume traded, NTRD 
is the number of trades for each five minute trading interval, M is a dummy variable that is equal 
to 1 for Mondays and 0 otherwise, and 𝜀𝑡 is the residual from the return equation. The parameter 
𝛿 captures the persistence in volatility. 
Pagan and Ullah (1988) find that the above two stage estimation, using equations (8) and 
(9), leads to inconsistent estimates as the true volatility is unobservable. Also, Bollerslev and 
Domowitz (1991) note that the two stage OLS model does not account for volatility clustering 
observed in the data. To address these econometric problems, we use the following GARCH(1,1) 
specification: 
𝑅𝑡= ∑
∝𝑘𝐷𝑘
5
𝑘=1
+ ∑
𝛽𝑗𝑅𝑡−𝑗
12
𝑗=1
+ 𝜀𝑡  
 
 
 
 
 
                 (10) 
𝜎𝑡
2 = 𝛼0 + 𝛽1𝑅𝐸𝐼𝑇𝑡+ 𝛽2𝑅𝑆𝑃𝑅𝐷𝑡+ 𝛽3𝐷𝐸𝑃𝑇𝐻𝑡+ 𝛽4𝑉𝑂𝐿𝑡+ 𝛽5𝑁𝑇𝑅𝐷𝑡+ 𝛽6𝑀𝑡+ 𝛼1𝜀𝑡−1
2
 +
             𝛾𝜎𝑡−1
2  
 
        
 
 
 
             
 
 
     (11) 
Both equations are estimated simultaneously as one system. The variables are as defined 
previously. The selection of a GARCH(1,1) model is based on the tradeoff  between accuracy and 
efficiency in model constructions. GARCH(1,1) has the lowest AIC and SIC values. 
We conduct the analysis using both the above mentioned model specifications. Since the 
results from the two models are qualitatively similar, we present only the results from 
GARCH(1,1) analysis. 
Exhibit 11 summarizes the results from the estimation of the various GARCH(1,1) models 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

20 
 
summarized by equations (10) and (11), using the high frequency data sampled at a five-minute 
sampling frequency for all sample stocks for the pre- and post-crisis periods. Models 1 and 2 
summarize results for the pre-crisis period, while models 3 and 4 summarize the results for the 
post-crisis period. The positive coefficient on the REIT dummy in Models 1 and 2 documents that 
REITs have significantly higher volatility than non-REIT matching stocks during the pre-crisis 
period. This relationship reverses during the post-crisis period as documented by a negative and 
significant coefficient for the REIT dummy in Models 3 and 4. These results support our 
hypothesis 3. Consistent with the findings from existing microstructure literature (see Jain and 
Jiang, 2014) we find a positive and statistically significant coefficient for RSPRD suggesting a 
negative relationship between liquidity and volatility. We also find a positive and statistically 
significant coefficient for NTRD, which suggests that the informed trader camouflages his trading 
activity by splitting one large trade into several small trades (Kyle, 1985; Admati and Pfleiderer, 
1988). Thus the number of trades conveys private information as reflected by increased volatility 
(Jones, Kaul, and Lipson, 1994). 
Overall, our results from GARCH analysis indicate that REITs have significantly higher 
volatility than non-REIT matching stocks during the pre-crisis period. We also document that, 
while the recent financial crisis has increased the volatility for the sample non-REIT stocks, the 
volatility for REITs has declined significantly during the post-crisis period.23 
////////// Insert Exhibit 11 about Here ////////// 
5.  Robustness Tests 
To address potential rival alternative hypotheses, we conduct several robustness tests. 
Specifically, we test if our results are driven by exclusion of mortgage REITs, increased stock 
offerings by REITs during the post-crisis period, our matching process, or our definition of the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

21 
 
crisis period. Results of these tests indicate that our findings of the changing REIT microstructure 
characteristics, in terms of improved liquidity and reduced volatility as compared to non-REIT 
stocks, during the post-crisis period are robust to these alternate economic or statistical 
explanations.  
5.1. Mortgage vs. non-mortgage REITs 
 
It can be argued that mortgage REITs are different than the non-mortgage REITs and other 
common stocks as their fundamental and microstructural characteristics are more similar to fixed 
income securities. In the results presented thus far, we excluded mortgage REITs from our 
analyses. We test the robustness of our results by including the mortgage REITs and find results 
consistent with our findings. We conclude that our results are not driven by excluding mortgage 
REITs. 
5.2. Increased REIT seasoned stock offerings post-crisis 
 
We find that REITs significantly increased their seasoned equity offerings during the postcrisis period to raise capital (Exhibit 12). To test if our results could be explained by the increase 
in REIT stock offerings, we excluded all the REITs with abnormal stock offerings during the postcrisis period.24 While we still find support for our significant liquidity and volatility differences 
results, we fail to find any statistical difference in trading activity, in terms of volume, number of 
trades and number of quotes, between REIT and non-REIT common stocks during the post-crisis 
period. Therefore, the increased trading activity in REITs post-crisis may in fact be due in part to 
their increased seasoned stock offerings. 
////////// Insert Exhibit 12 about Here ////////// 
5.3. Matching based on book-to-market ratio 
It can be argued that REITs are similar to value stocks (Anderson, Clayton, Mackinnon, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

22 
 
and Sharma, 2005) and hence, a more appropriate metric to use for matching REITs and nonREITs should be book-to-market ratio. To test the robustness of our findings, we match the REIT 
and non-REIT stocks based on book-to-market ratio. We find results qualitatively similar to the 
ones presented earlier. We find that REITs have lower liquidity and higher volatility as compared 
to non-REIT stocks during the pre-crisis period. As with prior results, the financial crisis reverses 
these relationships with REITs having higher liquidity and lower volatility. 
5.4. Matching based on trading volume 
We test the robustness of our findings by matching the REIT and non-REIT stocks based 
on trading volume instead of market capitalization. This additional analysis gives us qualitatively 
similar results as presented earlier. We find that REITs have lower number of trades and number 
of quotes, lower liquidity, higher price impact and volatility as compared to non-REIT stocks 
during the pre-crisis period. The financial crisis changes most of these relationships with REITs 
having higher number of trades and quotes, higher liquidity, lower price impact and lower 
volatility. 
5.5. Double sort based on market capitalization and trading volume 
When we test the robustness of our findings by matching the REIT and non-REIT stocks 
first on market cap and then on trading volume, we find results consistent with those previously 
presented.  
 
5.6. Triple sort based on Fama and French (1993) risk factors 
We test the robustness of our findings by matching the REIT and non-REIT stocks first on 
market beta, then on market capitalization, and finally on book-to-market ratio. We find results 
consistent with those presented earlier.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

23 
 
5.7. Alternate definition for post-crisis period 
In our analysis, we define the post-crisis period as the period following August 2008. Our 
choice of date is based on the fact that during August of 2008, the S&P 500 index reached its local 
peak of 1300.68 and following that high price event saw an unprecedented decline. This period is 
marked by significant decline in market confidence and a dramatic collapse in risk appetites. An 
extreme flight to quality led to massive sell-offs in major world stock markets during September 
and October of 2008. 
We test the robustness of our results using an alternate definition for the financial crisis 
period. The major world markets started showing signs of a financial crisis in the third quarter of 
2007. The increasing inability of market participants to price some risky assets during this period, 
highlighted by the French bank BNP Paribas’s announcement to this effect on August 9, 2007, 
signaled the start of the financial crisis. The S&P 500 index hit its global maximum during October 
2007 and ran downhill from there. Hence, we define post-financial crisis period as the period 
following October 2007. This exercise gives us even stronger results in terms of larger coefficients 
for REIT dummy, supporting our findings.  
5.8. Excluding the crisis period 
Finally, we test whether our results are driven by the extreme market movements during 
late 2007 to early 2009. We remove this period and re-analyze the data. We find that most of our 
results hold to this alternate data sampling. However, we do not find any statistically significant 
difference in volatility between the pre- and post-crisis periods if we exclude the crisis period. 
Hence, our result of significant increase in volatility of our sample stocks during the post-crisis 
period is driven by the extremely volatile crisis period. A further analysis reveals that REIT 
volatility has rather declined significantly during the post-crisis period.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

24 
 
6. Conclusion 
In this study, we document the market quality differences between REIT and non-REIT 
common stocks. We define market quality in terms of stock market liquidity, price volatility, and 
price impact. We also test the impact of the 2008 financial crisis on the market quality for REITs 
and other common stocks. Finally, we present the differences in the intraday patterns of liquidity, 
volatility and trading activity between REITs and non-REIT common stocks.  
Prior to the 2008 financial crisis, we find that REITs have significantly poorer stock market 
quality, as documented by lower liquidity, higher price volatility, higher price impact, and lower 
trading activity, than non-REIT common stocks. However, the 2008 financial crisis dramatically 
improved the market quality for REITs. We find that, during the post-crisis period, REITs have 
higher liquidity, lower volatility, lower price impact, and greater trading activity than non-REIT 
stocks.  These significant differences in stock market liquidity and volatility between REIT and 
non-REIT stocks and pre- and post-crisis periods are confirmed through regression analysis using 
the Stoll (2000) model for relative spreads and GARCH model, respectively. We show that our 
results are robust to alternate economic and statistical reasons for our findings. 
Overall, our results suggest that REITs have become more liquid during the post-crisis 
period. Additionally, their volatility and cost of trading has declined significantly making them an 
attractive vehicle for adding diversification to investor portfolios. This is reflected by increased 
trading activity in REITs during the post-crisis period.  
Further, our analysis of intraday patterns indicates that it is preferable to trade REIT stocks 
during the closing hour of the trading day when the liquidity is higher, volatility is lower, and the 
price impact is smaller as compared to the opening session of a trading day. By appropriately 
timing the trades, a trader can minimize transaction costs and improve execution quality.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

25 
 
This study contributes to the literature by not only documenting the significant market 
microstructure differences between the REIT and non-REIT common stocks but also presenting 
the evolution of market quality during the post-crisis period. Our results show that REITs behave 
differently as compared to non-REIT common stocks during the period of large market decline. 
Investors, fleeing risky investments, find the long-term diversification benefits of REITs more 
attractive during periods of high volatility and low interest rates.  The portfolio adjustment actions 
of investors during these periods make REITs more liquid and less volatile.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

26 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
Admati, A. R. and P. Pfleiderer, A Theory of Intraday Patterns: Volume and Price Variability, 
Review of Financial Studies, 1988, 1:1, 3–40. 
 
Ahn H-J., K-H Bae, and K. Chan, Limit Orders, Depth and Volatility: Evidence from the Stock 
Exchange of Hong Kong, Journal of Finance, 2001, 56:2, 767-88. 
 
Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, Liquidity, Maturity, and the Yields on U.S. Treasury Securities, 
Journal of Finance, 46:4, 1991, 1411-25. 
 
Anderson, R., J. Clayton, G. Mackinnon, and R. Sharma, REIT returns and pricing: the small cap 
value stock factor, Journal of Property Research, 22:4, 2005, 267-286. 
 
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, A Model of Investor Sentiment, Journal of Financial 
Economics, 49:3, 1998, 307-43. 
 
Below, S. D., J. K. Kiely, and W. McIntosh, REIT Pricing Efficiency; Should Investors Still Be 
Concerned?, Journal of Real Estate Research, 1996, 12:3, 397–412.  
 
Ben-David, I., F. Franzoni, and R. Moussawi, Hedge Fund Stock Trading in the Financial Crisis 
of 2007-2008, Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 25:1, 1-54. 
 
Bertin, W., P. Kofman, D. Michayluk and L. Prather, Intraday REIT Liquidity, Journal of Real 
Estate Research, 2005, 27:2, 155-76. 
 
Bhasin, V., R. A. Cole, and J. K. Kiely, Changes in REIT Liquidity 1990–1994: Evidence from 
Intra-day Transactions, Real Estate Economics, 1997, 25:4, 615–30.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

27 
 
 
Bollerslev, T. and  I. Domowitz, Price Volatility, Spread Variability, and the Role of Alternative 
Market Mechanisms, Review of Futures Markets, 1991, 10:1, 78-102. 
 
Brennan, M. J. and A. Subrahmanyam, Market Microstructure and Asset Pricing: On the 
Compensation for Illiquidity in Stock Returns, Journal of Financial Economics, 1996, 41:3, 441–
64. 
 
Butler, A. W., G. Grullon, and J. P. Weston, Stock Market Liquidity and the Cost of Issuing Equity, 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 2005, 40:2,  331-48. 
 
Cannon, S. E. and R. A. Cole, Changes in REIT Liquidity 1988-2007: Evidence from Daily Data, 
Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economic, 2011, 43:1, 258-80. 
 
Case, K., J. Quigley, and R. Shiller, Comparing Wealth Effects: The Stock Market Versus the 
Housing Market, Advances in Macroeconomics, 2005, 5:1, 1-32. 
 
Case, K. and R. Shiller, Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?, Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity, 2003, 2, 299-362. 
 
Chiang, K. C. H., X. Jiang, and M. L. Lee, REIT Idiosyncratic Risk, Journal of Property Research, 
2009, 26:4,  349-366. 
 
Chou, Y. H. and Y. C. Chen, Is the Response of REIT Returns to Monetary Policy Asymmetric?, 
Journal of Real Estate Research, 2014, 36:1, 109-35. 
 
Chun, G. H., J. Sa-Aadu, and J. D. Shilling, The Role of Real Estate in an Institutional Investor’s 
Portfolio Revisited, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2004, 29:3, 295-320. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

28 
 
 
Chung, R., S. Fung, and K. Hung, Institutional Investors and Firm Efficiency of Real Estate 
Investment Trusts, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2012, 45:1, 171-211.  
 
Clayton, J. and G. MacKinnon, Measuring Changes in REIT Liquidity: Moving Beyond the 
Bid/Ask Spread, Real Estate Economics, 2000, 28:1, 89–115. 
 
Clayton, J. and G. MacKinnon, Departures from NAV in REIT Pricing: The Private Real Estate 
Cycle, the Value of Liquidity and Investor Sentiment, Real Estate Research Institute, 2002. 
 
Cole, R., Changes in REIT Liquidity 1990-94: The Role of New REITs, Paper presented at the 
1998 AREUEA meeting, 1998. 
 
Cotter, J. and R. Roll, A Comparative Anatomy of Residential REITs and Private Real Estate 
Markets: Returns, Risks and Distributional Characteristics, Real Estate Economics, 2015, 43:1, 
209-40. 
 
Danielsen, B. R. and D. M. Harrison, The Impact of Potential Private Information on REIT 
Liquidity, Journal of Real Estate Research, 2000, 19:1/2, 49–71. 
 
Danielsen, B., D. Harrison, R. Van Ness, and R. Warr, Liquidity, Accounting Transparency, and 
the Cost of Capital: Evidence from Real Estate Investment Trusts, Journal of Real Estate 
Research, 2014, 36:2, 221-51. 
 
Demsetz, H, The Cost of Transacting, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1968, 82:1, 33–53. 
 
Devos, E., S. Ong, A. C. Spieler, and D. Tsang, REIT Institutional Ownership Dynamics and the 
Financial Crisis, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2013, 47:2, 266-88. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

29 
 
 
Easley, D., S. Hvidkjaer, and M. O'Hara, Factoring Information into Returns, Journal of Financial 
and Quantitative Analysis, 2010, 45:2, 293-309. 
 
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds, Journal 
of Financial Economics, 1993, 33:1, 3-56. 
 
Feng, Z., S. M. Price, and C. F. Sirmans, An Overview of Equity Real Estate Investment Trusts 
(REITs): 1993-2009, Journal of Real Estate Literature, 2011, 19:2, 307-43. 
 
Fleming, J., C. Kirby, and B. Ostdiek, The Economic Value of Volatility Timing Using Realized 
Volatility, Journal of Financial Economics, 2003, 67:3, 473–509. 
 
Foucault, T., Order Flow Composition and Trading Costs in a Dynamic Limit Order Market, 
Journal of Financial Markets, 1999, 2:2, 99-134.  
 
Foster, F. D. and S. Viswanathan, A Theory of the Interday Variations in Volume, Variance, and 
Trading Costs in Securities Markets, Review of Financial Studies, 1990, 3:4, 593-624. 
 
French, K. R., Stock Returns and the Weekend Effect, Journal of Financial Economics, 1980, 8:1, 
55-69. 
 
Gallant, A. R., P. E. Rossi, and G. E. Tauchen, Stock Prices and Volume, Review of Financial 
Studies, 1992, 5:2, 199-242. 
 
 
Ghosh, C., M. Miles, and C. F. Sirmans, Are REITs Stocks?, Real Estate Finance, 1996, 13, 46–
53. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

30 
 
 
 
Glascock, J. L. and R. Lu-Andrews, An Examination of Macroeconomic Effects on the Liquidity 
of REITs, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2014, 49:1, 23-46. 
 
Glascock, J. L., D. Michayluk, and K. Neuhauser, The Riskiness of REITs Surrounding the 
October 1997 Stock Market Decline, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2004, 28:4, 
339-54.  
 
Giliberto, M., Equity Real Estate Investment Trusts and Real Estate Returns, Journal of Real 
Estate Research, 1990, 5:2, 259-63. 
 
Goetzmann, W. and R. Ibbotson, The Performance of Real Estate as an Asset Class, Journal of 
Applied Corporate Finance, 1990, 3:1, 65-76. 
 
Grossman, S. J. and M. H. Miller, Liquidity and Market Structure, Journal of Finance, 1988, 43:3, 
617–33. 
 
Hasbrouck, J., The Dynamics of Discrete Bid and Ask Quotes, Journal of Finance, 1999, 54:6, 
2109-42. 
 
Hasbrouck, J. and G. Saar, Limit Orders and Volatility in a Hybrid Market: The Island ECN, 
Working Paper, NYU, 2002. 
 
Hendershott, T., C. M. Jones, and A. J. Menkveld, Does Algorithmic Trading Improve Liquidity?, 
Journal of Finance, 2011, 66:1, 1–33. 
 
Hill, M., G. W. Kelly and W. G Hardin, Market Value of REIT Liquidity, Journal of Real Estate 
Finance and Economics, 2012, 45:1, 383-401. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

31 
 
 
Hoffmann, A. O., T. Post, and J. M. Pennings, Individual Investor Perceptions and Behavior 
During the Financial Crisis, Journal of Banking and Finance, 2013, 37:1, 60-74. 
 
Huang, J. and Z. Zhong, Time Variation in Diversification Benefits of Commodity, REITs, and 
TIPS, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2013, 46:1, 152-92. 
 
Jain, P., J-REIT Market Quality: Impact of High Frequency Trading and the Financial Crisis, Paper 
presented at the 2015 AREUEA/NAREIT conference, 2015. 
 
Jain, P. K., Financial Market Design and the Equity Premium: Electronic versus Floor Trading, 
Journal of Finance, 2005, 60:6, 2955-85. 
 
 
Jain, P. and C. X. Jiang, Predicting Future Price Volatility: Empirical Evidence from an Emerging 
Limit Order Market, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 2014, 27, 72-93. 
 
Jain, P. K., P. Jain, and T. McInish, Risks of High Speed Trading, Working Paper, University of 
Memphis, 2016. 
 
Jensen, M. C., Agency Cost of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers, American 
Economic Review, 1986, 76:2, 323-29. 
 
Jones, C. M., G. Kaul, and M. L. Lipson, Information, Trading, and Volatility, Journal of Financial 
Economics, 1994, 36:1, 127–54. 
 
 
Jones, C. M, G. Kaul, and M. L. Lipson, Transactions, Volume and Volatility, Review of Financial 
Studies, 1994, 7:4, 631–51. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

32 
 
 
Karolyi, G. A., K. H. Lee, and M. A. Van Dijk, Understanding Commonality in Liquidity Around 
the World, Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 105:1, 82-112. 
 
Kyle, A., Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading, Econometrica, 1985, 53:6, 1315-35. 
 
Lee, C. M. C., B. Mucklow, and M. J. Ready, Spreads, Depths and the Impact of Earnings 
Information: An Intraday Analysis, Review of Financial Studies, 1993, 6:2, 345–74. 
 
Ling, D. and A. Naranjo, The Dynamics of REIT Capital Flows and Returns, Real Estate 
Economics, 2003, 31:3, 405-34. 
 
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel, Depression Babies:  Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect RiskTaking?, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126:1, 373-416. 
 
McInish, T. and R. Wood, An Analysis of Intraday Patterns in Bid/Ask Spread for NYSE Stocks, 
The Journal of Finance, 1992, 47:2, 753-764. 
 
Mooradian, R. and S. Yang, Dividend Policy and Firm Performance: Hotel REITs vs. Non-REIT 
Hotel Companies, Journal of Real Estate Portfolio Management, 2001, 7:1, 79-87. 
 
Nelling, E. F., J. M. Mahoney, T. L. Hildebrand and M. A. Goldstein, Real Estate Investment 
Trusts, Small Stocks and Bid–Ask Spreads, Real Estate Economics, 1995, 23:1, 45–64. 
 
 
Ooi, J. T. L., J. Wang and J. R. Webb, Idiosyncratic Risk and REIT Returns, The Journal of Real 
Estate Finance and Economics, 2009, 38:4, 420-42.  
 
 
Ooi, J. T. L., W. Wong, and S. Ong, Can Bank Lines of Credit Protect REITs against a Credit 
Crisis?, Real Estate Economics, 2012, 40:2, 285-316. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

33 
 
 
 
Pagan, A.R. and A. Ullah, The Econometric Analysis of Models with Risk Terms, Journal of 
Applied Econometrics, 1988, 3:2, 87-105. 
 
 
Schwert, W. G, Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?, Journal of Finance, 1989, 
44:5, 1115-53. 
 
 
Smith, T. and R. E. Whaley, Estimating the Effective Bid/Ask Spread from Time and Sales Data, 
The Journal of Futures Markets, 1994, 14:4, 437-55. 
 
Stoll, H., Friction, Journal of Finance, 2000, 55:4, 1479–1514. 
 
Subrahmanyam, A, Liquidity, Return, and Order-Flow Linkages Between REITs and the Stock 
Market, Real Estate Economics, 2007, 35:3, 383-408. 
 
Sun, Q. S. and K. Yung, Idiosyncratic Risk and Expected Returns of Equity Real Estate Investment 
Trusts, Journal of Real Estate Portfolio Management, 2010, 15:1, 45-57. 
 
Wang, K., J. Erickson, G. Gau, and S. H. Chan, Market Microstructure and Real Estate Returns, 
Real Estate Economics, 1995, 23:1, 85–100. 
 
Zhou, J. and R. I. Anderson, Extreme Risk Measures for International REIT Markets, The Journal 
of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2012, 45:1, 152-170. 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
 
We thank Frank J. SanPietro, Department of Finance, Insurance and Real Estate, University of 
Memphis, for his assistance on the preparation of the final manuscript. We further gratefully 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

34 
 
acknowledge the helpful comments from the anonymous referees. We also thank the discussants 
and attendees at the conferences where we presented early versions of this paper for their 
comments. All remaining errors are our own. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

35 
 
Exhibit 1. 
Descriptive statistics 
 
We present summary statistics from January 1, 2005 through June 30, 2011 for all the nonmortgage REITs traded on the US stock markets and the non-REIT firms matched based on the 
market capitalization. We sample the data for the first month in each quarter: January, April, July, 
and October, for 6 years: 2005 through 2011. Pre-crisis period consists of data from January, 
2005 to August 2008 and the remaining period is the post-crisis period. All the variables reported 
are the trading time-lapse-adjusted average for each five-minute period of trading. We then 
average the numbers across stocks and across years.  VOL is the volume traded during five 
minutes of trading, NTRDS is the number of trades, NQUOTES is the number of quotes, PRIVAR 
is the price volatility, QSPRD is the time weighted quoted spreads, RSPRD is the time weighted 
relative spreads, ESPRD is the volume weighted effective spreads, and RESPRD is the volume 
weighted relative effective spreads for every five minutes of trading 
 
 
Full Period 
Pre-Crisis Period 
Post-Crisis Period 
Post-Pre 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(5)-(3) 
Variable 
REITS  
STOCKS 
REITS  STOCKS REITS  
STOCKS 
REITS 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VOL 
 11,480 
    12,017     5,986   10,253    18,517 
   14,033 
12,531*** 
NTRDS 
62.21 
66.55 
25.98 
36.54 
103.56 
89.66 
77.58*** 
NQUOTES 
653.32 
689.58 
296.77 
453.19 1,126.59 
950.63 
829.82*** 
QSPRD 
26.17 
30.01 
32.37 
17.88 
20.75 
40.24 
-11.62*** 
RSPRD (%) 
1.73 
1.55 
2.53 
1.24 
1.37 
1.98 
-1.16*** 
ESPRD 
      0.22 
       0.14        0.36       0.17 
0.08 
0.13 
-0.28** 
RESPRD 
(%) 
0.53 
0.50 
0.59 
0.38 
0.44 
0.59 
-0.06** 
PRIVAR 
(%) 
0.10 
0.07 
0.08 
0.03 
0.10 
0.13 
0.02** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Significant at 1% level  
** Significant at 5% level  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

36 
 
Exhibit 2. Intraday pattern for trading volume 
Pre-Crisis Period  
 
 
 
        
 
 
  Post-Crisis Period 
   
 
 
Exhibit 3. Intraday pattern for number of trades 
Pre-Crisis Period 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 Post-Crisis Period    
  
     
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

37 
 
Exhibit 4. Intraday pattern for number of quotes 
Pre-Crisis Period 
 
 
 
 
      
 
Post-Crisis Period 
  
 
 
Exhibit 5. Intraday pattern for time weighted quoted spreads 
Pre-Crisis Period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Post-Crisis Period 
  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

38 
 
Exhibit 6. Intraday pattern for time-weighted relative spreads 
Pre-Crisis Period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Post-Crisis Period 
  
 
 
Exhibit 7. Time-weighted effective spreads 
Pre- Crisis Period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Post-Crisis Period 
  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

39 
 
Exhibit 8. Time-weighted relative effective spreads 
Pre-Crisis Period 
 
 
 
 
 
         Post-Crisis Period 
  
 
 
Exhibit 9. Time-weighted price volatility 
Pre-Crisis Period 
 
 
 
 
 
         Post-Crisis Period 
  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

40 
 
Exhibit 10. 
 
Proportionate spreads and stock’s trading characteristics 
 
To formally test the liquidity differences for non-mortgage REITs and non REIT matching 
stocks, we analyze the following regression (Stoll, 2000): 
𝑹𝑺𝑷𝑹𝑫=∝𝟎+ 𝜷𝟏𝑹𝑬𝑰𝑻+ 𝜷𝟐𝑳𝒐𝒈𝑽𝑶𝑳+ 𝜷𝟑𝑳𝒐𝒈𝑵𝑻𝑹𝑫+ 𝜷𝟒𝑳𝒐𝒈𝑴𝑽+ 𝜷𝟓𝑳𝒐𝒈𝑷𝑹𝑰𝑪𝑬
+ 𝜷𝟔𝑷𝑹𝑰𝑽𝑨𝑹+ 𝜺 
where RSPRD is the time weighted relative spreads for every 5 minutes of trading, REIT is a 
dummy variable that takes value of 1 for REITs and zero, otherwise, VOL is the volume traded, 
and NTRDS is the number of trades for every five minutes of trading. MV is the stock's market 
value, PRICE is the stock's price at the end of every five minute period, PRIVAR is the price 
volatility during the five-minute trading period, and 𝜺 is the error term. Pre-crisis period 
consists of data from January, 2005 to August 2008 and the remaining period is post-crisis 
period. White’s corrected standard errors are reported in parentheses. 
 
 
Pre-Crisis 
Post-Crisis 
Variable 
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 
INTERCEPT 
0.12*** (0.00) 
0.10*** (0.00) 
0.09*** (0.00) 
0.07*** (0.01) 
REIT 
0.06*** (0.01) 
0.05*** (0.00) 
-0.05*** (0.00) 
-0.04*** (0.01) 
LOG VOL 
 
-0.02*** (0.00) 
 
-0.02** (0.01) 
LOG NTRDS 
 
-0.02*** (0.00) 
 
-0.04**(0.01) 
LOG MV 
 
-0.05*** (0.00) 
 
-0.05**(0.00) 
LOG PRICE 
 
-0.06*** (0.01) 
 
-0.03**(0.01) 
PRIVAR 
 
0.01*** (0.00) 
 
0.02**(0.01) 
ADJ R2 
0.004 
0.151 
0.011 
0.204 
 
*** Significant at 1% level  
** Significant at 5% level  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

41 
 
Exhibit 11. 
 
Volatility GARCH regression 
 
We report the results from the estimation of the following GARCH model for non-mortgage 
REITs and non REIT matching stocks: 
𝑅𝑡= ∑∝𝑘𝐷𝑘
5
𝑘=1
+ ∑𝛽𝑗𝑅𝑡−𝑗
12
𝑗=1
+ 𝜀𝑡 
𝜎𝑡
2 = 𝛼0 + 𝛽1𝑅𝐸𝐼𝑇t + 𝛽2𝑅𝑆𝑃𝑅𝐷t + 𝛽3𝐷𝐸𝑃𝑇𝐻t + 𝛽4𝑉𝑂𝐿t + 𝛽5𝑁𝑇𝑅𝐷t + 𝛽6𝑀t 
+α1εt−1
2
 + 𝛾𝜎𝑡−1
2
 
𝑅𝑡 is the return on a stock for the five minute interval t, 𝐷𝑘 is a day-of-the-week dummy for day 
k, 𝜎𝑡
2 is the conditional variance of 𝜀𝑡 from the return equation, REIT is a dummy variable that 
takes value of 1 for REITs and zero otherwise, RSPRD is the time-lapse-weighted average 
relative spread, DEPTH is the time-lapse-weighted average volume at the best bid and best ask, 
ATS is the average trade size, VOL is the volume traded, NTRDS is the number of trades for 
each five minutes of trading, M is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 for Mondays and 0 
otherwise, and 𝜀𝑡 is the residual from the return equation. We report the standardized parameter 
estimates in this table. Pre-crisis period consists of data from January, 2005 to August 2008 and 
the remaining period is post-crisis period. White’s corrected standard errors are reported in 
parentheses. 
 
 
Pre-Crisis 
Post-Crisis 
Variable 
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 
REIT 
0.91***     
(0.15) 
0.41*** 
(0.02) 
-0.39***       
(0.09) 
-0.35***    
(0.06) 
RSPRD 
 
0.21***     
(0.01) 
 
0.11**         
(0.04) 
DEPTH 
 
0.05***     
(0.00) 
 
0.01          
(0.00) 
VOL 
 
0.01**       
(0.00) 
 
0.01           
(0.01) 
NTRDS 
 
0.06*** 
(0.00) 
 
0.16***       
(0.03) 
MONDAY 
 
0.05       
(0.07) 
 
0.03          
(0.05) 
ADJ. R2 
0.05 
0.15 
0.02 
0.10 
 
*** Significant at 1% level  
** Significant at 5% level  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

42 
 
 
Exhibit 12. REIT’s seasoned stock offerings 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

43 
 
 
1 A real estate investment trust (REIT) is a corporate tax designation for an entity that invests in 
real estate and is designed to provide a real estate investment structure similar to the structure 
provided by mutual funds for investment in stocks. This designation reduces or eliminates 
corporate taxes as long as a REIT distributes 90% of its taxable income as dividends. For more 
details, see Feng, Price, and Sirmans (2011).  
 
2 According to the National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts (NAREIT), 
approximately 76% of all REIT shares were held by institutional investors in 2008. In fact, Huang 
and Zhong (2013) find that approximately 50% of all REIT shares are owned by the 25 largest 
institutional investors. 
 
3 Chou and Chen (2014) argue that the unique characteristics of REITs create a very close tie 
between the performance of the REIT and the underlying property portfolio which, in turn, should 
increase the transparency in REIT valuation resulting in a higher liquidity.  
 
4 This flight to REITs was further fueled by the historically low interest rates which made the fixed 
income securities market less attractive to investors. 
 
5 However, Cole (1998) finds that this increase in liquidity can be attributed to the “new REITs” 
going public between 1991 and 1993. These larger, higher priced REITs were traded with more 
volume than the REITs that existed in 1990. When he excludes these “new REITs”, he finds that 
there was actually a decline in REIT liquidity during that period. 
 
6 We extend Cannon and Cole (2011) by presenting intraday patterns to identify optimal trading 
strategies for investors and analyzing the effect of the 2008 financial crisis on REIT stock market 
                                                          
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

44 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
quality.  
 
7 Hill, Kelly, and Hardin (2012) examine accounting liquidity in the form of cash versus lines of 
credit and find that the proverbial saying “cash is king” holds for REITs as the market values cash 
over available lines of credit during periods of financial crisis. 
 
8 Butler, Grullon, and Weston (2005) and Glascock and Lu-Andrews (2014) find that accounting 
liquidity is positively related to financial market liquidity. Cost of raising new capital is much 
higher when the financial markets are illiquid.  
 
9 Subrahmanyam (2007) finds that there is significant liquidity spillover from REITs to non-REIT 
stocks. 
 
10 Wang, Erickson, and Chan (1995) find that REITs have lower institutional investor participation 
and are followed by fewer stock analysts as compared to non-REIT stocks. 
 
11 Jain (2005) documents that the way the trading takes place has changed dramatically over the 
past decade. 
 
12 Devos, Ong, Spieler and Tsang (2013) examine the impact of the financial crisis on REIT 
institutional holdings. They suggest that the surge in volatility during periods of crisis may drive 
institutional investors away from REITs. However, their analysis of the various REIT subsectors 
(e.g. retail, industrial, etc.) reveals a “flight to quality” since institutional investors decreased their 
positions in the smaller riskier REITs and increased investment in larger, less risky ones. 
 
13 McInish and Wood (1992) finds that most of the stocks experience lower liquidity (or higher 
spreads) at the start and the end of the trading day, and higher liquidity (or lower spreads) during 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

45 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
the rest of the trading day, generating a U-shape pattern for spreads.  
 
14 See Easley, Hvidkjaer, and Ohara (2010), Karolyi, Lee, and Van Dijk (2012), Jain, Jain, and 
McInish (2016).  
 
15 The fundamental and microstructural characteristics of mortgage REITs are more similar to 
fixed income securities. 
 
16 Previous studies on REITs have matched REITs and non-REITs based on volume or liquidity. 
That process essentially matches based on a liquidity measure and then compares liquidity. Most 
microstructure studies; however, match stocks based on market capitalization, which is not a 
liquidity measure (see Stoll, 2000). We test the robustness of our results by matching REITs and 
non-REITs using volume, double sorting based on market capitalization and volume, and triple 
sorting based on Fama and French risk factors.  
 
17 Due to computational limitations; we limit our analysis to the first month of each quarter – 
January, April, June, and October for each of the sample years. 
 
18 Quoted spread may not capture true trading cost since it might reflect differences in price 
levels across time and stocks. 
 
19 We test the robustness of our results by deleting the extreme volatile period, the last quarter of 
2007 through the first quarter of 2009, and by using an alternate post-crisis period definition. 
Details are provided in the robustness section.  
 
20 Volume can proxy information arrival. This makes volume a proxy for liquidity since adverse 
selection (resulting due to information asymmetry) is an important component of liquidity (Kyle, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903

46 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
1985). Additionally, the new information about the financial markets should impact REITs and 
non-REITs similarly and hence, might not affect our findings. 
 
21 Danielsen and Harrison (2000) find that determinants of REIT liquidity vary depending on the 
exchange where the security is listed and hence, we only analyze the REITs listed on NYSE. 
 
22 Zhou and Anderson (2012) report extreme returns are more prominent for REIT returns 
compared to equities. Hence, REIT return can be successfully modeled with GARCH models. 
 
23 We analyzed Model 4 separately for REIT and non-REIT matching stocks and include a dummy, 
CRISIS, to control for the crisis period. We find the coefficient on CRISIS to be positive and 
statistically significant for both the REITs and non-REIT stocks at 5% level of significance, which 
suggests that financial crisis has significantly increased the volatility for all the sample stocks. 
 
24 Normal level of stock offerings is defined as the average stock offerings during the pre-crisis 
period by any given REIT. If any REIT’s stock offerings during the post-crisis period were 
significantly higher than the normal level, we excluded that REIT from our analyses.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2142903
