 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573 
Research Methods  
By  
Dr. Paul Cottrell 
June 12, 2016 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573 
OVERVIEW 
In this Breadth component, an analysis of research methods in quantitative ﬁnance pertaining to 
experimental, cross-sectional, quasi-experimental, pre-experimental, sample design, econometric 
models, and stochastic simulations is put forward.  A compare and contrast will be performed for 
each of the above research methods in quantitative ﬁnance.  This component will include a 
discussion of how these methods contribute to better understanding on hedging and pricing of 
ﬁnancial assets.  A discussion of the strengths and limitations of each research design method 
investigated pertaining to quantitative ﬁnance will be put forth. 
Experimental design is an important research method due to the power of inference. 
Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) proposed four major types of research design with 
differing degrees of inference and safeguards.  The four major types of research design proposed 
by Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias are: (1) experimental, (2) cross-sectional, (3) quasiexperimental, and (4) pre-experimental (p. 103).  Experimental designs involve assigning random 
samples to the experimental and control groups with independent variables applied to the 
experimental group.  Cross-sectional designs usually are associated with survey research, whereby 
manipulation to determine inference is diminished compared to experimental design.  Quasiexperimental research involves random sampling from a population but not random assignment 
within testing groups.  Pre-experimental are the weakest form of research methods due to the 
lack of random selection and assignment. 
In sample designs there are probability samples and non-probability samples (FrankfortNachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 167). Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) considered 
three types of non-probability sample designs: convenience, purposive, and quota samples (p. 
168).  Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias also considered four probability sample designs: simple 
random, systematic, and stratiﬁed (pp. 169-173).   
 
Another important set of tools in research design, especially in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance is 
econometrics. Econometrics is utilizing regression analysis to determine relationships between 
dependent and independent variables.  This breadth component will also provide an investigation 
by Wooldridge (2009) in three broad categories in econometrics: introduction to econometrics, 
simultaneous equation models, and advanced time series topics. Simultaneous equation models 
are a set of system of equations that describe ﬁnancial and economic systems.  A review of time 
series analysis for the ﬁeld of ﬁnance and economics is important to understand the temporal 
dynamics of the investigated variables.  For example, a time series analysis on price of the S&P 
500 might reveal certain volatility dynamics. 
 
In the stochastic modeling section a review of some random sampling methods and how 
to improve on the random sampling homogeneity are investigated. In complex ﬁnancial problems 
Monte Carlo simulations are frequently utilized with stochastic processes built in the simulation. 
This type of research method can help in making a more realistic and statistically sound research 
design.  Stochastic models can also help in forecasting price curves when the simulation 
parameterizes a Levy process, whereby the Levy process deﬁnes the drift, volatility, and jumpElectronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

diffusion components of the historic time series.  By taking the Levy process parameters the 
Monte Carlo simulation can generate probability paths of the price curve of interest. 
 
In the conclusion section an important question was examined.  How to best construction 
a research study that is related to quantitative ﬁnance research questions, especially relating to 
time series data from asset markets?  It’s within the intent of this Breadth component to answer 
this important question by using different research methods in quantitative ﬁnance pertaining to 
the categories of experimental, cross-sectional, quasi-experimental, pre-experimental, sample 
design, econometric models, and stochastic simulations.   
EXPERIMENTAL 
In this section a discussion on the components of a research design and types of experimental 
designs are investigated.  There are four components of a typical research design: comparison, 
manipulation, control, and generalization (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 94). 
Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) considered the comparison component as a way to 
establish correlation among independent and dependent variables (p. 94).  In quantitative 
research a comparison could be between price and volatility of asset returns.  The price could be 
representing the dependent variable, whereas volatility represents the independent variable. 
Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias contended that the manipulation component is important to 
establish causality, whereby changing the independent variable and measuring the change in the 
dependent variable might suggest a statistical relationship (p. 95).  In our example of price and 
volatility: if volatility changes x percent then price might change y percent which might establish 
statistical signiﬁcance.  For the third component, control is important to consider in the research 
design.  Internal validity can be established if the proper controls are in place during the 
experiment (p. 95). If a researcher can establish that the independent variable did cause a change 
in the dependent variable and not some other mediating set of variables then proper control was 
conducted in the experiment.  In quantitative ﬁnance perhaps price is also affected by investor 
memory and not just volatility.  The experiment would need to investigate how price changes 
with volatility and investor’s memory of previous price conditions.  The last component is 
generalization, which is deﬁned as the ability to project the conclusions of the experiment to the 
larger population (p. 101).  This is also considered external validity.   
It is possible that the sample size is not truly representative of the population dynamics. 
For example, our time series on price of an asset might be during times of ﬁnancial turmoil 
leading to the conclusion that a certain percentage of change in price is from a certain change in 
market volatility.  The problem is that the time series might be non-linear and that the percentage 
of change in price relative to volatility might be representative in a power law distribution – the 
system might be convex or concave.  So the external validity would only be established by 
increasing the period range to include turmoil and tranquil markets. 
There are ﬁve experimental design types to consider: (1) controlled experimentation, (2) 
Solomon four-group, (3) post-test-only control group, (4) effects through time, and (5) factorial 
design (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, pp. 103-107).  Frankfort-Nachmias and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

Nachmias (2008) proposed that controlled experimentation is the strongest method of 
establishing causation but external validity can be compromised (p. 103).  Frankfort-Nachmias 
and Nachmias described a controlled experiment as a design that allows for pretesting, post 
testing, and control-experiment group comparisons (pp. 103-104).  In quantitative ﬁnance it is 
possible to construct a controlled experiment.  For example, to determine if forecasting accuracy 
increases, a researcher can compare using constant volatility or time varying volatility. The 
control group is calculated with constant volatility and the experimental group is calculated with 
the time varying volatility.  The pretest is done by measuring forecasting accuracy on a random 
sample of assets among the control and experimental groups.  Then exposure to a time varying 
volatility measure in the experimental group is conducted and a new forecast is calculated.  In the 
post test the mean forecast accuracies are compared to determine if differences are statistically 
signiﬁcant.  
A Solomon four-group design is similar to the classic controlled experiment but there are 
an additional set of control and experimental groups that are not pretested to determine if 
pretesting affects the results (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 104). This type of 
research design might be useful in a simulation application in ﬁnance, whereby the experiment 
can be constructed assuming certain initial conditions and determine if these initial conditions 
affect the post testing results.             
A post test only control group design is usually a more practical experiment design 
because in many cases it might be cost prohibitive to pretest (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 
2008, p. 106).  A post test only control group is the same as a classical experimental design except 
that no pre testing is conducted on the experimental or control group.  In quantitative ﬁnance an 
example would be to compare the performance of forecasting between the standard BlackScholes pricing model used on the control group of assets and a Levy process pricing model used 
on the experimental group of assets. 
Research designs that determine the effects of time are important, especially in non-linear 
dynamic systems.  Experimental designs used to study effects extended in time that are 
constructed similarly to the Solomon four-group design but  have more post testing is performed 
for each time period of interest (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 107).  In 
quantitative ﬁnance effects on a system through time are very important, therefore many research 
designs should be utilizing additional post testing.  For example, in ﬁnancial time series there are 
lagged effects within the time series.  By looking at x periods out one can determine the 
multiplicative or decaying effect. 
 
When considering more than one independent variable in a research design the 
researcher needs to develop a factorial design to determine how each independent variable 
contributes to the dependent variable (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 108). 
Utilizing a matrix chart to organize the possible combination among the variables can be useful 
to the researcher.  In quantitative ﬁnance, researchers are interested in a multitude of variables 
that affect price, such as drift, volatility, and price jumps.  Regressing price with many different 
variables and determining statistical signiﬁcance will help describe the ﬁnancial system better, 
which in turn perhaps leads to better forecasting.   
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

CROSS-SECTIONAL 
A cross-sectional design is usually employed with survey research, whereby random samples of 
individuals are asked a series of questions (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 116). 
The questions are independent variables and the response by the individuals is the dependent 
variable.  In behavioral ﬁnance, a cross-sectional design can be utilized to determine investor 
behavior or perceptions related to stress.  For example, a random sample of investors could be 
asked a series of questions about risk tolerance to determine if they are an equity or bond 
investor. Frankfort- Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) considered that cross-section designs are not 
as powerful of a research tool as traditional experimental designs because before-and-after 
comparisons are not possible (p. 117). 
 
Some of the survey research methods employed in a cross-sectional design are: (1) mail 
questionnaire, (2) personal interview, and (3) telephone interview.  The advantages of a mailed 
questionnaire are the following: (1) low cost, (2) reduction in biasing error, greater anonymity, (3) 
considered answers, and (4) accessibility (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 207). 
Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) suggested that the disadvantages of a mailed 
questionnaire are: (1) requires simple questions, (2) no opportunity for probing, (3) no control over 
who ﬁlls out the questionnaire, and (4) low response rate (p. 207).   
 
Personal interviews have the following advantages: (1) ﬂexibility, (2) control of the 
interview situation, (3) high response rate, and (4) collection of supplemental information 
(Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 218). But Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias 
(2008) warn that the researcher must realize the disadvantages of personal interviews are: (1) high 
cost, (2) interview bias, and (3) lack of anonymity, which all are strengths in a mailed survey (p. 
219).    In terms of advantages of a telephone interview, Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias 
proposed that there are moderate costs, speed, high response rate, and quality (p. 223).  But the 
disadvantages of a telephone interview are the reluctance to discuss sensitive topics, the 
possibility of broken-off interviews, and the lack of supplemental information (p. 223). 
Since cross-sectional designs uses surveys a researcher needs to consider the types of 
questions to ask.  There are three types of question structures: (1) closed-ended, (2) open-ended, 
and (3) contingency questions (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 233).  Closed-ended 
questions are ones that an interviewee is asked to choose the most appropriate response to a 
question from a presented list.  Open-ended questions are questions when the interviewee 
answers a question with no presented list to choose from.  Usually open-ended questions are 
answered in sentence or essay format, whereby the interviewee’s answers are captured in full. 
Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) described contingency questions as a special type of 
closed-ended question, whereby a ﬁlter question is initiated and if the interviewee passes the ﬁlter 
question then the interviewer will initiate the contingency questions (p. 235). 
 
When considering a survey the interviewer needs to determine the question format. 
There are many different formats, such as ratings, matrix questions, and ranking types (FrankfortNachmias and Nachmias, 2008, pp. 236-238).  But beyond the format of the questions the 
interviewer needs to determine the sequencing, whereby Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

(2008) suggested funneling and inverted funneling sequencing (pp. 238-239).  In terms of funnel 
sequencing Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias describes the questioning process as a 
progressively narrowing of scope based on the answers of the previous question (p. 238). 
Inverted funnel sequencing is the opposite of funnel sequencing, whereby speciﬁc questions are 
progressively broader (p. 239). 
 
Cross-sectional designs are good for behavioral ﬁnance research, but are not adequate for 
quantitative ﬁnance because the research questions involved in quantitative ﬁnance are not survey 
oriented – the research questions usually are more experimental in design.  For example, if a 
researcher was interested in risk tolerance of an investor a cross sectional design utilizing a survey 
with funneling sequencing might be useful to narrow down the speciﬁc behavioral characteristics 
for high risk tolerance. 
QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL 
A quasi-experimental design allow for random selection from the population but does not require 
the random assignment to comparison groups, whereby reducing the internal validity compared 
to classical experimental designs (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 118).  FrankfortNachmias and Nachmias (2008) proposed four types of quasi-experimental designs: (1) 
contrasted-groups; (2) planned variation; (3) panels and time-series; and (4) control-series designs 
(pp. 118-127).  In Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias’ book contrasted-groups are quasiexperimental designs that compare categorical groups, such as region or political afﬁliation (p. 
118).  A simple example of a contrasted-groups design used in behavioral ﬁnance would be 
categorical groups that represent metropolitan regions and compare the mean percentage of 
savings of each categorical group, which allows for a statistical comparison to be made. 
Pretesting and post testing can be performed on comparison groups in a contrasted-groups 
research design (p. 120). 
 
Planned variation designs are where a researcher has designed an experiment where 
individuals are exposed at different levels of the independent variable to determine causal effects 
(Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 122). As  Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) 
suggested, planned variation designs have a tendency to weaken internal validity relative classical 
experiments because the comparison groups are not randomly assembled leading to possibility of 
biased conclusions on causal effects.  In a behavioral ﬁnance application, a planned variation 
design could be used to determine if a causal effect exists between a required margin in a futures 
account and volatility of market prices would increase risk aversion for investors. 
 
Panels and time-series designs are used to determine changes in the dependent variable 
along time (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 123).  Panel studies are more rigorous 
because the same comparison group is examined at different time intervals, but FrankfortNachmias and Nachmias (2008) warns that this type of design is difﬁcult in social science 
experiments because individuals assigned to a comparison group need to be observed over a 
certain time period – suggesting the problem of individuals dropping out of the research study (p. 
124).  When considering time series designs Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias proposed that a 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

typical time series has multiple pretesting and post testing observations (p. 124).  Time series 
designs are common in economics and ﬁnance.  Econometrics is a ﬁeld of study in economics, 
whereby regression analysis is performed on large datasets that are constructed through time.  For 
example, an economic policy can be measured to determine efﬁcacy using time series designs.   
 
Control-series designs are time-series designs that can compare different groups, whereby 
causal effects can be established (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 128).  For example, 
comparing Michigan and the average of the other States on income level over time can be a 
control-series design experiment.  This sort of design can be useful to economists and policy 
makers.  Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) suggested that the major advantage with 
control-series designs is that history, maturation, and testing effects are shared by all comparison 
groups allowing for control of these characteristics (p. 128). 
PRE-EXPERIMENT  
Pre-experimental is a very weak inferential tool for researchers.  Pre-experimental designs do not 
allow for random assignment to comparison groups and experimental manipulation; therefore 
internal and external validity is compromised (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 131). 
Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) proposed that the one advantage to a preexperimental design was that it allowed researchers to gather information when other research 
methods were not available, whereby the research would conclude that further studies would 
need to be conducted (p. 133).  When considering the continuum of inquiry pre-experimental 
designs would be more qualitative and less quantitative.  The disadvantage of pre-experimental 
designs articulated by Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias is that internal and external validity are 
extremely week (p. 133).  A one-shot case study is a type of pre-experimental design, which is 
similar to a phenomenological study were a single group or event is investigated (p. 131).  Due to 
the lack of a signiﬁcant sample size, validity of causation is compromised.  For example, in 
quantitative ﬁnance, we might start an investigation on the causes of illiquid markets by asking a 
hedge fund manager how they reacted to the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008.  Per-experimental designs 
could be used to pilot a research direction.  
SAMPLE DESIGN 
There are two types of sampling: probability and non-probability sampling (Frankfort-Nachmias 
and Nachmias, 2008, p. 167).  Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) considered a probability 
sample as to be able to specify the probability of a sample representing the population, whereas a 
non-probability sample is not being able to set a probability of a sample to the population (p. 
167).  From Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias there are four types of probability sample 
designs: (1) simple random sample, (2) systematic samples, (3) stratiﬁed samples, and (4) cluster 
samples (p. 169).  In simple random sampling each of the sampling units has equal and known 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

nonzero probability for assignment (p. 169).  In quantitative ﬁnance we could randomly select 
equities out of the S&P 500 index for sample unit assignment. Systematic sampling is when the 
ﬁrst sample is randomly selected but subsequent samples are selected at a set criterion, e.g. every 
5th individual.  In our S&P 500 index example, we arrange the index in alphabetical order and 
randomly select on equity and then select every 5th equity thereafter. A researcher should keep in 
mind that systematic sampling might introduce sample bias, but it is more convenient then simple 
random sampling. 
 
Stratiﬁed samples are used to ensure that minority groups are represented in the sampling 
process (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 171).  It is possible that a minority group 
might not be sampled adequately through a simple random sampling or a systematic sampling 
because of the sporadic nature of the diffusion in the population.  The problem with stratiﬁed 
sampling is that the population composition needs to be known to adequately have all concerned 
groups represented based on the true population distribution.  In economics stratiﬁed sampling 
might be utilized to sample disposable incomes of various racial groups in a country to ensure no 
sample bias to certain racial groups exists.  Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) described 
cluster sampling as a method used in large-scale research studies due to its low costs to initiate (p. 
173).  As Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias stated a large group is randomly selected and 
further subdivision sampling are conducted within the large group (p. 173).  It is possible to use 
cluster sampling in economics though the following example.  If a researcher was interested in 
understanding the changes in disposable income in a state and relative to the sales tax rate a 
cluster sample of a particular county within in a State can be randomly sampled and subdivided.     
 
In terms of non-probability sampling there are three main types: (1) convenience samples, 
(2) purposive samples, and (3) quota samples (Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias, 2008, p. 168). 
Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) concluded that convenience sampling is utilized when 
a quick and easy to assemble sample is needed (p. 168).  In ﬁnance, if a researcher needs to 
conduct a quick survey of employment a researcher could convenience sample her surroundings. 
Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias suggested that purposive samples are constructed using 
subjective means that the researcher believes represents the population composition (p. 168).  It 
does seem that purposive sampling is more representative of the population than convenience 
sampling but the subjectivity needs to be considered to understand the possibility of sample bias. 
A quota sampling is making a conscious effort to sample to a known ratio in the population (p. 
168).  Quota sampling seems similar to a stratiﬁed sampling but quota sampling is still considered 
a non-probability sample design because other factors that are represented in the population 
might not be in the quota sampling technique, e.g. race or age – when the quota considered in 
the population is gender. 
ECONOMETRICS 
Introduction to econometrics 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

Econometrics is a very important tool to analyze economic and quantitative ﬁnance themes. 
Econometrics involves regression models to describe the economic or ﬁnancial dynamics.  There 
are single factor and multi factor regressions to describe these economic and ﬁnancial 
environments.  For example, equation 1 is a simple regression. 
GDP = β0 + β1Productivity + u    
 
 
(1) 
GDP is gross domestic production, β0 is the intercept, β1 is the parameter for productivity, and u 
is the error term.  β1 is the change in GDP with a unit change in productivity.  If β1 = .7 then 
GDP would increase by .7 with one more productive unit. 
 
The ordinary least squares (OLS) method is the typical method used to produce the 
regression model.  The OLS method is used for estimating residuals and a regression line is ﬁtted 
with the dataset with the least error.  There are certain assumptions that need to be met to make 
sure the OLS is unbiased.  Biased OLS conditions reduce the internal validity of the regression 
analysis.  There are basically four assumptions for unbiased OLS regressions for a single factor 
linear regression: (1) linear in parameters, (2) random sampling, (3) sample variation in the 
explanatory variable, and (4) zero conditional mean (Wooldridge, 2009, pp. 47-49).  Wooldridge 
(2009) deﬁned that linear in parameters is when the dependent variable is related to the 
independent variable and the error term in a population (p. 47).  Random sampling is axiomatic 
and needs no further explanation.  Wooldridge explained that the sample outcomes on the 
independent variable are not all the same (p. 48).  Lastly, the expectation of the error term given 
any independent variable is zero (p. 49).    
 
It is important to also consider the homoskedasticity, where the variance of the error term 
given the independent variable is a constant (Wooldridge, 2009, pp. 47-49).  In summary, the 
homoskedastic assumption and the expected value of the error term of zero are key assumptions 
to assure that the regression model’s internal validity is not compromised.     
 
The assumptions for a multiple factor linear regression are the following: (1) linear in 
parameters, (2) random sampling, (3) no perfect collinearity, and (4) and zero conditional mean 
for the error term (Wooldridge, 2009, pp. 84-87).  Woodridge (2009) stated that under the 
assumptions for a multiple factor linear regression a model can be derived using unbiased OLS 
estimators (p. 88).  Woodridge mentions that if an independent variable is correlated to the error 
term then the independent variable is considered an endogenous explanatory variable (p. 88). 
But if the independent variable is not correlated to the error term then the independent variable 
is considered an exogenous explanatory variable (p. 88).  A researcher should be careful in 
including irrelevant variables in a regression model.  Over specifying the model does not have an 
effect on the unbiased coefﬁcients but it can have effects on the variance of the OLS estimators 
(p. 89).  When an under speciﬁed model is used the researcher should also beware of accuracy of 
the regression.  Under speciﬁed models can create a biased OLS estimator (p. 91).  This degree 
of bias is determined by the correlation of variables and the sign of the omitted coefﬁcient (p. 
91).       
In terms of the variance of the OLS estimators, a researcher needs to understand the 
accuracy of the OLS estimator to determine validity of the regression model.  In multiple 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

regressions there is the assumption of homoskedasticity for the error term relative to any of the 
explanatory variables (Wooldridge, 2009, p. 95).  Wooldridge (2009) calculated the size of the 
sample variance to determine the precision of an OLS estimator, e.g. large values mean less 
precise estimators (p 95).  Wooldridge considered that the components for a sample variance are 
the standard deviation, total sum of the squares, and R-square (p. 95).  The larger standard 
deviation means larger variance for the OLS estimators (p. 95).  The larger the total sum of the 
squares the smaller the sample variance and the more accurate the OLS estimator – when all 
others components are constant (p. 96).  When R-squared is large the sample variance is larger – 
when all other components are constant (p. 97).   
 
There is a tradeoff between bias and variance when considering including a variable in a 
regression model (Wooldridge, 2009, p. 99).  Wooldridge (2009) had the following rules when two 
independent variables are uncorrelated with each other (p. 100).   
• 
When the population coefﬁcient for the second term does not equal zero then the 
coefﬁcient for the ﬁrst term for the simple regression is biased and the coefﬁcient 
for the ﬁrst term from the multi regression is unbiased with the sample variance 
for the simple regression being less than the sample variance of the multi 
regression for the ﬁrst term’s coefﬁcient.   
• 
When the population coefﬁcient for the second term equals zero then the sample 
and multi regression coefﬁcient for the ﬁrst term are both unbiased with the 
sample variance for the simple regression being less than the sample variance for 
the multi regression for the ﬁrst coefﬁcient. 
In many multiple regression analyses OLS is used but the researcher should consider 
statistical methods that control for over or under specifying a regression model.  Some methods 
for doing this are stepwise routines, whereby a regression model is built up one independent 
variable at a time to see if the overall statistical signiﬁcance increases and that the individual 
independent variable are relevant.  Some software packages can also rearrange the stepwise order 
of a multiple regression to determine which explanatory variables are pertinent – order of the 
stepwise routine can bias the statistical results. 
Simultaneous equation models 
Simultaneous equation models (SEM) are important in understand complex dynamic systems 
(Wooldridge , 2009, p. 547).  For example, since supply and demand can be modeled in 
equilibrium then the supply equation can equal the demand equation.  Wooldridge (2009) 
deﬁned the observable variable as the explanatory variable but the error term as the 
unobservable variable, whereby the explanatory variables and the error terms are uncorrelated 
(p. 547).  When the explanatory variable is correlated to the error term then this leads to bias in 
the OLS estimator.  Wooldridge considered that simultaneity bias occurs when the dependent 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

variable deﬁnes one of the explanatory variables in another equation and is correlated to the 
error term of that second equation (p. 552). 
 
The identiﬁed equation in a two-equation system is the equation that can be estimated 
given a random sample on the explanatory variables (Wooldridge, 2009, p. 553).  Wooldridge 
(2009) stated that when the explanatory variables are exogenous and they are different in each 
equation then this condition is considered an exclusion restriction on the model (p. 554). 
Wooldridge also stated that when solving a system of simultaneous equations one is to determine 
the rank condition and order condition (pp. 554-555).  The easy way to remember the identiﬁer 
equation is to see if there are any exogenous variables not in an equation but is located in other 
equations, whereby the equation missing the exogenous variable is the identiﬁed equation (p. 
554).   The order condition is determined by counting the endogenous and exogenous variables, 
whereby there is at least as many excluded exogenous variables as included endogenous variables 
in the structural equation (p. 524).  
 
SEMs with time series are excellent for deﬁning a country’s economy (Wooldridge, 2009, 
p. 560). Wooldridge (2009) used the example that the consumption of a country can be modeled 
with income, tax receipts, interest rate, investment, and government spending (p. 560).  Other 
complex economic systems can also me model and are used in dynamic stochastic equilibrium 
models (DSGE).  DSGE is a system of equations that help model macroeconomic conditions, 
which is an advanced topic in econometric model.  Sometimes simultaneous equations have 
lagged explanatory variables, whereby a dependent variable is a function with a previous time 
period explanatory variable.  Wooldridge suggested that lagged variables can be considered 
endogenous or exogenous to the error term of the dependent variable function, but typically 
lagged variables are considered endogenous – correlated to the error term (p. 562). 
 
Shown in equation 2 through 4 is an example of a three-equation system (Wooldridge, 
2009, p. 559).   
 
 
#
 
The z explanatory variables are exogenous and the y variables are endogenous to the error term 
u.    The ﬁrst subscript deﬁnes the equation number and the second subscript deﬁnes the variable 
number.  Also the α parameters are considered endogenous and the β parameters are exogenous. 
Equation 1 is the identiﬁed equation because z2, z3, and z4 are excluded; therefore it meets the 
order condition. 
Panel data can be used in a SEM system.  Panel data are longitudinal, in which there are 
many cross sections of data throughout time.  Therefore, SEM can be good at modeling systems 
that are affected throughout time.  The use of dummy variables is also possible with SEM 
systems.  Dummy variable are used to determine the explanatory affects of non-numerical 
variables, e.g. gender or nationality. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

Due to the use of logarithms in SEM systems an explanation on their meaning should be 
investigated.  See table 1 for interpreting the logs in a regression model (Wooldridge, 2009, p. 46). 
Logarithms in a regression allow for non linear relationships in a regression model.
#
 
In a level-level model the dependent and independent variables do not have logs, 
therefore the unit change in the dependent variable is caused by a unit change in the 
independent variable.  For a log-log level then the percentage change in the dependent variable is 
caused by a percentage change in the independent variable.  Wooldridge (2009) considered the 
beta of the independent variable as the elasticity of y with respect to x in a log-log model (p. 46). 
Wooldridge also deﬁned 100 x beta as the semi-elasticity of y with respect x for a log-level model 
(p. 45). 
Advanced time series topics 
An inﬁnite distributed lag (IDL) model is when the dependent variable is deﬁned by current and 
all past values of the independent variables, see equation 5 (Wooldridge, 2009, p. 624).  This is 
similar to the lagged functions described in the previous economic section of this Breadth 
component, lagged independent variables extended to the indeﬁnite past.   Wooldridge (2009) 
suggested that due to there being an inﬁnite amount of lagged coefﬁcients there is some 
restrictions on estimating the model (p. 626).  Wooldridge considered using a Koyck distribution 
lag model to estimate the coefﬁcients in the IDL model (p. 626).  A coefﬁcient only depends on 
two parameters which are shown in equation 6 (p. 626). 
#
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

 A standard model with a lagged dependent variable can be obtained from an IDL model (p. 
627).  The result of the simpliﬁed IDL model is shown in equation 7 (p. 628). 
#
 
 
As can be seen in equation 7, the dependent variable is equal to the contemporaneous 
independent variable and a lagged dependent variable - with coefﬁcients governing the 
contemporaneous and lagged variables respectively. 
 
The Koyck distribution lag model is considered a special case and a more general 
deﬁnition of an IDL model can be obtained through a rational distribution lag (RDL) model 
(Wooldridge, 2009, p. 628).  The RDL model is simply adding a lagged exogenous variable, 
which was only a contemporaneous exogenous variable in the Koyck distribution lag model - 
coefﬁcients are deﬁned the same as in the Koyck distribution lag model (p.  628). Reference 
equation 7 for the RDL model mathematical deﬁnition, where  for equation 8: 
#
 
 
When dealing with time series analysis testing for unit roots is important for a researcher 
or practitioner. A unit root test determines if the time series has drift or not.  See equation 9 for 
an AR(1) model testing for a unit root (Wooldridge, 2009, p. 630).  AR(1) is an autoregressive 
model. 
#
 
If α=0 and ρ=1 then the time series is a random walk without drift, but when α≠0 and 
ρ=1 the time series is a random walk with drift (Wooldridge, 2009, p. 631).  Wooldridge (2009) 
considered testing the unit root with the Dickey-Fuller test or the augmented Dickey-Fuller test 
(pp. 631-633).  The main different between the normal Dickey-Fuller test and the augmented 
Dickey-Fuller test is that the latter test contains lagged changes in y, whereas the former test only 
has a lagged y. When the Dickey-Fuller test or augmented Dickey-Fuller test is statistically 
signiﬁcant then the time series is non-stationary. 
STOCHASTIC MODELING 
Monte Carlo simulations are very important analytical tools in quantitative ﬁnance.  Since nonlinear dynamic systems are very difﬁcult to determine through an analytical solution a researcher 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

needs to rely on numerical instruments, such as Monte Carlo simulations.  Monte Carlo 
simulations used in quantitative ﬁnance are basically a computer simulation that determines an 
evolutionary path of price or some other important metric.   For example, researchers can use 
Monte Carlo simulations to determine the probability of a certain range of prices for a particular 
asset.  The idea is to use stochastic variables that are integrated in the Monte Carlo simulation 
and re-run the simulation with much iteration.  The researcher would then understand the 
possible ranges of prices and determine from the simulation an average ending price of a 
probability cone for a range of prices.   
 
Stochastic processes have random characteristics.  A researcher needs to understand that 
randomization in computers might actually be clumpy and not uniform, especially when 
generating random vectors.  For example, in MATLAB the random generator will generate a 
degree of lumpiness in a two dimensional matrix.  If a researcher were to random generate from 
this random vector for their stochastic process the Monte Carlo simulation result would be 
slightly biased, which weakness internal validity.  There are four other common methods to solve 
the lumpiness problem for random vector generation: (1) Halton, (2) Faure, (3) Sobol, and (4) 
Hypercube (Huynh, Lai, and Soumare, 2008, p. 107).  Each one of these alternatives reduces the 
degree of lumpiness.  But does a researcher really need to adjust their stochastic process to 
correct the lumpiness when modeling in MATLAB?  First let’s examine the four other random 
generators.  Huynh, Lai, and Soumare (2008) used the Halton sequence, which is derived from 
the Van Der Corput sequence, and compared it to the MATLAB generator and found that the 
Halton sequence substantially reduced lumpiness in a two dimensional matrix (p. 94). Huynh, 
Lai, and Soumare tested the Halton sequence by using the Van Der Corput sequence, which uses 
different bases for each dimension, e.g. base 2 for dimension one and base 3 for dimension two (p. 
93). The base 2 and base Van Der Corput sequences are the following respectively (p. 92): 
0, 1/2, 1/4, 3/4, 1/8, 5/8, 3/8, 7/8, 1/16, 9/16, 3/16, 11/16, 5/16, 13/16, …  
0, 1/3, 2/3, 1/9, 4/9, 7/9, 2/9, 5/9, 8/9, 1/27, 10/27, 19/27, 2/27, …  
Even though the Halton does improve the lumpiness of the random vector generator compared 
to MATLAB the Halton sequence would need many dimensions to ﬁll a two dimensional matrix 
to each homogeneity (p. 94).   
The Faure is similar to the Halton sequence but differs by using the same base for all 
dimensions and permutation of the terms is implemented (Huynh, Lai, and Soumare, 2008, p. 
95).  In Huynh, Lai, and Soumare (2008) found that with 1000 terms homogeneity was reached 
with a base of 31, whereas not in a Halton sequence homogeneity was not reach even with a base 
of 103 (pp. 94-97).  Huynh, Lai, and Soumare warned that in a Faure sequence calculation 
performance diminishes at about the 25th dimension (p. 97).  The Faure sequence is determined 
by using the smallest prime number greater than the number of dimensions in the simulation (p. 
96).   From a qualitative perspective the lumpiness in graphing a base 2 and 3 Halton sequence 
and graphing a base 3 Faure sequence is about the same – an improvement from the MATLAB 
random generation. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

 
Sobol sequances are also built from Van Der Corput sequences but involves binary forms 
of terms (Huynh, Lai, and Soumare, 2008, p. 97).  Sobol sequences are quite involved and 
require an algorithm to generate.  Huynh, Lai, and Soumare (2008) suggest the follow basic 
process (p. 99): 
1. 
Select a primitive polynomial for a certain dimension. 
2. 
Use the initial values (M) based on the type of polynomial used. 
3. 
Determine position direction (k) for the decomposition of n term in base 2. 
4. 
Compute a new M by recurrence if needed with the chosen polynomial in 1. 
5. 
Compute values for yn+1. 
6. 
Compute xn+1 using  
 
#
 
7. 
Repeat step 3 through 6 to generate following sequence. 
It was found the Sobol Sequence does improve homogeneity compared to the MATLAB 
random generator process in three dimensions and computationally performs better than Halton 
and Faure sequences in higher dimensions (Huynh, Lai, and Soumare, 2008, p. 107). 
Hypercube sampling differs from the previous sequencing methods by being completely 
random, whereas the other sequencing methods were deterministic through the use of the Van 
Der Corput sequences (Huynh, Lai, and Soumare, 2008, p. 107).  Huynh, Lai, and Soumare 
(2008) suggested a three step process to implement a hypercube sampling: (1) divide each 
dimension into N sections; (2) generate uniform random variable and randomly distribute it in 
the ﬁrst section; and (3) repeat the step 2 for the remaining sections (p. 101).  Huynh, Lai, and 
Soumare showed that the hypercube sampling has similar distribution characteristics in low 
dimensions as in MATLAB and that the homogeneity of the hypercube sampling is slightly more 
(p. 102).   
How does the different sampling techniques compare to the MATLAB generation? 
Should research implement different strategies for sequence sampling to improve their stochastic 
simulations?  It was found that when trying to estimate the volume of a unit cube that MATLAB, 
Halton, Faure, Sobol, and hypercube methods perform differently and reach convergence at 
different number of iterations (Huynh, Lai, and Soumare, 2008, p. 103).  Huynh, Lai, and 
Soumare (2008) found that Halton, Faure, and Sobol converge faster than MATLAB and the 
hypercube in three dimensions (p. 103).  But Huynh, Lai, and Soumare did ﬁnd that Halton and 
Faure sequencing did lose efﬁciency faster than the Sobol sequencing, whereas the Hypercube 
sampling method did not lose efﬁciency with a more uniform distribution to MATLAB’s uniform 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

random generator (p. 105).  In conclusion, for estimating a three dimensional problem Sobol 
performs the best in terms of convergence time.   
  
In an option-like problem MATLAB, Halton, Faure, Sobol, and Hypercubes were 
compared to determine which method performs best, whereby this problem is still three 
dimensional. It was found that Halton, Faure, and Sobol mostly performed better in terms of 
standard error relative to MATLAB for all number of simulations, e.g. 200 though 1000 
simulations (Huynh, Lai, and Soumare, 2008, p. 107).  Huynh, Lai, and Soumare (2008) found 
that after 1000 simulations that MATLAB performed substantially worse than all other sampling 
methods in terms of standard error (p. 107).  In conclusion, for three dimensional random 
sampling for stochastic processes the research needs to weight computational time, convergence 
efﬁciency, and the number of iterations to perform for accurate results.  In addition, Hypercube 
sampling seems to perform similar to MATAB in terms of standard error, suggesting not much 
difference in homogeneity in large number of simulation iterations.  In most applications it seems 
that MATLAB’s uniform random generator is adequate for Monte Carlo simulation utilizing a 
stochastic process when number of iteration are adequate, but this might result in more 
computation time to generate the Monte Carlo simulation.  If a researcher desires to be more 
computationally efﬁcient and converge faster in their research study then Sobol sequencing might 
be a better method to implement in the Monte Carlo simulation.      
CONCLUSION 
In this section a discussion of the strengths and limitations of some research design methods 
pertaining to experimental, cross-sectional, quasi-experimental, pre-expermental, sample design, 
econometric models, and stochastic simulations. 
 
Experimental designs have four typical design components: comparison, manipulation, 
control, and generalization.  Each one of these components was elaborated upon.  There are ﬁve 
experimental design types to consider: (1) controlled experimentation, (2) Solomon four-group, (3) 
post-test-only control group, (4) effects through time, and (5) factorial design.  Leading to the 
conclusion that the controlled experimentation design type is the most powerful in establishing 
causation but external validity might be compromised.    
 
Cross-sectional design is usually employed with survey research, whereby a random 
sample of individuals is asked a series of questions.  For example, a random sample of investors 
could be asked a series of questions about risk tolerance to determine if they are an equity or 
bond investor.  Cross-section designs are considered not as powerful of a research tool as 
traditional experimental designs because before-and after comparisons are not possible.  Some of 
the survey research methods employed in a cross-sectional design are: (1) mail questionnaire, (2) 
personal interview, and (3) telephone interview. 
 
A Quasi-experimental design allows for random selection from the population but does 
not require the random assignment to comparison groups, thereby reducing the internal validity 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

compared to classical experimental designs.  There are four types of quasi-experimental designs: 
(1) contrasted-groups; (2) planned variation; (3) panels and time-series; and (4) control-series 
designs. Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias (2008) suggested that the major advantage with 
control-series designs is that history, maturation, and testing effects are shared by all comparison 
groups allowing for control of these characteristics. 
 
Pre-experimental is a very weak inferential tool for researchers.  Pre-experimental designs 
do not allow for random assignment to comparison groups and experimental manipulation; 
therefore internal and external validity is compromised.  When considering the continuum of 
inquiry pre-experimental designs would be more qualitative and less quantitative.  The 
disadvantage of pre-experimental designs articulated by Frankfort-Nachmias and Nachmias 
(2009) is that internal and external validity is extremely weak. 
 
There are two types of sampling: probability and non-probability sampling. There are 
four types of probability sample designs: (1) simple random sample, (2) systematic samples, (3) 
stratiﬁed samples, and (4) cluster samples.  Each one of these four types of sample designs was 
expounded upon.    
 
Econometrics is a very important tool to analyze economic and quantitative ﬁnance 
themes.  Econometrics involves regression models to describe the economic or ﬁnancial 
dynamics.  A discussion of the ordinary least squares method and how to use it in econometric 
regressions was put forth in this Breadth component.  In many multiple regression analyses the 
ordinary least squares method is used but the researcher should consider statistical methods that 
control for over or under specifying a regression model.  Some methods for doing this are 
stepwise routines, whereby a regression model is built up one independent variable at a time to 
see if the overall statistical signiﬁcance increases and that the individual independent variables 
are relevant. 
 
Simultaneous equations models are important in understanding complex dynamic system. 
For example, since supply and demand can be modeled in equilibrium then the supply equation 
can equal the demand equation.   Simultaneous equation models with time series are excellent 
for deﬁning a country’s economy.  Other complex economic systems can also be modeled and are 
used in dynamic stochastic equilibrium models.  Dynamic stochastic equilibrium models are a 
system of equations that help model macroeconomic conditions, which is an advanced topic in 
econometric modeling. 
 
Advanced topics in times series analysis was also investigated in the Breadth component. 
A discussion of inﬁnite distubuted lag models and rational distribution lag models were put 
forward.  The use of the normal Dickey-Fuller test and the augmented Dickey-Fuller test was 
discussed when testing for unit roots for stationary time series. 
Monte Carlo simulations are very important analytical tools in quantitative ﬁnance. 
Since non-linear dynamic systems are very difﬁcult to determine through an analytical solution a 
researcher needs to rely on numerical instruments, such as Monte Carlo simulations. Stochastic 
processes have random characteristics.  A researcher needs to understand that randomization in 
computers might actually be clumpy and not uniform, especially when generating random 
vectors.  There are four other common methods to solve the lumpiness problem for random 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

vector generation: (1) Halton, (2) Faure, (3) Sobol, and (4) Hypercube.  Each one of these random 
methods were explored and expounded upon. 
In this Breadth component different types of research designs have been evaluated and 
sub themes seemed to have emerged.  The researcher needs to be cognizant of the limitation of a 
research design and make sure that the appropriate statistical tests are performed on time series. 
For example, when using the Black-Scholes model for pricing options there are certain 
assumptions that need to be made with the time series investigated.  Those assumptions are 
constant volatility, normality, no transaction costs, constant drift, and no autocorrelation.  It was 
shown in this Breadth component on how to test for most of these assumptions statistically. 
 
In the Depth component an examination of current research on research methods and 
designs for the ﬁeld of quantitative ﬁnance is put forward.  Research methods are compared and 
contrasted on how to analyze hedging and price methods for ﬁnancial assets.  An investigation 
and evaluation of recent trends with research designs for the use in quantitative ﬁnance to 
develop and establish hedging and pricing techniques will be conducted. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573

Reference List  
Frankfort-Nachmias, C. & Nachmias, D. (2008). Research methods in social sciences (7th ed.). 
New York: Worth Publishers. 
Huynh, H. T., Lai, V. S., Soumare, I. (2008). Stochatic simulation and applications in ﬁnance with 
MATLAB programs. West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
Wooldridge, Jeffery. M. (2009). Introductory econometrics: a modern approach (4th ed.).  Ohio: 
South-Western Cengage Learning. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2794573
