Risk control of mean-reversion time in
statistical arbitrage
Joongyeub Yeo
George Papanicolaou
December 17, 2017
Abstract
This paper deals with the risk associated with the mis-estimation of mean-reversion of residuals in statistical arbitrage. The main idea in statistical arbitrage is to exploit short-term
deviations in returns from a long-term equilibrium across several assets. This kind of strategy
heavily relies on the assumption of mean-reversion of idiosyncratic returns, reverting to a
long-term mean after some time. But little is known regarding the assessment of this kind
of risk. In this paper, we propose a simple scheme that controls the risk associated with
estimating mean-reversions by using portfolio selections and screenings. Realizing that each
residual has a diﬀerent mean-reversion time, the ones that are fast mean-reverting are selected
to form portfolios. Further control is imposed by allowing the trading activity only when the
goodness-of-ﬁt of the estimation for trading signals is suﬃciently high. We design a dynamic
asset allocation strategy with market and dollar neutrality, formulated as a constrained optimization problem, which is implemented numerically. The improved reliability and robustness
of this strategy is demonstrated through back-testing with real data. It is observed that its
performance is robust to a variety of market conditions. We further provide some answers to
the puzzle of choosing the number of factors to use, the length of estimation windows, and
the role of transaction costs, which are crucial issues with direct impact on the strategy.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Keywords: mean-reversion time, statistical arbitrage, portfolio selection, market neutrality, principal components, factor models, residuals
Joongyeub Yeo (Corresponding author)
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University
E-mail address: uriyeobi@gmail.com
Phone: (650)556-4130
George Papanicolaou
Department of Mathematics, Stanford University
E-mail address: papanico@math.stanford.edu
Phone: (650)723-2081
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

1
Introduction
With the rapid evolution statistical methods for analyzing large data sets and the establishment of automated
markets, statistical arbitrage has become a common investment strategy with both hedge funds and investment
banks. Although there is no consensus on what is statistical arbitrage, its main idea is a trading or investment
strategy that exploits short-term deviations from a long-term equilibrium across the assets. Pairs trading is
one of the earliest forms of statistical arbitrage, and it is widely used. This strategy consists of buying a certain
asset which is below some equilibrium price and selling another correlated asset which is above it, expecting
that the two will tend to equilibrium so that the trade generates proﬁts. In other words, it is a bet on relative
positions, rather than absolute positions, in a way that the resulting portfolio is unaﬀected by the equilibrium
itself, and is relatively insensitive to market behavior. This kind of strategy heavily relies on the belief of
mean-reversion of idiosyncratic returns or residuals, reverting to a long-term mean within some time that can
be quantiﬁed. Although residuals of highly correlated assets generally converge to each other after diverging,
there is no rule that asserts this has to happen. Thus, the essential risk of statistical arbitrage lies in the
reliable quantiﬁcation of the mean reversion characteristics of residuals.
There are very few studies in the literature that address the issue of the mean-reversion of residuals from
the statistical arbitrage point of view. Thus, the objective of this paper is to address the question:
Can we control the risk from the mean-reversion behavior of residuals in statistical arbitrage?
The ﬁrst and the main contribution of this paper is that we consider statistical methods for the risk-control
of mean-reversion. Motivated by the observation that each residual has a diﬀerent rate of mean-reversion, we
carry out a statistical training to assess the quality of each residual relative to its rate of mean-reversion, from
which only fast mean-reverting residuals are selected to form portfolios. Regular updates of the portfolio and
further screening using the goodness-of-ﬁt in the estimation of trading signals is also imposed to boost the
reliability of the strategy.
Another contribution of our work is the transformation of the asset allocation problem in statistical arbitrage, with market- and dollar-neutrality conditions, to a constrained optimization problem that can be solved
numerically. In this strategy, the threshold-based rule deﬁnes the sign (long or short) of the position of each
asset and the neutrality conditions determine the investment amount.
Lastly, we demonstrate the performance of our strategy with real market data. The out-of-sample results
show that, compared to other strategies, the proposed risk-control method works very well, giving persistently
higher Sharpe ratios in all the diﬀerent market regimes encountered in the last several years, before and after
the 2008 crisis.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

1.1
Basic aspects of statistical arbitrage
Implementing a statistical arbitrage strategy involves several steps. We brieﬂy run through the necessary ones
in the context of generalized pairs trading, where each pair consists of an individual asset and its corresponding
common factors.
First of all, we describe how to construct residual returns. Consider a factor model
R = LF + U
(1)
where R is a N × T matrix of the data (e.g., stock returns), F is a p × T matrix of factors, L is an N × p
matrix of factor loadings, U is an N × T matrix of the idiosyncratic components or residuals. Usually, only
R is observable, so L, F, and U must be estimated. By its deﬁnition, the residual is determined subject to
the common factors (LF, in Eq. 1). To estimate factors we use principal components.1 Then determining
the common factors amounts to determining the number of factors. The estimation of the number of factors
in high-dimensional models has been the subject of extensive research. For simplicity, in most of this paper
rather than using a time-varying number of factors, we consider several diﬀerent constant values.
Next, the factor loadings (L) are estimated by multivariate regression of R on the subspace spanned by
F. Finally, the residual (U) is the remaining part, after subtracting the estimated common factors from the
original returns:
ˆU = R −ˆL ˆF.
(2)
Here the hat ( ˆ· ) notation indicates estimators, since only R is observable.
The next step is modeling the residual processes, and we adopt the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process:
dXi
t = κi(mi −Xi
t)dt + σidW i
t
(3)
Here Xi
t =
tP
l=1
Uil is an integrated residual return for the i-th asset.2 The parameters (κ, σ, m)3 in the OU
modeling are estimated by least-squares, using an associated autoregressive process in discrete time.
The last step is trading. For each asset, a trading signal is generated as a normalized level of each residual
using the estimated OU parameters. Then we open or close a position whenever its signal becomes active or
inactive, respectively.
1This not just because it is easy to do. See section 2 for further discussion.
2Xi
t has units of log price.
3κ represent the rate of mean-reverting, σ is for volatility, m is for the long-term mean value of X.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

1.2
Risk control for reliable residuals
Although the strategy described above is well designed and widely used, there are several issues that must be
considered.
1. First and most critically, there is no guarantee that a residual reverts to some mean. Clearly, a slow mean
reversion is unfavorable in statistical arbitrage, since it increases uncertainties in spread convergence,
and hence decreases the chance of getting proﬁts.
2. Second, the parameter estimation for generating trading signals may not always be satisfactory. Signals
with large estimation errors cannot be trusted.
3. Third, the estimated mean-reversion times or the correlation structure of residuals are not constant over
rolling time windows. They can and do change with time.
Consequently, to improve the reliability of the statistical arbitrage strategy, we propose the following controls.
1. Strategic reliability - Residuals that have long estimated mean-reversion time should be excluded from
the strategy. We only consider residuals with relatively fast mean-reversion for portfolio selection.
2. Statistical reliability - Any trading signal with large estimation error is screened out.
3. Temporal reliability - Portfolio choices based on the estimated mean-reversion time must be updated
regularly.
For the ﬁrst control, we introduce a reliability score for each residual by the average of rates of meanreversion (∼ˆκ) estimated from training periods. Then we choose only a certain portion of the highest scoring
stocks, expecting that the residuals of those stocks will show good mean-reversion properties. The second
control ensures that the estimation for the trading signals is as reliable as we want. Indeed, we reject a trading
signal if the R2-value from the corresponding OU-estimation is lower than a cutoﬀvalue.4 The third part is to
avoid relying on old information. Refreshing portfolio selection enables us to keep holding reliable residuals.
These operations are all shown to signiﬁcantly diminish the relevant risk and augment the stability of the
strategy.
1.3
Optimization for asset allocations
As discussed, a trading signal determines whether to buy or sell the asset. However, how much one needs to
allocate to each asset is still a non-trivial problem, since there are several constraints. In particular, market
neutrality is crucial in our strategy, since it allows the portfolio to be relatively uncorrelated from market
movements. Dollar neutrality and leverage constraints are also necessary for a fair assessment of strategies. In
4Other goodness-of-ﬁt measures can be used, but in this paper we use R2-value.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

short, for each time t, the required conditions can be stated as follows,
Market-neutrality :
X
i
Likqi = 0,
for each k=1,. . . ,p
(4)
Dollar-neutrality :
X
i
qi = 0
(5)
Total Leverage :
X
i
∥qi∥= I
(6)
Long/Short :
sgn(qi) is given by trading signals.
(7)
Here L is the factor loading matrix in Eq.1, qi is the investment amount on asset i, p is the number of factors,
and I is the total leverage level. Note that the ﬁrst condition is derived by multiplying q on both sides of Eq.1
and letting the common factor parts be zero.
These conditions can be consolidated to formulate an optimization problem. We do not write the full
expression here, but it turns it has the form:
min
q
∥Lq∥1
(8)
s.t.
Aq ⪯0
(9)
Aeqq = beq
(10)
c(q) = d
(11)
where A and Aeq are square matrices, beq and q are vectors, c(q) is a nonlinear function, and d is a scalar5.
By solving this problem, asset allocation can be more eﬃcient in the sense of robustness to market variations.
1.4
Back-tests
The performance of our method is evaluated by analyzing the cumulative proﬁt and loss (PnL) with real data.
As for market data, we use 3780 records (Jan 2, 2000 - Dec 31, 2014) of daily prices for 3786 stocks of the
S&P500. We use a portfolio size of 25, 50, 75, and 100 stocks, out of a total of 378 stocks. The performance is
evaluated within diﬀerent market regimes. We consider ﬁve regimes, each of which has two-year (504 business
days) period: pre-crisis (2005-2006), in-crisis (2007-2008), post-crisis (2009-2010), afterward (2011-2012), and
recent years (2013-2014).
The results are compared when using diﬀerent portfolios as well as with other
parameter choices. As comparison groups, we ﬁrst consider a portfolio where stocks are randomly chosen. In
addition, portfolios where stocks are selected by capitalization, one with the highest and the other with the
lowest, are also investigated.
5As will be discussed later, the dimensions of these quantities can change depending on the previous state
of the portfolio.
6There are stocks coming in and out of the pool of S&P500. We have only picked stocks which have persisted
during the 15-year period.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Figure 1 provides a snapshot of the back-testing results. We see that our portfolio selection using faster
mean-reversions performs better than any other comparison portfolios: the Sharpe ratios of the controlled
portfolios are much higher. By calculating the length of days of active positions as a proxy of realized meanreversion time, we check that our training for the mean-reversion speeds is eﬀective in the out-of-sample tests.
Furthermore, the selective trading via the R2-value screening boosts the overall results.7 These results show
that our risk controls lead to enhanced reliability in statistical arbitrage.
We also see that the investment adjustment derived from the proposed optimization problem plays an
important role in enhancing the robustness of the strategy. Regardless of regimes, the Sharpe ratios are more
stable than those from uniform asset allocation, which shows the importance of the optimization problem
regarding market-neutrality. Lastly, we also investigate the eﬀect of parameters such as number of factors,
window lengths, and transaction costs. From the results we ﬁnd that the performance with shorter windows
is more sensitive to the impact of higher transaction costs, as might be expected. Furthermore, we see that
in volatile markets only a small number of factors is suﬃcient for our strategy to work well. The issues of
portfolio size and the decreasing performance in recent years are discussed as well.
1.5
Relevant works
Pairs trading has been studied extensively from various perspectives. A seminal work is [1], where the authors
present a very simple relative value trading rule with U.S. data from 1963 to 2002. They use the Euclidean
squared distance of price time series to identify pairs, and show that a simple rule to open/close a trade
generates statistically and economically signiﬁcant excess returns. This work has been extended by [2] and
[3]. They reﬁne the formation of portfolios by allowing securities within the 48 Fama-French industries and
by measuring the number of zero crossing. Nevertheless, there are several limitations, including the fact that
none of these studies take into account trading costs.
There are not many studies devoted to mean reversion in residuals in the context of statistical arbitrage.8
In [9] a Gaussian linear state-space processes is suggested for modeling mean-reverting spreads arising in pairs
trading. Their point of view is that the observed process must be seen as a noisy realization of an underlying
hidden process, so the comparison between the two can lead to a more proﬁtable strategy. They suggest to
use the EM (expectation-maximization) algorithm for estimating model parameters. Although their model is
fully tractable, its applicability in practice is debatable, due to the fact that the model restricts the long run
relationship between the two stocks to one of return parity.9 In [11]a framework for forecasting is developed
using a co-integration method. Stocks with similar common trends are preselected, are assumed to be non7This is veriﬁed with various choices on the number of extracted factors and estimation windows.
8However, the notion of mean reversion of stock prices has received a considerable amount of attention in
the ﬁnancial literature ([4]; [5]; [6]; [7]; [8]).
9In the long run, the two stocks chosen must provide the same return so that any departure from it will be
expected to be corrected in the future ([10]).
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

stationary within the framework of a common trend model as in [12] and in Arbitrage Pricing Theory of [13].
In Vidyamurthy a method is also developed for ﬁnding the optimal triggering level for each pair, by counting
the number of times that each trigger level is exceeded. However, Vidyamurthy’s arguments are informal,
depend on heuristics, and lack explanations for decisions that aﬀect other aspects of the strategy and thus
make the approach of questionable value for practitioners.
The Ornstein-Uhlenback process has played a signiﬁcant role in modeling residuals. Closed form expressions
are obtained in [14] for the mean and variance of the trade duration and the strategy return, using OU modeling.
The eﬀect of transaction costs is also considered. In [15] stochastic control theory with OU-modeling is used,
and an optimal dynamic strategy for mean-reverting arbitrage opportunities is presented. But transaction costs
are still missing in the paper, and so their daily rebalancing is not expected to outperform the threshold-based
trading rule.
Recently, [16] carried out an extensive study of statistical arbitrage in the U.S. equities market. The authors
use principal component analysis and sector ETFs to ﬁnd factors, and analyze the performance of statistical
arbitrage strategies using residual modeling. Our study is motivated by their work, while our main focuses
is on the risks associated with mean-reversion times, portfolio selections, and the reliability of estimations.
We also enforce market- and dollar- neutrality by solving a constrained optimization problem, which is also
diﬀerent from what they do. Our approach is especially eﬀective when there is a restriction on the number of
stocks in a portfolio. We also study in detail the eﬀect of various parameter choices, such as the number of
factors, estimation windows, capitalizations, regimes, or transaction costs.
1.6
Outline
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we ﬁrst recall the factor model framework and
explain how the residuals are generated. Then the estimation of mean-reversion times is discussed. In addition,
we introduce a risk control method to search for reliable residuals. Section 3 explains the trading rule and the
required balance conditions for the strategy. We propose an optimization problem for the asset allocation. The
numerical results and back-testings are presented in section 4. We compare results with diﬀerent parameter
choices and with various other portfolios.
We ﬁrst investigate the eﬀects of our control methods and the
proposed optimization problem for asset allocations. We explore further other issues, such as capitalization,
market regimes, number of factors, training window lengths, transaction costs, and portfolio size. An issue
in recent years’ market and the results from time-varying number of factors are also addressed. Finally, we
conclude in section 5.
2
Risk-control of mean-reversion times of residual processes
In this section we explain how residuals are constructed, calibrated, and controlled.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

2.1
Construction of residuals
Most trading strategies in statistical arbitrage only concern the residual returns of assets. Thus, the way of
determining residuals directly aﬀects its performance. By deﬁnition of residuals in factor models, the problem
of determining residuals is equivalent to that of determining common factors.
Let us consider a set of N securities (e.g., stocks) each represented by a time series of returns and let T
be the number of time series observations. For i = 1, · · · , N and t = 1, · · · , T, we write a factor model as
rt
n×1
=
L
N×p
ft
p×1
+ ut
n×1
(12)
where rt is a time series of original returns, ft represents factors, L represents factor loadings, and ut represents
idiosyncratic returns. Note that the rationale of this model is to decompose the original signal into systemic
components (factors) and idiosyncratic components (residuals). Collecting the above vectors, we can rewrite
the above factor model in a matrix form
R
N×T
=
L
N×p
F
p×T
+ U
N×T
(13)
In this paper, we adopt statistical factor models in which factors are unobservable and so extracted from asset
returns. That is, one needs to determine factors, their loadings, the number of factors, and residuals, based on
the information taken from market returns. We follow [16] for constructing factors. The number of factors is
also an important quantity to be speciﬁed. One simple and common way is to choose p factors that explain a
certain level of variance. In this study, we mainly consider constant number of factors.10
From the data matrix R, a correlation matrix can be obtained according to the formula:
C = 1
T MM T
(14)
where M is N × T matrix of the normalized returns derived from R.11 Each element of C is obviously the
Pearson correlation coeﬃcient Ci,j between a pair of stocks i and j. The correlation matrix can be diagonalized
by solving the eigenvalue problem
Cvi = λivi,
i = 1, · · · , N
(15)
From investment theory perspective, each eigenvector vi can be considered as a realization of an N-security
portfolio with weights equal to the eigenvector components vk
i , where k = 1, · · · , N. However, in order to
10In section 4.9, we also consider the dynamic number of factors by variance explanation ratios. The number
of factors should also take into account the correlation structure as well as variance. We developed a new
method to deal with this issue in another paper.
11Mit := (Rit −¯
Ri)/σi, where ¯
Ri and σi are the mean and standard deviations, respectively, of Rit.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

estimate each factor, we use the following eigensignals:
bFm = ⟨qm, rt⟩,
m = 1, · · · , p
(16)
where i-th element of a vector qm is deﬁned by qi
m := vi
m/σi with σi the standard derivation of stock i, and ⟨·⟩
is the inner product, and p is the number of factors. The division by σi is to take into account the fact that
higher capitalized ﬁrms are less volatile as discussed in [16]. Once bF is estimated, we use multivariate least
squares regressions of R on bF to estimate the factor loading coeﬃcients, bL. Finally, the residuals are obtained
by the diﬀerence between the original returns and common factors.
bU = R −bL bF.
(17)
Note that this calculation is deﬁned within a given time window T.12
2.2
Calibration of residuals
For the estimation of mean-reversion time of residual processes, we employ the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU)
process.13
Rewriting the factor model, we have
Rit =
p
X
j=1
LijFjt + Uit
(18)
It is natural to assume that the integrated residual process
Xit =
t
X
l=1
Uil
(19)
shows mean-reverting behaviors. The OU-modeling for stock i is given as
dXit = κi(mi −Xit)dt + σidWit,
κi > 0.
(20)
Note that the OU model is a continuous stochastic diﬀerential equation, but we only have discrete time
observations14. One way to deal with this is to discretize the OU process to the autoregressive process of order
1, and use the standard estimation method, the least-squares (LS), to estimate parameters. That is, we ﬁrst
12Two kinds of time windows are mentioned in this paper. One is for estimating the sample correlation matrix
and PCA, and the other is for parameter estimation of residual modeling. For simplicity and consistency, we
ﬁx the same length for both.
13There are many possible ways to model the residuals. However, the OU modeling is the most frequently
used for mean-reverting processes and is convenient for parameter estimation.
14There have been numerous studies made on estimating continuous time models based on discrete time
observations. We refer to the following literature: [17]; [18]; [19]; [20].
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

estimate the following model
Xk+1 = a + bXk + ϵk,
(21)
where ϵk ∼N(0, ν2), using LS.15 Then it is straightforward to relate the estimated parameter sets {ˆa,ˆb, ˆν} to
{ˆκ, ˆm, ˆσ}. The details of this estimation method are described in an appendix of [16].16
2.3
Risk-control methods
2.3.1
Ranks by mean-reverting speed
The mean-reversion time of residuals is hard to analyze and control, since it reﬂects idiosyncratic features
of individual asset, which may not be easily interpreted with economic indicators. For example, the meanreversion dynamics of residuals does not have to be similar to that of the original returns. Obviously, there is
no fundamental theory for this. However, our approach starts from the premise that some stocks have a more
distinguishable correlation structure than others. Then their residuals, the remainders after removing factors,
are more well-decoupled from the market and hence are more reliable for market-neutral strategies. In other
words, these residuals are less trending or faster mean-reverting. Since there is no structural model for this
mechanism, we develop empirical schemes using market data.
Note that in OU modeling, the parameter κ represents the mean-reverting speed17. In order to ﬁnd “good”
residuals, we ﬁrst ﬁlter out slow mean-reversions. This is because if a residual is not reverting for a long time
after opening a position on it, it will be hard to ﬁnd an optimal time to close the position. Hence, we accept
residuals which have relatively faster mean reversion speed.
To quantify the mean-reversion speed of each residual, we take a simple average of mean-reverting speed
(ˆκit) that are estimated for each stock i and on n-th day of the training period. A quality score is deﬁned as
QSi =
1
Ttrain
Ttrain
X
n=1
ˆκin,
(22)
κin is the estimated mean-reversion speed of asset i at time n within Test and Ttrain and Test are the length
of training and estimation window, respectively18. This measure is motivated from the in-sample tests where
15The maximum likelihood (ML) is also frequently used. It can be shown that the LS estimator is equivalent
to the ML estimator, and we focus LS estimator in the rest of the paper.
16One problem with continuous OU model is estimation bias for the mean-reversion estimator. Standard
estimation methods, such as least squares, maximum likelihood or generalized method of moments, are known
to produce biased estimators for the mean reversion parameter ([21]).
Researchers have developed several
methods to reduce this bias. For example, [22] adopts jackknife method to resolve this issue.
17The mean-reversion time can be deﬁned by its inverse, scaled by the interval of discrete observations:
τ ≡
1
κ∆t.
18The estimated mean-reversion parameter κ generally depends on the length estimation window. Thus, the
mean-reversion speed must be normalized by the estimation window. However, since our selection step is only
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

we observe that κ’s are widely distributed. Since a higher score of QSi implies a higher (on average) meanreversion speed of stock i’s residual, those stocks are selected at the end of the training. The number of selected
stocks in a portfolio can vary. In this paper, we consider 25, 50, 75, and 100 out of total 378 stocks.19
2.3.2
Selective trading via R2-value screening
As we discussed, the estimated OU parameters are used for generating trading signals. Poor estimation cannot
provide reliable signals. In order to improve statistical reliability, we accept estimation results only with high
enough goodness-of-ﬁt. As a measure of goodness-of-ﬁt, we adopt R2-value20 and set a threshold for this:
R2 value > η
(23)
where R2-value is calculated for the OU parameters estimation and η ∈(0, 1) is the cutoﬀlevel. This selective
trading reduces the frequency of ineﬃcient trading as well as their associated unnecessary transaction costs.
Empirical distributions of estimated mean-reversion time and R2-value are shown in Figure 12.
2.3.3
Updating portfolio selection
The mean-reversion dynamics of residuals are not stationary, but change in time. The validity of residuals’
ranks based on the training within a time window can deteriorate with time. Thus, the portfolio selection
must be updated regularly. The updating interval is set to be same as the length of estimation window, for
consistency of market information. By doing this, the current portfolio maintains up-to-date information of
mean-reversion times.
3
Robust trading algorithm and optimization
In this section, we give an overview of the trading strategy we implement. First, a threshold-based rule is
explained. We then focus on developing an investment strategy that incorporates several constraints that are
needed to make it robust.
Note that the strategy involves three main steps.
1. Residual generation: do PCA for historical data from t−T to t, where t is the current time, and generate
residuals from factor models.
conducted in a ﬁxed window, it is actually not necessarily at least here.
19If the number selected is too small, then the solution of optimization problem for market-neutral condition
becomes inaccurate, since ﬁnding a feasible combination of dollar quantities that cancelled out can be hard.
20The R2 value is deﬁned as R2 ≡1 −SSres
SStot, where SSres and SStot are the residual and total sum of
squares, respectively.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

2. Portfolio selection: estimate parameters with OU-modeling of residuals and select stocks using conﬁdence
criteria.
3. Trading: dynamically adjust the portfolio by opening and closing the long/short positions during the
trading horizon.21 The investment amount for each asset is determined by solving a constrained optimization problem.
3.1
Trading signals
From the estimated OU parameters, we generate dimensionless trading signals as
sit =
Xit −mi
eσi
(24)
where mi and eσi are mean and equilibrium standard deviation of residuals,22 and Xit is the level of integrated
residual return of asset i at time t. This signal is a normalized version of residual state, which suggests a simple
trading strategy as follows. If the signal is strongly positive, the asset is assumed to be over-valued. Then we
open a short position, expecting that the price will go down. Once it comes back to a lower level, we close the
short position. Similarly, we can open a long position if the signal is strongly negative, and so on. The four
thresholds we use are given as follows.
open short position(sit > 1.25)
→
close short position (sit < 0.5)
(25)
open long position(sit < −1.25)
→
close long position (sit > −0.5)
(26)
The scheme for the threshold based rule is illustrated in Figure 2.
3.2
Three constraints
For the practical implementation of the strategy and the proper assessment of its performance, we impose the
following three conditions.
3.2.1
Market-neutrality
A market-neutral strategy generates returns that are independent of the market environment. Recall we have
the factor model for Rit,
Rit =
p
X
k=1
LikFkt + Uit.
(27)
21For selective trading, trades are rejected if the estimation error is too high.
22 eσi = σi/√κi, where σi is the standard deviation of residual returns.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Let qit be the capital amount invested in asset i at time t.
Then we can write the gain at each time by
multiplying qit to Rit.
N
X
i=1
qitRit
=
N
X
i=1
qit
"
p
X
k=1
LikFkt + Uit
#
(28)
=
p
X
k=1
"(
N
X
i=1
Likqit
)
kt
Fkt
#
+
N
X
i=1
qitUit
(29)
where we switched the summation in the second equality. The gain can be decomposed into the factor gain
and the residual gain. The condition for market-neutrality, or hedging the so-called beta risk, implies there is
no gain from the market factors. Eliminating the ﬁrst term on the RHS, we have the following expression for
market-neutrality
N
X
i=1
Likqit = 0,
for each k = 1, ..., p and for each t
(30)
3.2.2
Dollar-neutrality
We also want our strategy to be dollar-neutral, which just means symmetry between long and short holdings,
N
X
i=1
qit = 0,
for each t
(31)
With this condition, there is no net amount of money investment. This also ensures that we can have a fair
comparison or assessment of the strategy.
3.2.3
Leverage: total amount of investment
When it comes to comparing diﬀerent strategies, the total absolute amount matters. In order to normalize
this eﬀect, we need to restrict the total investment.
N
X
i=1
|qit| = I,
for each t
(32)
The leverage constant, I, is set to achieve a desired level of volatility of returns.
3.3
Optimization for asset allocations
The rule displayed in Figure 2 determines only whether to buy or sell an asset. The main objective of this
section is to determine how much. First of all, it is worthwhile to note that not all assets’ allocations need
to be changed each time.
For example, if the trading signal of an asset does not indicate a change of its
position from time t to t + 1, then the amount already invested in this asset is preserved. This means that the
adjustment should be applied only to stocks that are to take new positions. This actually makes sense and it
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

avoids unnecessary transaction costs.
Let us start out by deﬁning the following sets of assets:
Ct
:
assets whose positions are changed from t −1 to t
(33)
Ut
:
assets whose positions are unchanged from t −1 to t
(34)
Lt
:
assets that are long positions at t
(35)
St
:
assets that are short positions at t
(36)
Ot
:
assets that are zero positions at t
(37)
Note that these sets are completely determined by the trading signals and the threshold-based rule. Then we
can rewrite the three conditions as
Positions:
sgn(Qit) =













+1,
i ∈Lt
0,
i ∈Ot
−1,
i ∈St
(38)
Market-neutrality:
X
i∈Ct
Likqit +
X
i∈Ut
Likqit = 0,
for each k and t
(39)
Dollar-neutrality:
X
i∈Ct
qit +
X
i∈Ut
qit = 0,
at each t
(40)
Total leverage:
X
i∈Ct
|qit| +
X
i∈Ut
|qit| = I,
at each t
(41)
Note that at time t, {qit|i ∈Ut} = {qi,t−1|i ∈Ut}, since the position of the asset i is unchanged from t −1 to
t, by deﬁnition of Ut. Thus, the summations including Ut can be treated as constants at time t.
In order to ﬁnd qit, we set up an optimization. Finding a suitable objective function is a crucial issue. In this
paper, we want to avoid introducing any other quantity such as expected returns or covariance matrices, since
they are hard to estimate or they can lead to other intricate issues. Instead, we take one of the conditions and
modify it to the objective function. In particular, we consider the market-neutrality condition:
N
P
i=1
Likqit = 0
for each k. Motivated from this, we set the objective function as

N
X
i=1
Li1qit
 + · · · +

N
X
i=1
Lipqit

(42)
which is to be minimized. Other conditions will be the constraints in the optimization problem.23 Therefore,
23Other conditions may be used for the objective function. Our choice is made solely for better numerical
stability in solving the problem.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

to ﬁnd the asset allocations at each time t, we solve the following problem.
min
qit,i∈Ct
p
X
k=1

X
i∈Ct
Likqit

(43)
s.t.
sgn(qit) =













+1,
i ∈Lt
0,
i ∈Ot
−1,
i ∈St
,
(44)
X
i∈Ct
qit = −
X
i∈Ut
qit
(45)
X
i∈Ct
|qit| = I −
X
i∈Ut
|qit|
(46)
Again, the ﬁrst constraint is for the sign of each investment that is determined by trading signals. The second
constraint is for a dollar-neutrality, and the third is from the leverage condition. The summations over Ut are
written on the right hand sides, to indicate that they are known quantities at time t and regarded as constants.
We can rewrite the problem in a simpler vector-matrix form. Let us employ notation for two vectors, qt
and eqt such that
qt
=
{qit,
i ∈Ct}
(47)
eqt
=
{qit,
i ∈Ut}
(48)
That is, qt and eqt represent the dollar investments for stocks that have changed and not changed their positions,
respectively, at time t. Our goal is to ﬁnd q, given the fact that eq is determined at t. Noting that the summation
of absolute values can be simply rewritten as 1-norm, the vector-matrix expression is given by
min
qt ∥Lqt∥1
(49)
s.t.
Aqt ⪯0
(50)
Aeqqt = beq
(51)
c(qt) = d
(52)
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

where
A
Nc×Nc
: Aij
=













−δij,
i ∈Lt
+δij,
i ∈St
0,
otherwise
,
(53)
Aeq
(Nc+1)×Nc
=


e
A
1T

,
with
e
A
Nc×Nc
: { e
Aij = δij,
i ∈Ot}
(54)
beq
(Nc+1)×1
=

0
1T eqt


(55)
c(qt)
=
∥qt∥1
(56)
d
=
I −∥eqt∥1
(57)
Here Nc is the number of changed positions at each time, deﬁned as Nc = |Ct|.24 This constrained optimization
can be solved numerically.
There is a numerical issue regarding the portfolio size.
If we consider larger
portfolios, the optimization has more degree of freedom to control, so it is likely that the constraints can be
satisﬁed more tightly. However, at the same time, solving a higher dimensional optimization problem can
accumulate more numerical error. It turns out from the back-test results that larger portfolios result mostly
in better performance than smaller ones.25
4
Empirical results
The back-testing results are presented in this section. We start out by describing the testing setups.
4.1
Back-testing setups
4.1.1
Schemes
Figure 3 provides a schematic diagram on how the data is used for back-testings.
During the “portfolio
selection” period, we use historical data to estimate the mean-reversion speed of each asset’s residual. The
estimations are collected with a moving window, and they are sorted by the average mean-reversion speed.26
At the end of training, the high-ranked stocks are chosen to form the trading portfolio. In the “trading” period,
the trading signals are generated. Then we dynamically adjust the asset allocations based on the solution of
the optimization problem we discussed in section 3.3. Note that the OU-estimations are carried out in both
24We found that the matrices and vectors used in this optimization problem are sparse, since the proportion
of active signals are usually small.
25The eﬀect of the portfolio size is discussed in section 4.7.
26or the inverse of the estimated mean-reversion times.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

periods: One is for sorting estimated mean-reversion speeds and the other is for generating signals.
4.1.2
Parameters
Trading results cannot of course be independent of the choice of parameters and of the testing environments.
Therefore, we consider the following parameter ranges for our tests.27
1. Estimation window: 30, 60, 90, 120 days
2. Number of factors: 5, 10, 15, 20 factors are removed to obtain residuals.
3. Trading periods: 5 regimes - 2005-2006 / 2007-2008 / 2009-2010 / 2011-2012 / 2013-2014
4. Portfolio selection: risk-controlled, high-capitalization, low-capitalization, random
The window lengths are chosen for reliable estimations. For example, 5 days are insuﬃcient to derive meanreversion properties from daily data. On the other hand, a window that is too long can cause over-ﬁtting or
overemphasis of old information. We choose the range from 30 to 120 days which is also consistent with the
actual reporting cycles of companies. As for the number of factors, our intention is to ﬁnd the number of
principal components that eﬀectively remove strong cross-correlations between assets. From the returns data
of 378 stocks28, we found that taking out more than 30 principal components makes residuals too noisy, which
may cause instability in estimations. In order to have meaningful mean-reverting residuals, we extract 1 to
20 factors. Lastly, the performance of the trading strategy is evaluated and summarized for each two-year
period. Although the overall performance for the whole period (ten years in this paper) may be important for
long-term proﬁts, persistent performance with no bad periods is preferred. Thus, ﬁve diﬀerent two year periods
are considered: pre-crisis (2005-2006), in-crisis (2007-2008), post-crisis (2009-2010), afterward (2011-2012), and
recent years (2013-2014).
4.1.3
Performance measure
The performance from trading can be measured by the cumulative proﬁt-and-loss (PnL). We use the following
formula.29
Et+∆t = Et + Etr∆t +
N
X
i=1
qitRit∆t −
N
X
i=1
qitr∆t −
N
X
i=1
|qi(t+∆t) −qit|ϵ
(58)
where Et is the value of the portfolio at time t, r is the reference rate of cash, and ϵ is for frictional costs. Note
that the fourth term on the right hand side must be zero if the dollar neutral condition is completely satisﬁed.
However, there are numerical tolerance imposed for the feasibility, we keep that term here.
27Other parameters are also considered later.
28The number of factors can vary with the asset universe used.
29We use the same formula as in [16].
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

For each period, the annualized Sharpe ratio for the PnL is calculated as the standardized excessive returns:
SRann =
µann −r
σann
(59)
where µann and σann are the average and standard deviation of annualized return of PnL, respectively, and the
risk-free rate r is a constant.30 Annualized total returns and volatility of PnL returns are examined as well.
4.1.4
Market data
Our analysis is based on stocks from S&P500. We extracted T = 3780 records (Jan 2, 2000 - Dec 31, 2014) of
daily prices for N = 378 stocks, which have persisted during this period. The data of daily stock prices and
market capitalization are obtained from Bloomberg Database Services: PX LAST recorded the closing price on
the last trading day and CUR MKT CAP is used to record the prevailing market capitalization at each day.
4.2
Sample PnL plots
Before presenting the back-test results, we ﬁrst present typical PnL plots that are generated from controlled
and random portfolios with diﬀerent transaction costs. Our trading algorithm works quite well regardless of
the prevailing market regime.
4.3
Mean-reversion control
As illustrated in Section 2.3, stocks are chosen based on the quality scores we calculate before each period so as
to form the trading portfolio. We also compare performance with other portfolios, including a randomly chosen
portfolio, and high- and low- capitalized ﬁrms portfolios. The left plot in Figure 5 shows the performance of
the four diﬀerent portfolios. The portfolio size here is N = 75 and the transaction cost is 5bp (ϵ = 0.0005
in equation (58)), and no R2-screening is applied. Our portfolio selection using fast mean-reverting residuals
outperforms other portfolios. In particular, we found no signiﬁcant drawdown in all ﬁve periods when using
the controlled portfolio.
31 This shows that our approach is robust to market changes, yielding consistent
results during both bearish and bullish markets.
In contrast, the performance with a randomly chosen portfolio is diﬀerent.
The Sharpe ratios of the
random portfolio are lower and more unstable. It is also clear that the mean reversion strategy with the riskcontrolled portfolio is far superior to low- and high- cap portfolios as well. Moreover, the controlled portfolio
gives high-returns and low-volatility, whereas for other portfolios, the high returns are accompanied by high
30We use r = 2% in this paper.
31For example, with a window of 60 days and 5 factors, the Sharpe ratios are close to or higher than 2 over
all periods, and the average annual return of the strategy is 20%, which are convincing results. See Table 4 for
detailed results.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

volatilities.
To further assess the impact of our approach, we also test with an anti-controlled portfolio, which is formed
from the stocks with long mean-reversion times. We present the performance from this portfolio in Table 10 in
the Appendix, and as expected, the results are the worst among the all other portfolios considered. Although
there are few parameter choices that yield a good performance, the overall ﬂuctuations of PnL are signiﬁcantly
larger than those from other portfolios. We also conﬁrm this with experiments using other portfolio sizes.
To conﬁrm and illustrate the eﬀect of mean-reversion control in the out-of-sample tests, we also investigate
the realized mean-reversion time of the residuals. By this, we mean the realized buy-sell time intervals, or the
duration between opening and closing of a position:
Realized mean-reversion time := length of days of active positions
(60)
This quantity can be easily calculated by tracking the positions while trading. In Figure 6, we summarize
the estimated and realized mean-reversion times. For estimated mean-reversion times, we take the inverse of
mean-reverting speed scaled by the data observation interval: τi =
1
κi∆t for asset i, and then we average. As
shown in the left plot, estimated the mean-reversion times for the controlled portfolio are about 7 days, while
those for other portfolios are 8 or more days. The diﬀerence is also evident for realized values. On average, the
realized mean-reversion times of the controlled portfolio are 0.5 to 1 day shorter than those of other portfolios.
Since there is no strict deﬁnition of mean-reversion time, the observed diﬀerence in scale is expected. The
main point here is that our control of the estimation process works well and the realized mean-reversion times
for the controlled portfolio are clearly shorter than those from other portfolios. It also supports the observed
eﬀectiveness of the training based on estimated mean-reversion times.
4.4
Selective trading via R2-value screening
The reliability of a trading signal relies on the estimation quality of OU-parameters. Rather than keeping
and using all signals, we reject some of them if the goodness of ﬁt of the corresponding OU estimations is
signiﬁcantly lower than an acceptable level.
The least squares estimation uses two consecutive integrated
residuals, Xk+1 and Xk, where Xk is deﬁned as the sum of residual returns from time 1 to k. With longer
windows, Xk+1 and Xk are close, and the R2-value from the OU-estimations tends to be larger.
We set
diﬀerent thresholds for diﬀerent window lengths so that the total number of trades is decreased by 50% from
this screening.
The eﬀect of selective trading via R2-value screening on Sharpe ratios is clear as seen from the right plot
of Figure 5. We ﬁnd that in most periods and parameter ranges, the R2-screening boosts up performance.
Comparing results from before and after applying the R2-screening, we can see that the Sharpe ratios (+0.22,
+0.47, +0.74, and +0.63 on average) and the average returns (+3.55%, +4.5%, +5.55%, and +3.93% on
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

average) are increased for controlled, random, low-cap, and high-cap portfolios, respectively.32
An important consequence of these observations is that higher goodness-of-ﬁt in parameter estimation is essential for
increasing the reliability of trading signals, especially for a well diversiﬁed statistical arbitrage strategy.
4.5
Capitalization
As we have seen in Figure 5, in addition to the random portfolio, we also compare other portfolios that are
formed by according to capitalization. The assets are sorted by market capitalization, and low- and highcapitalized assets are selected to form portfolios for trading.
We note ﬁrst that none of them outperform
the controlled portfolio in all periods. Second, we ﬁnd that the high-cap portfolio performs very well during
2007-2008 and 2009-2010, compared to low-cap portfolio. The most likely explanation for this is that small
ﬁrms rely less on market information and so are less sensitive to market changes, as compared to large ﬁrms.
Consequently, during volatile periods market impact is greater on large ﬁrms, and this is reﬂected by principal
component analysis.
Thus the residuals of large-cap portfolios are well-decoupled from the market.
The
third observation is that the volatility resulting from high-cap portfolios is lower than for other portfolios.
The volatility level on average is about ∼3.87%, which is close to the level of the controlled portfolio (3.68%).
Lastly, when the transaction costs are high, the low-cap portfolio performs much better than high-cap portfolio.
See Table 8 and Table 9 in the Appendix.
4.6
Number of factors, window lengths, and transaction costs
Most studies in statistical arbitrage do not provide suﬃcient guidance or discussion about the role of important
parameters, such as the number of factors, window lengths, and transaction costs. In this subsection we consider
some issues associated with them.
First, the number of factors to be used varies depending on the portfolio size and the window length, since
a larger portfolio or a longer window generally require more factors to be removed to get reliable residuals.
This is because when using statistical factor models, with the factors constructed from observed data, the
explaining power of a single factor can decrease when the data size increases. Second, setting a window length
must take into account the trade-oﬀbetween the beneﬁt from accessing more data and the loss from using
old information. Lastly, transaction costs also matter. For example, frequent trading may increase chances of
gaining, but at the same time it will bring losses if the transaction costs are high.
We have found that the relations among these quantities are rather complicated, and a speciﬁc parameter set that leads to best performance is not clearly identiﬁed. However, considering an extensive range of
parameters (see Figure 7), we observe the following.
1. Performance with short windows is more sensitive to the number of factors. If the window is short, not
32The volatility increases by limited amount.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

many factors can be used. Thus, subtracting too many factors quickly degrades performance, compared
to using longer windows.
2. The results with shorter window (with a smaller number of factors) are best when transaction costs are
small. However, performance drops signiﬁcantly as the transaction costs increase (to 15bp and above).
In particular, if the transaction costs are high, then using long windows provides better and more stable
performance. This is not surprising, since when it comes to trading environments with high transaction
costs, frequent trading activities are not desirable.
The performance of a strategy considered (denoted by Ω) depends on three elements: the number of factors
(p), the length of estimation window (T), and transaction cost (ϵ):
Ω
=
Ω(p, T, ϵ)
(61)
The best choices, or the optimal values, in the sense of performance for p and T are entangled.
p∗
=
p∗(T, ϵ)
(62)
T ∗
=
T ∗(p, ϵ)
(63)
Thus, the performance of a strategy must be discussed always along with p and T.33 The relations are visualized
in Figure 7 as a surface of Sharpe ratios with respect to p and T. As seen from these plots, when the transaction
costs increase the performances with shorter windows become unstable, while performance with longer windows
is less so. As for the number of factors, any number larger than 10 yields unacceptable results in this context.
4.7
Portfolio sizes
In many cases we consider, as the portfolio size increases the strategy becomes more stable, as can be seen
in Figure 8. This is consistent with the well-known idea of diversiﬁcation. Since the total leverage is ﬁxed
regardless of the number of stocks participated, the optimization process has more range and give more stable
results. However, this is not true in general. For example, in the case of a controlled portfolio we ﬁnd that
using N = 75 stocks results in a higher Sharpe ratio on average than using N = 100 stocks.
This also illustrates the role of the proposed optimization problem (Eq.43) given the total leverage. Figure
9 presents the performance without doing the optimization for asset allocation. That is, we allocate an identical
amount to each asset, given the long/short signal of each. As expected, the performance is very unstable, since
the allocation in this case may not satisfy the market-neutral conditions.
33Here we assume that the relations can change with the total number of stocks (N) and data frequency
(∆t).
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

4.8
Recent years results
We found that our investment algorithm becomes less eﬀective in recent years, 2013-2014. We need to examine
this period more carefully. Since the essence of our approach is based on mean-reversion time control, we can
check whether there is any unexpected change in realized mean-reversion times. Actually, Figure 6 already
has a clue for this. We see that the buy-sell interval for the controlled portfolio is relatively longer both in
2005-2006 and 2013-2014. We note that the selected residuals in the controlled portfolio are expected to have
shorter mean-reversion times. However, if they do not behave as predicted, the reliability of whole approach
may drop.
It appears that in 2005-2006, the relatively longer realized mean-reversion time did not aﬀect
performance, but in 2013-2014, we have seem to aﬀect it. Unfortunately, we do not found a clear explanation
for why this happens, but only a guess that the residuals in the recent market period have abnormally higher
temporal correlations, which results in slower mean-reversions than expected.
4.9
Time-varying number of factors by variance explanations
So far, we have been using the ﬁxed number of factors. This assumption can be relaxed by introducing a
dynamic number of factors. Estimating the number of factors in high-dimensional factor models is beyond the
scope of this study.34
Results with a dynamic number of factors with moving windows is presented in Figure 10. We can see that
the numbers range from 1 to 25, which shows that there is time-varying correlation among assets. It can be
also found that the market becomes very condensed during late-2008, mid-2010, and late-2011. We note that
high volatility of markets is directly linked to the strong correlation of assets. The largest eigenvalue dynamics
depicted in Figure 11 also illustrates this. Given a variance level, the corresponding number of factors is smaller
when using shorter windows (60 days in Figure 10). This is because each factor brings higher proportion of
variance, compared to using longer windows (120 days in Figure 10).
With a dynamic number factors we repeat the back-tests as before. Table 2 and Table 3 are the results
for a controlled portfolio with transaction costs of 5bp and 20bp, respectively. The result with 20% is the best
when the transaction costs are low. However, the performance from the variance explanation level of 30% to
40% are more stable with high-cost settings. We point out that there is no unique level of variance explanation
that yields an all-the-time best performance. This would imply that using a dynamic number of factors solely
based on variance explanation might not be ideal.
34However, a commonly used method is to determine the number of principal components that explain a
certain level of total variance of returns. Instead of ﬁxing the number of factors, we now ﬁx the percentage of
explained variance, such as 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, and 60%, and the number of factors changes according to
the variance levels.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

5
Conclusions
Mean-reversion is the critical property for many statistical arbitrage strategies, and this paper studies its risk in
detail. We have proposed a new approach to control the risk of mean-reversion time. Following the well-known
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck modeling for residual processes, stocks are ranked by the estimated mean-reversion speeds.
Then high-ranked stocks are selected to form the trading portfolio. This simple portfolio formation procedure
combined with selective trading via goodness-of-ﬁt in trading signals estimation eﬀectively makes the strategy
more reliable. Moreover, the optimization problem for trading volume plays a crucial role in obtaining market
and dollar neutrality. All these contribute to robust performance regardless of market regime. The results
obtained from back-testings have demonstrated the eﬀectiveness of the approach.
Statistical arbitrage algorithms generally involve many parameters. There are, however, no “best” parameters to use. The exploration of the associated parameter regimes provides some insight into the relation
between these parameters and trading performance.
6
Acknowledgement
Joongyeub Yeo gratefully acknowledges the support of ILJU Foundation Scholarship.
References
[1] Gatev E, Goetzmann WN, Rouwenhorst KG. Pairs trading: Performance of a relative-value arbitrage
rule. Review of Financial Studies. 2006;19 (3):797–827.
[2] Do B, FaﬀR. Does simple pairs trading still work? Financial Analysts Journal. 2010;66 (4):83–95.
[3] Do B, FaﬀR. Are pairs trading proﬁts robust to trading costs? Journal of Financial Research. 2012;35
(2):261–287.
[4] Fama EF, French K. Permanent and temporary components of stock prices. Journal of Political Economics.
1988;96(2):246273.
[5] Poterba JM, Summers LH. Mean reversion in stock prices: evidence and implications. Journal of Financial
Economics. 1988;22(1):27–59.
[6] Jorion P, Sweeney R. Mean reversion in real exchange rates: evidence and implications for forecasting.
Journal of International Money and Finance. 1996;15(4):535–550.
[7] Chaudhuri K, Wu Y. Random walk versus breaking trend in stock prices: evidence from emerging markets.
Journal of Banking and Finance. 2003;27:575–592.
[8] Carcano G, Falbo P, Stefani S. Speculative trading in mean reverting markets. European Journal of
Operation Research. 2005;163:132–144.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

[9] Elliott RJ, van der Hoek J, Malcolm WP. Pairs trading. Quantitative Finance. 2005;5(3):271276.
[10] Do B, FaﬀR, Hamza K. A new approach to modeling and estimation for pairs trading. In Proceedings
of 2006 Financial Management Association European Conference. 2006;.
[11] Vidyamurthy G. Pairs Trading: Quantitative Methods and Analysis. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons;
2004.
[12] Stock JH, Watson MW. Testing for common trends. Journal of the American Statistical Association.
1988;83 (404):1097.
[13] Ross SA. The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic Theory. 1976;13 (3):341–360.
[14] Bertram WK. Analytic solutions for optimal statistical arbitrage trading. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications. 2010;389 (11):2234–2243.
[15] Jurek JW, Yang H. Dynamic portfolio selection in arbitrage. Working Paper, Harvard University. 2007;.
[16] Avellaneda M, Lee JH.
Statistical arbitrage in the US equities market.
Quantitative Finance.
2010;10(7):761–782.
[17] Lo AW. Maximum likelihood estimation of generalized It processes with discretely sampled data. Econometric Theory. Econometric Theory. 1988;4:231–247.
[18] Bergstrom AR. Continuous Time Econometric Modelling. Oxford University Press; 1990.
[19] Pedersen A. A new approach to maximum likelihood estimation for stochastic diﬀerential equations based
on discrete observation. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics. 1995;22:55–71.
[20] Ait-Sahalia Y. Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Discretely Sampled diﬀusion: A Closed-form Approximation Approach. Econometrica. 2002;70:223–262.
[21] Yu J. Bias in the estimation of mean reversion parameter in continuous time models. Journal of Econometrics. 2012;169:114–122.
[22] Phillips PCB, Yu J. Jackkniﬁng bond option prices. Review of Financial Studies. 2005;18:707–742.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

A
Supplemental tables
Table
Portfolio
N
ϵ
R2-screening
Table 2
Controlled
Dynamic
5bp
No
Table 3
Controlled
Dynamic
20bp
No
Table 4
Controlled
75
5bp
No
Table 5
Controlled
75
5bp
Yes
Table 6
Random
75
5bp
No
Table 7
Random
75
5bp
Yes
Table 8
Low-Cap
75
5bp
No
Table 9
High-Cap
75
5bp
No
Table 10
anti-Controlled
75
5bp
No
Table 11
Controlled
100
5bp
No
Table 12
Controlled
50
5bp
No
Table 13
Controlled
25
5bp
No
Table 14
Controlled
75
10bp
No
Table 15
Controlled
75
No Cost
No
Table 1: Summary of tables in appendix.
Tables with other parameters are available on
request.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Tables
Table 2: Dynamic number of factors: Controlled portfolio with N = 100, 5bp cost and no
R2-screening
Windows
Var. Exp.
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
20%
2.32
3.10
2.47
3.17
2.52
2.72
40.03%
5.22%
30%
2.18
2.99
2.53
2.50
2.07
2.45
34.74%
5.22%
40%
2.69
3.19
2.18
2.71
1.55
2.46
32.42%
5.00%
50%
1.52
2.80
2.53
2.79
3.08
2.54
27.94%
4.46%
60%
0.92
1.65
3.12
2.04
1.64
1.87
16.72%
4.12%
60
20%
2.19
2.35
1.45
2.31
0.49
1.76
25.79%
6.09%
30%
2.80
2.17
1.45
2.34
0.79
1.91
27.75%
6.06%
40%
1.59
2.25
1.54
1.81
2.11
1.86
23.93%
5.58%
50%
1.60
3.26
1.33
1.77
1.42
1.88
22.49%
5.16%
60%
1.83
2.30
0.94
1.59
0.48
1.43
14.95%
4.81%
90
20%
1.39
1.55
1.83
1.93
0.02
1.35
17.08%
5.78%
30%
1.02
1.64
1.83
1.97
0.08
1.31
16.50%
5.71%
40%
1.78
1.96
1.71
1.80
1.12
1.67
19.49%
5.20%
50%
1.05
2.47
1.42
3.01
0.55
1.70
17.76%
4.71%
60%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00%
−%
120
20%
1.15
0.69
2.30
1.33
1.98
1.49
17.44%
5.98%
30%
1.45
0.65
2.30
1.33
2.03
1.55
17.60%
5.85%
40%
1.70
1.90
2.09
1.51
1.43
1.72
21.32%
5.38%
50%
1.07
0.72
1.28
1.08
1.80
1.19
11.58%
5.18%
60%
1.06
1.58
1.56
1.25
0.15
1.12
11.56%
4.63%
Mean
1.65
2.06
1.89
2.01
1.33
1.79
21.95%
5.27%
Dynamic number of factors are applied, based on variance explanation by principal components. Transaction costs are 5bp. All
values are annualized.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 3: Dynamic number of factors: Controlled portfolio with N = 100, 20bp cost and no
R2-screening
Windows
Var. Exp.
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
20%
(0.17)
1.65
0.88
0.49
(0.38)
0.50
7.70%
5.83%
30%
(0.43)
1.51
0.92
(0.22)
(0.71)
0.21
5.33%
5.89%
40%
(0.25)
1.60
0.53
(0.19)
(1.48)
0.04
4.07%
5.64%
50%
(1.88)
1.14
0.42
(0.28)
(0.81)
(0.28)
1.96%
5.09%
60%
(3.19)
(0.12)
0.50
(1.34)
(2.69)
(1.37)
(2.66)%
4.87%
60
20%
0.83
1.58
0.64
0.99
(0.91)
0.63
9.47%
6.54%
30%
1.33
1.42
0.64
1.03
(0.67)
0.75
10.56%
6.50%
40%
(0.04)
1.40
0.71
0.36
0.16
0.52
7.84%
6.00%
50%
(0.39)
2.19
0.55
0.21
(0.87)
0.34
6.68%
5.55%
60%
(0.67)
1.32
(0.09)
(0.15)
(2.10)
(0.34)
2.17%
5.22%
90
20%
0.43
0.96
1.12
0.92
(1.05)
0.48
7.12%
6.08%
30%
0.01
1.04
1.12
0.95
(0.99)
0.42
6.70%
6.02%
40%
0.42
1.26
1.00
0.70
(0.30)
0.62
8.28%
5.49%
50%
(0.39)
1.61
0.64
1.77
(0.94)
0.54
6.97%
4.97%
60%
(0.16)
0.28
0.32
0.14
(0.70)
(0.02)
2.52%
4.99%
120
20%
0.39
0.28
1.75
0.55
0.97
0.79
9.04%
6.25%
30%
0.65
0.24
1.75
0.55
0.99
0.84
9.23%
6.11%
40%
0.74
1.33
1.57
0.75
0.26
0.93
11.61%
5.62%
50%
(0.08)
0.13
0.78
0.21
0.55
0.32
4.52%
5.41%
60%
(0.26)
0.83
0.93
0.23
(1.35)
0.08
3.97%
4.87%
Mean
(0.16)
1.08
0.83
0.38
(0.65)
0.30
6.16%
5.65%
Dynamic number of factors are applied, based on variance explanation by principal components. Transaction costs are 20bp
here. All values are annualized.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 4: Controlled portfolio (N=75, ϵ=5bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
2.52
1.92
2.92
2.37
2.62
2.47
20.88%
3.84%
10
0.57
1.68
0.36
0.81
1.16
0.92
6.40%
3.30%
15
0.64
0.82
0.66
0.69
(0.27)
0.51
4.16%
2.67%
20
(1.33)
(0.86)
(1.04)
(0.18)
(1.37)
(0.95)
(0.15)%
2.23%
60
5
1.80
2.58
1.63
2.19
1.93
2.02
20.08%
4.55%
10
1.74
1.11
2.17
1.16
0.83
1.40
11.36%
3.99%
15
1.64
1.60
2.11
0.63
0.61
1.32
9.38%
3.33%
20
0.56
1.43
0.93
0.27
0.03
0.64
5.12%
3.04%
90
5
1.34
2.03
2.36
2.22
0.65
1.72
16.97%
4.47%
10
2.42
1.15
1.11
1.63
2.03
1.67
13.04%
4.08%
15
0.53
1.81
2.23
1.52
1.00
1.42
11.43%
3.72%
20
1.03
1.61
2.13
1.52
1.35
1.53
10.15%
3.22%
120
5
1.23
2.55
1.82
1.85
1.25
1.74
18.15%
4.74%
10
2.17
1.08
2.61
1.39
1.64
1.78
14.82%
4.07%
15
1.33
1.90
2.10
1.45
0.52
1.46
12.35%
3.94%
20
0.52
1.93
1.18
0.78
0.98
1.08
8.25%
3.72%
Mean
1.17
1.52
1.58
1.27
0.94
1.29
11.40%
3.68%
The out-of-sample performance of mean-reversion controlled portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs are
5bp per volume. R2-screening is not applied here. Sharpe ratios are summarized for each window length, number of extracted factors, and
period. In addition, mean Sharpe ratios, mean returns, and volatility of return of cumulative PnL are presented. All values are annualized.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 5: Controlled portfolio (N=75, ϵ=5bp, R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
2.96
2.57
2.24
2.59
1.73
2.42
27.94%
4.75%
10
0.77
1.96
1.21
1.98
1.42
1.47
11.95%
4.08%
15
0.75
1.53
1.34
1.66
0.58
1.17
7.75%
3.15%
20
0.73
(0.72)
0.25
0.01
0.01
0.06
2.24%
2.51%
60
5
1.93
2.00
2.79
1.93
2.73
2.28
27.27%
4.99%
10
1.55
0.59
2.75
1.28
1.78
1.59
14.56%
4.64%
15
2.51
1.70
1.21
1.03
1.15
1.52
12.85%
4.23%
20
1.77
1.54
1.29
0.97
(0.15)
1.08
8.34%
3.62%
90
5
1.40
1.17
1.82
2.54
0.98
1.58
17.24%
5.28%
10
1.37
2.81
1.22
1.93
1.24
1.71
17.89%
4.87%
15
1.54
1.70
2.22
1.53
0.93
1.59
15.51%
4.51%
20
0.60
1.37
1.92
1.51
2.47
1.57
11.88%
3.86%
120
5
1.00
2.66
1.92
1.82
0.95
1.67
20.60%
5.41%
10
2.34
2.79
2.14
1.11
0.29
1.73
18.79%
4.82%
15
1.94
2.10
1.08
1.35
0.68
1.43
13.01%
4.47%
20
2.14
1.70
1.18
0.66
0.68
1.27
11.35%
4.47%
Mean
1.58
1.72
1.66
1.49
1.09
1.51
14.95%
4.35%
The out-of-sample performance of mean-reversion controlled portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs are
5bp per volume. R2-screening is applied here. Compared to Table 4, Sharpe ratios and returns are signiﬁcantly boosted up. All values are
annualized.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 6: Random portfolio (N=75, ϵ=5bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
0.82
1.42
0.69
1.61
1.00
1.11
9.88%
4.54%
10
1.31
(1.09)
0.07
0.34
(1.02)
(0.08)
1.38%
3.81%
15
(0.00)
(0.75)
0.29
0.43
(0.26)
(0.06)
1.73%
2.99%
20
(1.12)
(0.37)
(1.45)
(1.14)
(1.78)
(1.17)
(0.67)%
2.41%
60
5
0.97
2.20
1.16
0.73
0.48
1.11
12.25%
5.11%
10
(0.31)
0.90
1.19
0.23
1.16
0.63
6.23%
4.43%
15
(0.27)
0.32
1.17
(0.81)
(0.26)
0.03
2.60%
4.02%
20
(0.34)
0.09
0.26
(1.33)
(0.20)
(0.30)
1.06%
3.62%
90
5
(0.07)
1.38
1.16
0.78
0.70
0.79
8.64%
5.20%
10
(0.05)
1.06
1.19
(0.06)
0.29
0.49
6.41%
5.09%
15
0.13
1.69
1.55
0.69
(0.10)
0.79
8.12%
4.29%
20
(0.00)
1.12
(0.01)
(0.32)
1.01
0.36
3.82%
4.25%
120
5
0.12
0.79
(0.22)
1.33
1.12
0.63
6.27%
5.65%
10
0.82
0.85
1.25
0.60
1.54
1.01
10.66%
5.26%
15
1.05
1.80
1.33
0.94
0.96
1.22
10.91%
4.37%
20
0.03
0.66
1.30
0.14
0.58
0.54
5.87%
4.45%
Mean
0.19
0.75
0.68
0.26
0.33
0.44
5.95%
4.34%
The out-of-sample performance of randomly chosen portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs are 5bp per
volume. R2-screening is not applied here. The performance from random portfolio has much ﬂuctuations and unstable. As a result, the
Sharpe ratios are signiﬁcantly lower than tha from controlled portfolio. All values are annualized.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 7: Random portfolio (N=75, ϵ=5bp, R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
1.60
2.52
1.10
2.08
2.16
1.89
19.30%
4.82%
10
1.29
0.02
1.00
1.40
1.22
0.98
6.99%
3.69%
15
1.32
1.19
0.79
2.32
1.48
1.42
8.11%
2.95%
20
(0.09)
0.41
(0.52)
(0.31)
(0.15)
(0.13)
1.81%
2.34%
60
5
0.94
2.41
1.95
2.19
0.18
1.53
19.94%
5.73%
10
0.83
1.74
1.23
2.18
2.02
1.60
14.48%
4.56%
15
0.42
0.96
2.14
0.80
1.34
1.13
9.26%
4.01%
20
0.66
1.53
1.75
(0.01)
1.02
0.99
7.82%
3.55%
90
5
1.25
0.94
1.47
1.89
1.42
1.40
14.90%
5.35%
10
0.71
1.68
1.92
1.46
1.19
1.39
14.65%
4.94%
15
1.47
1.80
1.39
1.16
1.05
1.38
12.85%
4.53%
20
0.95
1.56
(0.07)
1.45
(0.01)
0.78
6.49%
4.82%
120
5
0.37
1.38
0.58
1.07
1.43
0.96
10.49%
5.89%
10
1.45
0.97
1.06
1.85
0.82
1.23
14.44%
6.17%
15
1.87
0.86
1.65
1.11
0.49
1.19
12.45%
5.05%
20
0.84
0.33
1.81
1.62
1.01
1.12
10.10%
4.54%
Mean
0.99
1.27
1.20
1.39
1.04
1.18
11.50%
4.56%
The out-of-sample performance of randomly chosen portfolio.
The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs are 5bp
per volume. R2-screening is applied here. The performance from random portfolio has been improved from R2-screening. All values are
annualized.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 8: Low-cap portfolio (N=75, ϵ=5bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
0.62
0.95
0.03
0.22
1.69
0.70
7.01%
5.83%
10
0.32
(0.43)
(0.90)
(0.34)
(0.95)
(0.46)
(0.29)%
4.69%
15
0.55
(0.66)
(0.49)
(0.28)
(1.71)
(0.52)
0.16%
3.68%
20
(1.35)
(0.81)
0.29
(1.37)
(1.00)
(0.85)
(0.33)%
2.92%
60
5
1.49
1.44
1.20
0.65
2.03
1.36
18.44%
6.62%
10
1.00
0.23
0.42
1.11
1.46
0.84
8.06%
5.41%
15
0.52
(0.12)
1.28
1.22
(0.22)
0.54
5.54%
4.51%
20
(0.13)
(0.47)
0.34
1.76
0.21
0.34
3.61%
4.13%
90
5
2.24
1.68
0.78
1.81
1.04
1.51
19.22%
6.11%
10
1.84
1.55
0.62
1.12
1.06
1.24
13.14%
5.55%
15
1.05
0.74
1.49
1.04
1.47
1.16
11.06%
4.91%
20
1.39
(0.01)
0.87
1.00
0.42
0.73
6.90%
4.66%
120
5
1.22
0.85
0.91
1.46
1.94
1.27
15.42%
6.29%
10
0.24
1.04
1.70
0.88
0.61
0.89
11.72%
6.13%
15
1.37
0.59
1.01
1.21
0.88
1.01
10.18%
5.25%
20
1.15
(0.22)
0.61
1.16
1.24
0.79
7.25%
5.12%
Mean
0.84
0.40
0.63
0.79
0.64
0.66
8.57%
5.11%
The out-of-sample performance of low-cap portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs are 5bp per volume.
R2-screening is not applied here. On average, it performs well during pre-crisis and post-crisis. All values are annualized.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 9: High-cap portfolio (N=75, ϵ=5bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
(0.06)
1.37
2.14
(0.09)
1.10
0.89
7.98%
3.97%
10
(0.71)
0.08
0.91
(0.51)
(0.56)
(0.16)
1.89%
3.41%
15
(0.72)
(0.43)
0.38
(0.83)
(1.39)
(0.60)
0.56%
2.76%
20
(1.94)
(0.92)
(2.05)
(1.53)
(2.06)
(1.70)
(1.63)%
2.25%
60
5
1.56
2.05
1.42
1.04
2.34
1.68
15.07%
4.36%
10
1.18
0.70
2.04
0.40
0.38
0.94
7.70%
3.91%
15
0.29
0.97
1.80
(0.45)
0.36
0.59
5.27%
3.39%
20
0.49
0.28
0.32
(0.66)
(0.11)
0.06
2.58%
3.01%
90
5
0.89
1.73
1.80
(0.23)
0.95
1.03
11.69%
5.04%
10
0.13
1.39
1.84
0.24
(0.03)
0.71
8.97%
4.65%
15
(0.52)
1.10
0.83
(0.52)
0.83
0.34
4.46%
3.91%
20
0.33
0.78
0.88
0.71
(1.32)
0.28
3.98%
3.63%
120
5
0.19
0.27
0.25
0.75
1.38
0.56
5.38%
5.30%
10
0.34
1.12
1.18
0.45
1.41
0.90
8.51%
4.60%
15
0.51
0.17
0.79
0.67
0.49
0.53
4.94%
4.09%
20
0.99
1.54
1.09
0.69
0.15
0.89
7.36%
3.69%
Mean
0.18
0.76
0.98
0.01
0.25
0.44
5.92%
3.87%
The out-of-sample performance of high-cap portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs are 5bp per volume.
R2-screening is not applied here. On average, it performs well during crisis. All values are annualized.
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 10: Anti-controlled portfolio (N=75, ϵ=5bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
1.40
1.53
0.67
0.17
2.25
1.20
11.22%
4.90%
10
0.41
0.29
(0.12)
(0.10)
(1.60)
(0.23)
1.42%
3.84%
15
(0.23)
(0.85)
(1.51)
(0.47)
(1.02)
(0.82)
(0.89)%
3.26%
20
(1.01)
(1.70)
(0.78)
(1.47)
(1.73)
(1.34)
(1.32)%
2.64%
60
5
1.01
0.61
(0.42)
1.65
0.40
0.65
6.15%
5.63%
10
(0.10)
1.32
0.23
0.96
0.88
0.66
6.19%
4.65%
15
(0.43)
0.94
0.71
0.03
(0.07)
0.24
3.92%
4.13%
20
(0.77)
(1.12)
(0.04)
(1.34)
0.02
(0.65)
(0.61)%
3.76%
90
5
0.87
0.45
1.82
(0.00)
0.85
0.80
9.27%
5.67%
10
0.56
0.95
0.54
(0.28)
0.74
0.50
6.04%
5.34%
15
0.36
0.27
0.87
(0.17)
1.69
0.61
5.86%
4.86%
20
(0.58)
(0.35)
0.00
(0.08)
0.39
(0.12)
1.39%
3.96%
120
5
0.69
0.48
(0.40)
1.62
2.63
1.00
7.83%
6.09%
10
0.44
0.98
0.99
0.91
2.52
1.17
10.44%
5.00%
15
(0.56)
0.06
1.11
1.71
1.29
0.72
6.42%
4.68%
20
(0.47)
0.64
0.75
0.03
0.18
0.23
3.79%
4.50%
Mean
0.10
0.28
0.28
0.20
0.59
0.29
4.82%
4.56%
The out-of-sample performance of anti-controlled portfolio. That is, stocks with slower mean-reverting residuals are selected to form a
portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs are 5bp per volume. All values are annualized.
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 11: Controlled portfolio (N=100, ϵ=5bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
1.58
2.06
2.24
2.54
1.50
1.99
15.73%
3.77%
10
0.02
2.07
0.21
0.40
0.70
0.68
5.30%
3.17%
15
(0.39)
(0.14)
0.69
(0.16)
(1.10)
(0.22)
1.72%
2.59%
20
(1.43)
(0.54)
(1.37)
(1.13)
(1.88)
(1.27)
(0.65)%
2.22%
60
5
1.89
1.85
1.28
2.17
1.65
1.77
16.24%
4.51%
10
1.07
1.76
2.14
0.75
0.17
1.18
9.69%
3.78%
15
1.26
1.05
1.86
0.22
(0.40)
0.80
6.38%
3.32%
20
0.93
1.54
0.47
0.28
(0.14)
0.62
4.75%
3.02%
90
5
1.65
1.66
1.49
1.66
0.74
1.44
13.75%
4.59%
10
1.91
1.61
0.67
1.18
1.32
1.34
10.48%
4.09%
15
0.50
2.56
1.87
1.27
0.85
1.41
10.27%
3.49%
20
1.04
2.56
1.12
1.75
0.82
1.46
9.16%
3.09%
120
5
1.55
2.30
1.87
1.37
1.75
1.77
18.02%
4.69%
10
2.21
2.26
2.64
1.81
1.48
2.08
18.39%
3.96%
15
1.77
2.04
2.62
1.29
0.89
1.72
13.60%
3.65%
20
0.96
0.85
0.96
0.65
0.87
0.86
6.72%
3.71%
Mean
1.03
1.59
1.30
1.00
0.58
1.10
9.97%
3.60%
The out-of-sample performance of controlled portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 100, and the transaction costs are 5bp per volume.
R2-screening is not applied here. On average, the Sharpe ratios and returns are slightly lower than that of portfolio size of 75. The returns
the All values are annualized.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 12: Controlled portfolio (N=50, ϵ=5bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
2.55
1.46
1.95
1.02
1.69
1.73
19.22%
5.16%
10
0.04
0.80
0.06
0.70
(0.51)
0.22
3.34%
4.43%
15
(0.02)
0.38
(0.33)
0.44
(0.67)
(0.04)
1.98%
3.70%
20
(1.38)
(0.58)
(1.17)
(0.22)
(2.26)
(1.12)
(1.29)%
3.12%
60
5
0.25
0.61
2.14
1.43
0.68
1.02
12.81%
6.14%
10
1.06
1.17
1.74
1.19
0.25
1.08
11.07%
4.93%
15
1.06
(0.03)
1.61
0.55
0.16
0.67
6.53%
4.43%
20
1.25
1.57
(0.32)
0.55
(0.88)
0.43
3.91%
4.51%
90
5
1.12
1.62
0.83
1.53
0.85
1.19
14.73%
5.95%
10
1.83
1.08
1.68
0.27
1.04
1.18
13.28%
5.49%
15
0.78
1.54
1.22
0.59
0.56
0.94
9.60%
4.94%
20
0.58
1.88
1.62
0.84
0.09
1.00
9.23%
4.16%
120
5
2.11
0.73
0.96
0.97
1.57
1.27
14.96%
6.11%
10
1.73
1.79
2.30
0.73
0.88
1.49
18.87%
5.52%
15
1.58
1.30
2.14
0.72
0.36
1.22
13.79%
5.12%
20
1.27
0.60
1.92
0.34
0.73
0.97
9.84%
4.75%
Mean
0.99
0.99
1.15
0.73
0.28
0.83
10.12%
4.90%
The out-of-sample performance of controlled portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 50, and the transaction costs are 5bp per volume.
R2-screening is not applied here. On average, the Sharpe ratios and returns are more unstable and much lower than that of portfolio size
of 75 The returns the All values are annualized.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 13: Controlled portfolio (N=25, ϵ=5bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
0.93
0.49
1.39
0.81
2.08
1.14
15.62%
7.03%
10
(0.12)
1.11
0.78
0.39
0.39
0.51
6.08%
5.50%
15
(0.13)
(0.24)
1.46
(0.08)
(0.60)
0.08
2.97%
4.68%
20
(0.97)
(0.16)
(0.18)
(0.11)
(2.02)
(0.69)
(0.33)%
4.28%
60
5
0.68
1.23
1.29
0.82
0.69
0.94
14.26%
7.28%
10
1.17
1.17
0.63
(0.57)
0.22
0.52
6.87%
5.89%
15
1.72
0.82
2.31
(0.25)
0.33
0.99
10.44%
5.14%
20
1.19
2.00
(0.75)
(0.22)
(0.93)
0.26
3.15%
5.27%
90
5
0.16
1.67
1.00
0.50
(0.09)
0.65
10.17%
7.40%
10
2.25
0.25
1.25
0.96
1.05
1.15
14.09%
6.53%
15
1.28
1.68
0.85
0.96
0.61
1.08
13.57%
6.30%
20
0.52
1.24
1.67
0.03
(0.53)
0.59
7.47%
5.47%
120
5
1.62
0.55
0.78
0.55
1.36
0.97
12.38%
6.98%
10
0.84
0.52
1.73
0.34
0.53
0.79
12.03%
7.01%
15
1.07
(0.41)
1.40
0.77
(0.46)
0.47
7.33%
6.47%
20
0.45
0.60
1.47
0.50
0.86
0.78
9.53%
5.83%
Mean
0.79
0.78
1.07
0.34
0.22
0.64
9.10%
6.07%
The out-of-sample performance of controlled portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 25, and the transaction costs are 5bp per volume.
R2-screening is not applied here. On average, the Sharpe ratios and returns are more unstable and signiﬁcantly lower than that of portfolio
size of 75. The returns the All values are annualized.
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 14: Controlled portfolio (N=75, ϵ=10bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
1.09
1.40
0.90
0.59
0.35
0.86
8.52%
4.60%
10
(1.80)
0.40
(0.81)
(0.28)
(1.73)
(0.84)
(1.06)%
3.90%
15
(1.77)
(1.28)
(1.19)
(1.59)
(3.26)
(1.82)
(2.98)%
3.24%
20
(3.85)
(2.59)
(2.85)
(3.05)
(4.39)
(3.35)
(4.88)%
2.68%
60
5
0.35
1.10
1.58
1.17
0.50
0.94
10.75%
5.33%
10
0.47
1.00
1.21
0.59
(0.62)
0.53
5.67%
4.34%
15
0.75
(0.54)
1.11
(0.05)
(1.22)
0.01
2.48%
3.85%
20
0.18
0.77
(0.09)
(0.87)
(1.37)
(0.27)
1.41%
3.48%
90
5
1.00
1.46
1.34
1.49
0.16
1.09
11.71%
5.17%
10
0.99
1.14
0.57
0.68
0.69
0.81
7.83%
4.87%
15
0.31
1.55
1.20
0.27
0.38
0.74
6.79%
4.08%
20
0.35
1.86
1.65
0.60
(0.40)
0.81
6.88%
3.55%
120
5
1.78
2.02
1.30
1.24
1.23
1.51
15.77%
4.95%
10
1.36
2.27
1.96
1.22
0.53
1.47
14.61%
4.49%
15
1.89
1.46
1.63
0.41
0.02
1.08
9.85%
4.21%
20
0.45
0.75
1.18
0.01
0.00
0.48
5.59%
4.32%
Mean
0.22
0.80
0.67
0.15
(0.57)
0.25
6.18%
4.19%
The out-of-sample performance of mean-reversion controlled portfolio.
The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs
are 10bp per volume. R2-screening is not applied here. When the transaction costs become higher, the Sharpe ratios dropped down and
become unstable. All values are annualized.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Table 15: Controlled portfolio (N=75, ϵ=0bp, no R2-screening)
Windows
Factors
Periods
All
2005-2006
2007-2008
2009-2010
2011-2012
2013-2014
Mean
Return
Volatility
30
5
3.19
2.74
2.38
2.94
2.58
2.76
28.40%
4.24%
10
0.68
2.44
0.99
2.78
1.26
1.63
11.24%
3.55%
15
1.27
1.26
1.17
1.79
1.14
1.32
7.86%
2.93%
20
0.17
0.68
0.39
1.61
1.33
0.84
4.54%
2.37%
60
5
1.44
1.79
2.19
2.19
1.72
1.87
21.60%
5.10%
10
1.60
1.95
2.21
1.91
0.82
1.70
14.84%
4.13%
15
2.17
0.80
2.24
1.46
0.45
1.42
10.74%
3.65%
20
1.80
2.29
0.99
1.07
0.87
1.41
9.30%
3.30%
90
5
1.72
1.94
1.87
2.23
0.96
1.74
19.30%
5.02%
10
1.83
1.83
1.09
1.46
1.71
1.58
14.81%
4.71%
15
1.29
2.41
1.88
1.13
1.76
1.69
13.71%
3.94%
20
1.47
2.91
2.50
1.86
1.00
1.95
14.31%
3.42%
120
5
2.34
2.47
1.77
1.80
1.97
2.07
22.82%
4.83%
10
2.00
2.84
2.41
1.94
1.42
2.12
21.77%
4.38%
15
2.57
2.20
2.10
1.15
0.95
1.80
15.99%
4.11%
20
1.26
1.46
1.61
0.89
0.89
1.22
10.78%
4.20%
Mean
1.67
2.00
1.74
1.76
1.30
1.70
15.13%
3.99%
The out-of-sample performance of mean-reversion controlled portfolio. The number of selected stocks is 75, and there is no transaction
cost. R2-screening is not applied here. When the transaction costs become higher, the Sharpe ratios dropped down and become unstable.
All values are annualized.
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Figures
05−06
07−08
09−10
11−12
13−14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Period
Sharpe ratio
N=75, 5bp cost, no R2−screen
 
 
Controlled
Random
Low−Cap
High−Cap
Figure 1: The eﬀect of mean-reversion controlled portfolio on Sharpe ratios.
The size of
portfolio is 75, the transaction cost is 5bp per volume, and R2-screening is not applied here.
It is clear to see that the portfolio selection using the estimated mean-reversion speed (red
line) performs better than any other portfolios.
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Figure 2: A schematic diagram for a long/short strategy. When the trading signal hits 1.25,
it is presumed to be over-valued, so we sell the stock to open the short position (green dots),
expecting it to go down soon. If it hits 0.5, we buy the stock to close the short position, which
leads us to obtain proﬁts. Similar strategy can be applied to the open/close of long position
(red dots).
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

Figure 3: Diagram for trading scheme in a single testing cycle. The mean-reversion speeds
(or the inverse of the mean-reversion times) are estimated with a moving estimation window,
and the quality scores are recorded until the end of the training period. Based on the quality
scores, high-ranked stocks are selected to form the trading portfolio. When the trading signal
is judged to be statistically reliable, the optimization problem for asset allocations is solved
for trading. Note that the estimation windows for training and for trading are set to be the
same.
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Time (year)
Cumulative PnL
Controlled Portfolio. Cost=5bp
 
 
2005−2006 (SR: 2.96)
2007−2008 (SR: 2.57)
2009−2010 (SR: 2.24)
2011−2012 (SR: 2.59)
2013−2014 (SR: 1.73)
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Time (year)
Cumulative PnL
Controlled Portfolio. Cost=10bp
 
 
2005−2006 (SR: 1.09)
2007−2008 (SR: 1.40)
2009−2010 (SR: 0.90)
2011−2012 (SR: 0.59)
2013−2014 (SR: 0.35)
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Time (year)
Cumulative PnL
Random Portfolio. Cost=5bp
 
 
2005−2006 (SR: 1.60)
2007−2008 (SR: 2.52)
2009−2010 (SR: 1.10)
2011−2012 (SR: 2.08)
2013−2014 (SR: 2.16)
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Time (year)
Cumulative PnL
Random Portfolio. Cost=10bp
 
 
2005−2006 (SR: −0.09)
2007−2008 (SR: 0.71)
2009−2010 (SR: −0.06)
2011−2012 (SR: 0.61)
2013−2014 (SR: −0.13)
Figure 4: Sample results of cumulative PnL for each period. The results are generated using
two portfolios (controlled and random) with two transaction costs (of 5bp and 10bp per
trading volume). Here the portfolio size is N = 75, the number of removed factors are 5 and
the window length is 30 business days. R2-screening is applied. Note that the performance of
controlled portfolio with R2-screening is very stable and yields high Sharpe ratios. It is also
less aﬀected by increased transaction costs, compared to random portfolio. The results with
various parameters are provided in the appendix.
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

05−06
07−08
09−10
11−12
13−14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Period
Sharpe ratio
N=75, 5bp cost, no R2−screen
 
 
Controlled
Random
Low−Cap
High−Cap
05−06
07−08
09−10
11−12
13−14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Period
Sharpe ratio
N=75, 5bp cost, R2−screen
 
 
Controlled
Random
Low−Cap
High−Cap
Figure 5: The out-of-sample performance from four diﬀerent portfolios. The number of selected stocks is 75, and the transaction costs are 5bp per volume. (Left) Without R2-screening.
Compared with the performance from other portfolios with same condition, the Sharpe ratios are mostly improved when using the (mean-reversion) controlled portfolio. (Right) With
R2-screening. The overall level of performance enhanced by selective trading based on R2screening. All values are annualized.
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

05−06
07−08
09−10
11−12
13−14
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Period
Estimated mean−reversion time
Estimated mean−reversion time (days)
 
 
Controlled
Random
Low−Cap
High−Cap
05−06
07−08
09−10
11−12
13−14
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Period
Realized mean−reversion time
Realized mean−reversion time (days)
 
 
Controlled
Random
Low−Cap
High−Cap
Figure 6: Mean-reversion times (in days): estimated (Left) and realized (Right) values are presented. The mean-reversion controlled portfolio exhibits signiﬁcantly shorter trading intervals
compared to other three portfolios. Note the values are averaged.
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

0
5
10
15
20
40
60
80
100
120
−4
−2
0
2
Window length
Low transaction cost (ε=5bp)
Number of factors
Sharpe ratio
0
5
10
15
20
40
60
80
100
120
−4
−2
0
2
Window length
High transaction cost (ε=15bp)
Number of factors
Sharpe ratio
Figure 7: The performance surface as a function of number of factors (p) and window length
(T), for two diﬀerent transaction costs settings: ϵ=5bp (left) and ϵ=15bp (right). The performance is measured by averaged Sharpe ratios. The interruption from increasing costs is
bigger for shorter windows than longer windows.
47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

25
50
75
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Portfolio size
Sharpe Ratios
Performance with 5bp Cost
 
 
Controlled
Random
Low−Cap
High−Cap
Figure 8: Sharpe ratios with respect to portfolio sizes: X axis represents portfolio sizes (25,
50, 75, and 100 stocks) and Y axis represents Sharpe ratios. The results are presented with
transaction costs of 5bp. Note that the values on the Y axis are averaged ones over all number
of factors, estimation windows, and periods. In general, the performance is better with larger
portfolio sizes. However, for controlled portfolio, using N = 75 is better than using N = 100.
48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

05−06
07−08
09−10
11−12
13−14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Period
Sharpe ratio
Effect of Optimization for Allocations
 
 
With optimization
Without optimization
Figure 9: Performance comparison between with and without solving optimization problem
for asset allocations.
In void of optimized asset allocations, the strategy is unstable and
cannot achieve the market-neutrality.
49
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Window: 60 days
Number of factors
Year
 
 
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
SP500
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Window: 120 days
Number of factors
Year
Figure 10: Dynamics of number of factors that explain diﬀerent levels of variance.
The
numbers diﬀer with estimation window: 60 days (top) and 120 days (bottom). The total
number of stocks is 378. The scaled S&P500 index is compared. The correlation is larger in
volatile markets.
50
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Dynamics of largest eigenvalue
Level of variance explained by by the largest eigenvalu
Year
 
 
Window: 60 days
Window 120 days
Figure 11: The largest eigenvalue of correlation matrix of normalized original returns with
moving window. The largest eigenvalue increase signiﬁcantly when market becomes volatile.
The shorter windows response more sensitively to the market.
51
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x 10
4
Distribution of mean−reversion time (window=60 days)
estimated mean−reversion time (days)
freq
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x 10
4
Distribution of mean−reversion time (window=120 days)
estimated mean−reversion time (days)
freq
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
x 10
4
Distribution of R2 value (window=60 days)
R2 value
freq
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
x 10
4
Distribution of R2 value (window=120 days)
R2 value
freq
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
estimated mean−reversion time vs. R2
estimated mean−reversion time (days)
R2
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
estimated mean−reversion time vs. R2
estimated mean−reversion time (days)
R2
Figure 12: An exemplary statistics of mean reversion time and R2 values. (Top) Distribution
of estimated mean-reversion time. (Middle) Distribution of R2 values from OU estimations.
(Bottom) Scatter plots between the two. Here the number of factors is 20, and estimation
window length is 60 (Left) and 120 days (Right). Note that the estimation mean-reversion
times and R2 values are larger for longer estimation window, and vice versa.
52
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2868525
