 
 
 
 
 
Chicago Booth Paper No. 24-26 
 
 
 
 
 
The Statistical Limit of Arbitrage* 
 
Rui Da 
Indiana University 
Stefan Nagel 
University of Chicago, NBER and CEPR 
Dacheng Xiu 
University of Chicago and NBER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance 
The University of Chicago, Booth School of Business 
 
This paper also can be downloaded without charge from the 
Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection 
 

The Statistical Limit of Arbitrage∗
Rui Da†
Indiana University
Stefan Nagel‡
University of Chicago
NBER and CEPR
Dacheng Xiu§
University of Chicago
NBER
This version: June 22, 2025
Abstract
We investigate the economic consequences of statistical learning for arbitrage
pricing in a high-dimensional setting.
Arbitrageurs learn about alphas from
historical data.
When alphas are weak and rare, estimation errors hinder
arbitrageurs—even those employing optimal machine learning techniques—from
fully exploiting all true pricing errors. This statistical limit to arbitrage widens
the equilibrium bounds of alphas beyond what traditional arbitrage pricing theory
predicts, leading to a signiﬁcant divergence between the feasible Sharpe ratio
achievable by arbitrageurs and the unattainable theoretical maximum under
perfect knowledge of alphas.
Keywords: Learning about Alphas, Rational Expectations, Portfolio Choice, Rare
and Weak Signal, False Negatives, Empirical Bayes, Testing APT, Machine Learning, Decision-making under Uncertainty
∗We are grateful for comments from Adem Atmaz, Lars Hansen, Ye Luo, Andreas Neuhierl, Markus
Pelger, Seth Pruitt, Yizhou Xiao, Yao Zeng, and seminar and conference participants at Columbia University, Indiana University, Louisiana State University, Princeton University, ITAM Business School,
University of Cincinnati, University of Chicago, Yale School of Management, EPFL, ETH Zurich, Stockholm Business School, University of Gothenburg, University of Liverpool, University of Oxford, City University of Hong Kong, Gregory Chow Seminar Series in Econometrics and Statistics, HKUST, KAIST,
Peking University, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Southern University of Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, University of Melbourne, Sao Paulo School of Economics, American
Finance Association Annual Meetings, NBER Summer Institute, Jacobs Levy Center Frontiers in Quantitative Finance Conference, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, SFS Cavalcade North America,
Annual SoFiE Conference, Global AI Finance Research Conference in Singapore, China International
Conference in Finance, Wabash River Finance Conference, and SAIF Annual Research Conference.
†Address: 1275 E 10th St, Bloomington, IN 47405. E-mail: ruida@iu.edu.
‡Address: 5807 S Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. E-mail: stefan.nagel@chicagobooth.edu.
§Address: 5807 S Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. E-mail: dacheng.xiu@chicagobooth.edu.
1

1
Introduction
The full-information rational expectations hypothesis assumes that economic agents possess perfect knowledge of the economic model, thereby bypassing the statistical challenges
real-world agents encounter when estimating its parameters. While this assumption may
be plausible in a low-dimensional environment with ample data for learning, many economic settings are more realistically high-dimensional, with unknown model parameters
and limited data. This raises important questions: How should agents optimally learn
in such environments, and what are the implications for equilibrium outcomes? In this
paper, we explore these questions in the context of asset market arbitrage.
The absence of near-arbitrage opportunities is a fundamental principle in most asset
pricing theories, including the Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT). These theories implicitly assume that if investment opportunities with exceptionally high reward-to-risk ratios
were to exist, they would attract arbitrageurs. Armed with knowledge of the investment
opportunities (i.e., alphas and covariances), these arbitrageurs would exploit and, in turn,
eliminate such opportunities. In reality, however, sophisticated investors seeking rewarding investment opportunities lack perfect knowledge. Instead, they rely on statistical
analysis to infer the existence of such opportunities from historical data, introducing a
statistical challenge. In some cases, such as derivatives pricing, this challenge may be
small enough that it does not signiﬁcantly hinder arbitrage activity. However, in noisier,
high-dimensional settings like the cross-section of stock returns, statistical challenge can
be substantial, imposing a formidable limit on arbitrage.
To analyze the eﬀects of arbitrageur learning, we consider a setting in which returns
follow a statistical linear factor model, with the high-dimensional alphas and volatilities
drawn from a prior distribution.1 Arbitrageurs evaluate trading strategies based on meanvariance utility, seeking factor-neutral arbitrage portfolios that optimally capture factor
model alphas while balancing risks. Importantly, these strategies must be feasible, relying
solely on observable data such as historical returns. This feasibility constraint reﬂects
the reality that arbitrageurs do not have direct access to the realizations of alphas and
volatilities; instead, they must infer them from observable data.
Incorporating this constraint, we derive upper bounds on the achievable utility and
Sharpe ratio for any feasible arbitrage portfolio, given a particular prior distribution.
These upper bounds are strictly dominated by the infeasible optimal values that arbitrageurs could attain if they had perfect knowledge of the realizations of alphas and
volatilities.
Moreover, for each prior distribution considered, we construct a feasible
strategy that achieves these bounds.
1Throughout, we adopt a Bayesian perspective, treating (high-dimensional) parameters as realizations
of random variables. Nuisance (low-dimensional) parameters are treated as constants, that is, as having
degenerate (singleton) distributions.
2

Moreover, the diﬃculty of the arbitrageurs’ learning problem depends primarily on
the prior distribution of alphas, rather than on volatilities, as the latter are much easier
to learn in our setting. We use simple special cases to illustrate how the Sharpe ratio
bound on feasible portfolios varies with the strength and sparsity of alphas. When alphas
are strong and not too rare relative to the dimensionality of the cross-section and the
sample size, arbitrageurs can, in the limit, perfectly learn alphas. However, when alphas
are weaker and more rare, inferring about them becomes more challenging, creating a
gap between the feasible Sharpe ratio bound and the infeasible Sharpe ratio that requires perfect knowledge of alphas. For instance, the infeasible Sharpe ratio may explode
asymptotically, while the feasible Sharpe ratio bound remains ﬁnite.
The optimal strategy leverages posterior inference, which in turn depends on the
prior distribution of alphas. Under diﬀerent priors, approaches such as multiple testing,
shrinkage, and selection correspond to the optimal strategy for their respective prior
assumptions. These alternative approaches are widely used by empirical asset pricing
researchers and practitioners, making it valuable to understand the prior scenarios under
which they achieve the optimal feasible strategy.
A multiple-testing procedure as in
Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) (BH) seeks to prevent false alpha discoveries by applying
a p-value threshold that controls the false discovery rate (FDR), setting alphas that
do not pass this threshold to zero. The BH procedure achieves optimal performance
only when a small number of true alpha signals are strong; otherwise, it tends to be
overly conservative, falling short of optimality. In contrast, Ridge shrinkage can achieve
optimality when almost all true alphas are either uniformly strong or uniformly weak.
Lasso-based selection and shrinkage of alphas aims to balance the strengths of these two
approaches, with a tuning parameter that can adapt to diﬀerent scenarios.
Yet none of these methods attain the upper bounds on utility and Sharpe ratio across
all possible prior distributions. These strategies are only optimal if the prior implied
by their regularizations matches the true prior, about which arbitrageurs generally lack
precise knowledge. To address this challenge, we seek a uniformly optimal strategy—one
that outperforms others in terms of utility across all plausible priors. In other words, when
arbitrageurs face ambiguity about the true prior, striving for uniformity oﬀers the most
robust solution. The aforementioned strategies are feasible but not uniformly optimal.
In fact, we demonstrate that a uniformly optimal feasible strategy does exist in our setting. Speciﬁcally, arbitrageurs can construct a feasible trading strategy that achieves the
aforementioned upper bounds uniformly across all prior distributions of alphas, regardless of their strength and sparsity. Under this strategy, portfolio weights are determined
by the relative magnitudes and associated uncertainty of the alpha estimates, following
Bayes’ rule. Assets with high alpha t-statistics receive portfolio weights proportional to
their t-statistics, while those with weaker estimates are assigned appropriately shrunk
3

weights. As alluded to previously, the prior of alphas, unknown to arbitrageurs, plays a
key role, because it directly impacts the portfolio weights via the Bayes’ rule. Borrowing
insights from the empirical Bayes method, our strategy fully recovers the impact of the
prior from the empirical distribution of alpha estimates, ensuring its optimality.
The uniformly optimal feasible utility and Sharpe ratio precisely characterize the
magnitude of the statistical limit to arbitrage. The gap between them and their infeasible
counterparts implies that the amount of mispricing that can survive in equilibrium is more
sizable compared to a scenario where arbitrageurs have exact knowledge of alphas and
volatilities. Empirically, it is the feasible Sharpe ratio—not the unattainable, infeasible
one—that reveals the minimum reward-to-risk compensation arbitrageurs require.
To empirically contrast feasible and infeasible Sharpe ratios, we propose an estimator
for the infeasible Sharpe ratio. While this Sharpe ratio can be consistently estimated,
it is not attainable by any feasible portfolio with weights derived from historical data.
The infeasible Sharpe ratio often serves as the foundation for tests of the APT, see,
e.g., Gibbons et al. (1989), Gagliardini et al. (2016), Fan et al. (2015), and Pesaran and
Yamagata (2017). While these tests are powerful and can lead to the discovery of alpha
signals, they are not relevant for arbitrageurs limited to feasible trading strategies. Our
eﬀort in constructing the uniformly optimal feasible arbitrage portfolio and evaluating
its economic performance directly responds to Shanken’s call to empirically assess the
APT by “characterizing the investment opportunities that are available as a consequence
of the observed expected return deviation” and “examining the extent to which we can
approximate an arbitrage with existing assets” (Shanken, 1992). Here we do so taking
into account the statistical limits to arbitrage.
Finally, we demonstrate the empirical implications of the statistical limits of arbitrage by examining monthly equity returns in US stock market from 1965 to 2020. Our
empirical analysis has two parts. In the ﬁrst part, we examine individual stock returns.
We construct a multi-factor model that uses observed stock characteristics as risk exposures. The characteristics include 16 commonly used return predictors and 11 industry
indicators. These characteristics and industry dummies capture similar equity factors in
the MSCI Barra model widely-used among practitioners. In the second part, we analyze
returns on 1,273 characteristics-sorted portfolios and 49 industry portfolios, for which we
construct latent factor models via singular value decomposition, following Giglio and Xiu
(2021). Data on characteristics and portfolio returns in our empirical analysis is from
Chen and Zimmermann (2020).2
For individual stocks, we estimate alphas as the averaged residuals in cross-sectional
regressions of stock returns on characteristics in 60-month rolling windows. The crosssectional R2s are relatively low, averaging around 8% over our sample period.
This
2See openassetpricing.com (Stock-level Signal Datasets August 2023 Release).
4

suggests that learning alphas from realized returns is diﬃcult, as the alphas are obscured
by large amounts of noise. Accordingly, only 7.58% and 1.12% of individual stocks’ alpha
estimates have t-statistics greater than 2.0 and 3.0, respectively, in absolute values. Even
without accounting for multiple testing, these estimates indicate that non-zero alphas are
both rare and weak.
One may be concerned that these results may overstate the diﬃculty of learning
alphas because they use only realized returns as the only signal of alpha. Our analysis
of portfolio returns addresses these concerns. The large number of characteristics used
to construct these portfolios can be interpreted as signals of alphas, and the portfolios as
managed investment strategies that exploit the information in these signals. Although
a latent factor model accounts for a larger portion (around 35%) of the cross-sectional
variation in realized portfolio returns than the factor model for individual stock returns,
we ﬁnd that portfolio alphas still exhibit notable rarity and weakness. This is particularly
evident once we adjust for publication years, ensuring that portfolios are considered only
after their sorting characteristics were published in the previous years.
We then ﬁnd, across both individual stocks and portfolios and using various methods,
that the optimal feasible arbitrage portfolios yield moderately low annualized Sharpe ratios below 0.7. In contrast, the infeasible Sharpe ratios are considerably higher, averaging
more than 4.8 and reaching as high as 16 in some sample periods for individual stocks,
and ranging from 5 to 20 for portfolios. The large gap between feasible and infeasible
Sharpe ratios highlights the empirical signiﬁcance of the statistical limits to arbitrage.
When these statistical limits to arbitrage are taken into account, the empirical facts are in
line with the implication of the APT that near-arbitrage opportunities should be absent.
In macroeconomics and ﬁnance, rational expectations models—where decision makers are not confronted with parameter uncertainty and prior ambiguity—have attracted
criticism (Hansen, 2007, 2014). Hansen (2014) emphasizes the importance of both types
of uncertainty. He notes, “To confront model ambiguity, we may assign subjective probabilities across models, including the unknown parameters.” Given a prior, much of the
literature has adopted Bayesian learning as a way to study how decision makers act in
the presence of parameter uncertainty. See, for example, Pastor and Veronesi (2009) for
a survey on learning in ﬁnancial markets. In many settings—particularly when learning a low-dimensional parameter, as in Collin-Dufresne et al. (2016)—learning can be
suﬃciently slow for its eﬀects to persist within empirically realistic sample sizes, even
though convergence to rational expectations takes place in the long run. An exception
is Martin and Nagel (2022), where learning eﬀects persist because investors face a highdimensional inference problem regarding the process generating ﬁrm cash ﬂows. Similarly,
arbitrageurs in our model attempt to infer a high-dimensional vector with a potentially
insuﬃcient sample size, though they focus on learning about alphas rather than the un5

derlying cash ﬂow processes of ﬁrms. Our results therefore highlight the statistical limits
of arbitrageurs’ ability to counteract mispricing that could arise from the asset demand
of less sophisticated or liquidity-driven investors.
Hansen (2014) further notes that “there are multiple reasons to consider a family of
priors...This family...could also capture the ambiguity to a single decision maker struggling
with which prior should be used.” Concerns about prior ambiguity are formalized in earlier
work as well. For instance, agents in Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989) and Maccheroni et al.
(2006) address prior ambiguity by ranking decision rules according to a max-min utility
criterion, where the minimization is over the set of potential priors. Equivalently, they
choose a decision rule that performs best under the “worst-case” prior.
In contrast,
our arbitrageurs are able to achieve utility and Sharpe ratio outcomes that match those
attainable by an agent who knows the actual prior, uniformly across all potential priors.3
They accomplish this by leveraging the empirical Bayes method to learn about the prior
from observable data. Despite this virtually perfect learning about the prior, however,
the outcomes attainable by agents employing the best machine learning methods in a
high-dimensional environment still fall short of those achievable by rational expectations
agents in the asymptotic limit.
Our paper builds on a large literature on the arbitrage pricing theory (APT) developed by Ross (1976) and later reﬁned by Huberman (1982), Chamberlain and Rothschild
(1983), and Ingersoll (1984). As in these foundational studies, we employ asymptotic
arguments that avoid imposing strong structural assumptions about the economy. The
results of this analysis should be interpreted as an asymptotic approximation for a more
realistic setting with a ﬁnite number of assets. The key point is that weak economic restrictions rule out Sharpe ratios far above the Sharpe ratios of diversiﬁed factor portfolios.
Diﬀerent from earlier work on the APT, we show in this paper that the statistical limit
to arbitrage dramatically widens this Sharpe ratio bound compared with an economy in
which arbitrageurs are endowed with perfect knowledge of investment opportunities. In
this regard, our paper is also related to the literature on the limits of arbitrage reviewed
in Gromb and Vayanos (2010). Complementary to this literature, the arbitrage limit in
our setting stems from model ambiguity, rather than from risk, costs, frictions, and other
constraints faced by arbitrageurs.
Our paper provides a solution to a long standing problem in optimal portfolio choice
under parameter uncertainty. Historically, the plug-in mean-variance portfolio, which is
based on sample means and covariance matrices, has been criticized for underperforming. Assuming normally distributed returns, Kan and Zhou (2007) study the expected
performance of this portfolio and observe that its Sharpe ratio is below its theoreti3In this regard, our analysis is related to a substantial literature in econometrics and statistics that
discusses the uniform validity of asymptotic approximations; see, e.g., Staiger and Stock (1997), Imbens
and Manski (2004), Leeb and P¨otscher (2005), Andrews et al. (2020).
6

cal value. Further studies by Tu and Zhou (2010) and Kan et al. (2022) expand their
analysis by exploring alternative portfolio rules that aim to minimize utility loss under
estimation uncertainty. However, these studies only identify optimal solutions within a
predetermined class of strategies, which does not reﬂect the ﬂexibility investors have in
practice to choose any perceived superior strategy. In contrast, our study identiﬁes a
uniformly optimal solution that achieves optimal feasible Sharpe ratios without imposing
restrictions on the choice of strategies. Our analytical framework is primarily concerned
with arbitrage portfolios, but our results are directly applicable to optimal portfolios in
general, thus providing a solution to this classic problem.
A closely related paper to ours is Kim et al. (2020), which proposes a characteristicsbased factor model to construct feasible arbitrage portfolios. Their asymptotic theory
does not preclude arbitrage opportunities with a theoretically inﬁnite Sharpe ratio, which
implies a rather strong signal-to-noise ratio in their alpha signals. Our setting is considerably diﬀerent in that the premise of our framework rules out inﬁnite feasible Sharpe
ratios, which enforces weak and rare signals. In our setting, alphas cannot possibly be
recovered with certainty even when the sample size is large.4
Our paper also contributes to the evolving literature on applications of statistical and
machine learning in asset pricing, and in particular on the topic of testing the APT,
e.g., Gibbons et al. (1989), Gagliardini et al. (2016), and Fan et al. (2015), as well as
on testing for alphas, e.g., Barras et al. (2010), Harvey and Liu (2020), and Giglio et al.
(2021). The ﬁrst literature focuses on testing a null that all alphas are equal to zero.
This is certainly an interesting null hypothesis. However, as we emphasize in this paper,
an economically sensible interpretation of the APT should allow for statistical limits to
arbitrage. This means that the APT does allow for non-zero alphas as long as they do
not induce an explosive feasible Sharpe ratio. The second literature focuses on detecting
strong alphas, applying multiple testing methods, such as the BH method, or extensions
thereof, to control the FDR. In contrast, we allow for rare and weak alpha signals such
that any procedure aiming to control the FDR is too conservative with too few or no
discoveries.5 Our objective here is not on model testing or signal detection. Rather, we
strive for the optimal economic performance of arbitrage portfolios. We show that even
if signals were so weak that they are undetectable by multiple testing methods, they may
lead to a portfolio with a considerable Sharpe ratio.
The literature on portfolio choice through Bayesian and economic decision-theoretical
4On the empirical side, Guijarro-Ordonez et al. (2022) propose a deep learning approach to statistical
arbitrage that achieves a sizable out-of-sample Sharpe ratio. The proﬁts of their trading strategy stem
from generalized return reversals at daily to weekly frequencies, potentially due to liquidity provision
and other microstructure channels. Our empirical analysis is not targeted towards characterizing the
reward-to-risk ratios for high frequency traders, nor for traders that turnover a large portion of their
portfolios daily.
5Donoho and Jin (2004) adopt the so-called higher criticism approach, dating back to Tukey (1976),
to detect rare and weak signals in a stylized multiple testing problem.
7

perspectives is extensive, as outlined in the survey by Avramov and Zhou (2010). Early
works like those by Jorion (1986) and Frost and Savarino (1986) highlight the advantages
of using Bayes-Stein shrinkage solutions. Further contributions in this topic incorporate
informative and economically motivated priors, as in Black and Litterman (1992), Pastor
(2000), and Pastor and Stambaugh (2000). In our context, the optimal portfolio weights
are proportional to the posterior mean of alpha. This resembles the classical normal
mean problem in empirical Bayes, dating back to Robbins (1956), where the unknown
parameters (alphas) are regarded as random draws from some common distribution, and
only a noisy version (realized ex-factor returns) is observed. Our nonparametric approach
thereby shares the same spirit of nonparametric empirical Bayes, see, e.g., Johns (1957),
Zhang (1997), and Brown and Greenshtein (2009).
Yet, our focus is on utility and
Sharpe ratios rather than the mean-squared error of parameter estimation, as in classical
empirical Bayes inference. The latter is unsuitable in our context also because, under
the economically relevant scenario where the feasible optimal Sharpe ratio diminishes
relative to the infeasible one, the mean-squared error of the optimal alpha estimator
asymptotically converges to that of a naive zero estimator, rendering the mean-squared
error criterion uninformative.
Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops our main result on the statistical
limit to arbitrage.
Speciﬁcally, Section 2.1 sets up the model, Section 2.2 motivates
and then deﬁnes the feasibility constraint facing arbitrageurs, Sections 2.3 - 2.5 specify
arbitrageurs’ decision problem, derive the optimal strategy, illustrate the Bayes correction
for alpha, and demonstrate the gap between feasible and infeasible Sharpe ratios, Section
2.6 constructs a uniformly optimal and feasible trading strategy that achieves the bound,
Section 2.7 proposes an estimator of the infeasible Sharpe ratio, and ﬁnally Section 2.8
analyzes alternative strategies. Section 3 provides simulation evidence, followed by an
empirical analysis in Section 4. Section 5 concludes. The appendix provides additional
empirical and theoretical results, as well as all the technical details.
2
Main Theoretical Results
We start by revisiting the arbitrage pricing theory framework developed by Ross (1976).
This theory is primarily based on a reduced-form statistical model for asset returns, which,
despite its stylized nature, oﬀers signiﬁcant theoretical insights and remains relevant for
guiding empirical investment decisions.
2.1
Factor Model Setup
The factor economy has N assets in the investment universe. The N × 1 vector of excess
returns rt follows a reduced-form linear factor model:
8

rt = α + βγ + βvt + ut,
(1)
where β is an N × K matrix of factor exposures, α is an N × 1 vector of pricing errors,
vt is a K × 1 vector of zero-mean factor innovations with covariance matrix Σv, γ is a
K × 1 vector of risk premia, and ut is a vector of idiosyncratic returns which, conditional
on all the variables before time-t, has a diagonal covariance matrix Σu and zero mean.6
To facilitate our asymptotic analysis along the cross-sectional dimension, N, we regard
high dimensional objects such as α, β, and Σu as random variables drawn from some
cross-sectional distributions, whereas γ and Σv are regarded as deterministic constants.
This distinction allows us to apply large-sample approximations to analyze the former,
whereas the latter function as nuisance parameters in our analysis. We assume that α has
zero mean, and is cross-sectionally independent of β.7 These conditions are essential for
identiﬁcation of γ in a model that allows for pricing errors. We formalize these conditions
later.
A more general version of this model allows for time-varying parameters:
rt = αt−1 + βt−1γt−1 + βt−1vt + ut,
(2)
where βt is a vector of time-varying factor loadings and γt is a vector of time-varying risk
premia.8 Despite its greater generality, this speciﬁcation does not materially change the
economic insights regarding the theoretical limits of arbitrage. For clarity, our theoretical
analysis focuses on the more stylized unconditional model in (1), although our results,
including Theorem 1, continue to hold under (2) with time-varying βt.
There are at least three variations of (1), depending on what is assumed to be observable to arbitrageurs.
The most common setup in the academic ﬁnance literature
imposes that factors are observable as, e.g., in Fama and French (1993).9 The second
setting, which has gained more popularity recently since its debut in Connor and Korajczyk (1986), assumes that factors are latent. The third setting is the MSCI Barra
model originally proposed by Rosenberg (1974), where factor exposures are equal to
6While approximate factor models become more prevalent following Chamberlain and Rothschild
(1983), allowing for oﬀ-diagonal entries in the covariance matrix Σu would introduce additional statistical
obstacles due to the estimation of large covariance matrix for inference on alpha and for building optimal
portfolios. For simplicity, we illustrate the economic consequences of statistical limits to arbitrage using
a strict factor model. We discuss violations of these model assumptions later.
7The zero-mean assumption on α is not restrictive, in that we can impose the ﬁrst column of β as a
vector of ones, with the ﬁrst entry in vt set to zero, so that the ﬁrst entry in γ represents the zero-beta
rate or the cross-sectional mean of α.
8This model is overly parametrized that parameters are not identiﬁable without additional restrictions.
Some examples of parsimonious conditional factor models include Connor et al. (2012), Gagliardini et al.
(2016), and Kelly et al. (2019).
9This diﬀers from saying that the factor innovations in vt are observable. In the observable factors
setting, we typically write ft = µ + vt, where µ is a vector of the population means of ft; importantly, µ
does not necessarily equal the factor risk premia γ. Since µ is unknown, vt remains unobservable.
9

stock characteristics and hence observable.10 One notable advantage of this model is that
it sidesteps the statistically and computationally demanding task of estimating a large
number of potentially time-varying stock-level factor exposures. Since the MSCI Barra
model is arguably the most prevalent approach among practitioners, we assume that β
is observable to arbitrageurs and, in our empirical work, use this approach in analyzing
individual stock returns. Speciﬁcally, we follow the conditional model in (2), making use
of time-varying observed β’s. We also employ a moving window method to estimate α,
which eﬀectively accounts for slow-varying α’s.
In practice, arbitrageurs may make use of ﬁrm-level characteristics to predict individual stock’s alphas. Our framework can in fact easily accommodate this if we assume
that (2) holds with αt = ctα and βt = ctβ for certain characteristics ct that represent
arbitrageurs’ signals, then projecting returns onto lagged characteristics results in:
(c⊺
t−1ct−1)−1c⊺
t−1rt = α + β(γt−1 + vt) + (c⊺
t−1ct−1)−1c⊺
t−1ut.
(3)
This transformation converts a conditional model for individual stocks with timevarying alphas into an unconditional latent factor model for managed portfolios,
(c⊺
t−1ct−1)−1c⊺
t−1rt, with time-invariant alphas as in (1). Thus, via these managed portfolios, our theoretical framework also applies to a setting in which arbitrageurs use signals
to predict time-varying alphas. Empirically, we therefore also examine returns on portfolios formed on a large number of stock characteristics, in addition to the individual stock
analysis.
2.2
Feasible Near-Arbitrage Opportunities
Building on the insights of Ross (1976), Huberman (1982), and Ingersoll (1984), the concept of near-arbitrage can be formalized as follows. We adopt the subsequence framework
used in Ingersoll (1984), where the subsequence typically depends on the number of investment opportunities, denoted by N. For each N, all random variables are deﬁned on a
ﬁltered probability space (Ω, F, {Fs}s≤t, P), where Ft contains the information generated
by α, β, {rs, vs, us}s≤t. The probability measure P represents the data-generating process
(DGP) and may vary with N. Accordingly, we consider a sequence of DGPs {PN}N≥1,
and the expectation and variance operators, each deﬁned with respect to PN. For simplicity and without loss of clarity, we will omit explicit reference to N and simply write
P, E(·), and Var(·).
Deﬁnition 1. A portfolio strategy w at time t is said to generate a near-arbitrage under
a sequence of DGPs11, if it satisﬁes w ∈Ft and there exists a constant δ > 0 such that,
10See Kozak and Nagel (2023) on the conditions on factor construction and return covariance matrix
that must hold for characteristics to equal factor loadings.
11We omit the dependence of w on N and t.
10

for any ϵ > 0, the following holds with probability approaching one:
Var(w⊺rt+1|Ft) ≤ϵ,
E(w⊺rt+1|Ft) ≥δ > 0.
Intuitively, no near-arbitrage means there exists no sequence of portfolios that earn
positive expected returns with vanishing risks. Ingersoll (1984) establishes that a suﬃcient
and necessary condition for the absence of near-arbitrage is that12
S⋆:=
p
α⊺Σ−1
u α ≲P 1.
(4)
Here, S⋆is the theoretically optimal Sharpe ratio arbitrageurs can achieve in this economy using a portfolio strategy that has zero exposure to factor risks, namely, a “statistical
arbitrage” strategy in the jargon of practitioners. This result suggests that moderate mispricing in the form of nonzero alphas is permitted in an economy without near-arbitrage
opportunities, but there cannot be too many large alphas that would make S⋆explode.13
To achieve this optimal Sharpe ratio, arbitrageurs should hold a factor-neutral portfolio with weights given by w⋆∝Σ−1
u α, according to Ingersoll (1984).14
His analysis
assumes that arbitrageurs know the true (population) parameters: α and Σu. In reality,
however, the true parameters are unknown to arbitrageurs as they only have a ﬁnite
sample of data to learn about these parameters. The consequences of such parameter
uncertainty can be minor in some contexts if the true parameters are revealed asymptotically and model predictions converge to those of a rational expectations model in which
agents are endowed with perfect knowledge of parameters. Fundamentally, this requires
that the learning problem in the limiting experiment becomes increasingly simpler as the
sample size increases.
We assume at any given time t, arbitrageurs examine a sample of size T, derived from
(1), spanning from t −T + 1 to t. Throughout we will consider asymptotic limits as N
and T increase while K and t are ﬁxed. In this context, the diﬃculty of the learning
problem also hinges on the number of investment opportunities, N, besides T. As N
increases, for a given sample size T, it becomes increasingly diﬃcult for arbitrageurs
12We use the notation aN ≲bN to denote aN = O(bN). Similarly, we write aN ≲P bN to denote
aN = OP(bN). We use aN ≂bN if aN ≲bN and bN ≲aN, and deﬁne aN ≂P bN analogously. The
subscript N is omitted whenever there is no ambiguity.
13Assuming αi is i.i.d. and λmax(Σu) ≲P 1, by equation (4), we have α⊺α ≲P α⊺λmin(Σ−1
u )α ≲P
α⊺Σ−1
u α ≲P 1, so that E(α2
i ) = o(1) by the law of large numbers.
14In Ingersoll (1984), α is deﬁned to be the cross-sectional projection of the expected returns onto β
in the population model, such that α⊺Σ−1
u β = 0. As a result, his arbitrage portfolio weights are factor
neutral, i.e., w⋆⊺β = 0 by construction.
In contrast, our paper sets forth a predetermined DGP as
speciﬁed in (1), where α is modeled as a random variable with the property E(α⊺β) = 0. Consequently,
the factor-neutral optimal strategy illustrated by (9) does not exactly align with the formula presented
by Ingersoll (1984). Under our DGP assumptions, Ingersoll’s portfolio weights are not strictly factorneutral. Nonetheless, we can show that our optimal portfolio weights remain factor-neutral, and achieve
the same Sharpe ratio S⋆asymptotically as N increases.
11

to determine which assets truly have nonzero alphas. If the learning problem remains
diﬃcult as N and T increase, the learning eﬀect persists, which could lead to limiting
implications that diﬀer from the rational expectations case.
Within this framework,
the rational expectations limit S⋆is only relevant for rather restrictive scenarios. By
contrast, in more realistic cases—such as when N greatly exceeds T—the optimal Sharpe
ratio arbitrageurs can achieve without factor exposures is far smaller than S⋆, due to
their inability to make error-free inference. Therefore, condition (4) may be excessively
restrictive in such scenarios.
To illustrate this intuition, we consider a simple and speciﬁc example.
Example 1. Suppose the cross-section of alphas is drawn from the following distribution:
αi
i.i.d.
∼





µ
with prob. ρ/2
−µ
with prob. ρ/2
0
with prob. 1 −ρ
,
1 ≤i ≤N,
(5)
where µ ≥0 and 0 ≤ρ ≤1, and they potentially vary with N and T. In addition, we also
assume β = 0, u ∼N(0, σ2IN) for some σ > 0, and u is independent of α. Consequently,
equation (1) becomes rt = α + ut.
In this example, µ dictates the strength of alphas, ρ describes how rare alphas are,
whereas σ is a nuisance parameter. To emphasize the role of signal strength and count,
we impose in this example that all assets share the same alpha distribution and the
same idiosyncratic variance. Now suppose, more speciﬁcally, that the magnitude of (µ, ρ)
satisﬁes
µ ≂T −1/2
and
ρ ≂N −1/2.
(6)
By modeling parameters µ and ρ as functions of the sample size and dimension of the
investment set, we introduce greater ﬂexibility in depicting the challenges arbitrageurs
encounter in ﬁnite sample situations.15 This condition (6) implies that the signal strength
µ vanishes as the sample size increases (T →∞) and the signal percentage count ρ decays
as the investment universe expands (N →∞). This setup is intended to approximate a
situation in which only a small subset of assets have nonzero, and typically small, alpha.
The objective is to characterize a setting in which alphas can survive in the presence of
arbitrageurs. On the other hand, σ is assumed to be ﬁxed, since arbitrage activity does
not aﬀect the magnitude of idiosyncratic risks.
This model resides in an uncommon territory in the existing literature of asset pricing:
15Adopting a drifting sequence for parameters is a common trick in econometrics to provide more
accurate ﬁnite sample approximations. As Bekker (1994) put, “in evaluating the results, it is important
to keep in mind that the parameter sequence is designed to make the asymptotic distribution ﬁt the
ﬁnite sample distribution better. It is completely irrelevant whether or not further sampling will lead to
samples conforming to this sequence or not.”
12

weak and rare alphas.
In fact, the classical no-near-arbitrage condition (4) imposes,
implicitly, weakness or rareness on alphas; otherwise, if alphas were strong and dense,
α⊺α would explode rather rapidly. Even in the current setting, in light of the fact that
E(α⊺α) = ρµ2N, we still have α⊺α
P
−→∞as long as N 1/2/T →∞. In other words, a
near-arbitrage opportunity arises according to (4), with a strategy w = σ−2α.
However, statistical uncertainty prevents arbitrageurs from having this “free lunch.”
In general, it is only possible to recover any element of alpha up to some estimation error
of magnitude T −1/2.16 Since, by design, the true alpha is of the same order of magnitude
as its level of statistical uncertainty, i.e., µ ≂T −1/2, it is impossible for arbitrageurs to
determine precisely which assets among all have nonzero alpha.
For illustration purpose, suppose that arbitrageurs adopt the strategy bw = σ−2bα,17
replacing α in w with bα = ¯r = α + ¯u.18
Out of sample, this portfolio’s conditional
expected return and conditional variance can be written as:
E
 σ−2 (α + ¯u)⊺(α + ut+1)|Ft

= σ−2(α⊺α + ¯u⊺α),
Var
 σ−2 (α + ¯u)⊺(α + ut+1)|Ft

= σ−2(α⊺α + 2α⊺¯u + ¯u⊺¯u),
where ut+1 denotes a future de-meaned return at t + 1, that shares the same distribution
as {us}s≤t, but is independent of ¯u which belongs to the information set up to t, Ft. The
resulting squared conditional Sharpe ratio is given by:
S2 =
σ−4(α⊺α + ¯u⊺α)2
σ−2(α⊺α + 2α⊺¯u + ¯u⊺¯u) ≲P T −1 →0,
(8)
where we use the fact that ¯u⊺¯u ≂P N/T when ut is i.i.d.. In other words, this portfolio
achieves a Sharpe ratio equal to zero asymptotically.
Is there a superior trading strategy capable of maintaining a non-vanishing Sharpe
ratio? The straightforward answer is no. Our discussion below will elucidate that, within
this context, namely, (6) holds true, the highest achievable Sharpe ratio for all feasible
trading strategies employed by arbitrageurs, represented as SOPT, vanishes asymptotically
16Giglio et al. (2021) develop the asymptotic normality result for alpha estimates via a Fama-MacBeth
procedure in various scenarios, in which factors are (partially) observable or latent whereas β is unknown.
The CLTs in these scenarios share the same form: for any 1 ≤i ≤N,
√
T(bαi −αi)
d
−→N(0, σ2
i (1 + γ⊺(Σv)−1γ)),
(7)
where σ2
i is the ith entry of Σu. In the case that β is observable (but factors are not), we can show that
the CLT has a similar form except that the scalar (1 + γ⊺(Σv)−1γ) disappears.
17The knowledge of σ is ultimately inconsequential for our purposes, as we will demonstrate subsequently for a more general setting. Despite σ being known, this strategy fails to yield any positive Sharpe
ratio.
18For any time series of random vector at, we use ¯a to denote its sample average. As we will point out
later in the paper, this strategy bw, which we will denote by bwCSR, fails to achieve the optimal Sharpe
ratio in all scenarios. We will discuss this in detail in Section 2.6.
13

as N, T →∞.
Conversely, the infeasible optimal Sharpe ratio, denoted S⋆, diverges
under the condition that N 1/2/T →∞.
There is a vast disparity, as shown by this
example, between SOPT and S⋆. The diﬀerence between feasible and infeasible strategies
is primarily driven by the information set accessible to arbitrageurs when they implement
their trading strategies. In this example, the infeasible strategy assumes that arbitrageurs
have access to a comprehensive information set, Ft, that encompasses the knowledge of
α.
This knowledge proves to be extremely valuable when α is both rare and weak,
which creates signiﬁcant gap between this strategy and others that lack access to such
information.
To formalize this, we introduce the concept of feasibility:
Deﬁnition 2. Let G denote the information set generated by the data observable to arbitrageurs. A strategy w is said to be feasible (or infeasible) if it is (or is not) G-measurable.
By modeling the unknown parameters as random variables that lie outside the information set G, we explicitly acknowledge the presence of parameter uncertainty. Arbitrageurs must therefore rely on observed data within G to learn about these unknowns.
Within a Bayesian framework, they update their priors using historical data, forming
posterior beliefs that serve as the basis for inference.
However, just as parameters can take many possible values, arbitrageurs in practice
also face uncertainty about which of the many possible priors the parameters are drawn
from—that is, they face prior ambiguity. Prior ambiguity breaks the feasibility of strategies based on posterior beliefs, because the posterior—conditional on the same observed
data—can still vary with the choice of prior. Since feasibility requires strategies to be
G-measurable—that is, entirely determined by observable quantities—the dependence of
the posterior on an unobservable prior renders such strategies infeasible. To illustrate
this point, consider Example 1, where the prior distribution of α is characterized by two
unknown parameters: µ and ρ. In this setting, bα serves as the suﬃcient statistic summarizing the information set G. Yet, the posterior mean of αi is positive for all observed
bαi > 0, provided that both µ > 0 and ρ > 0, but is zero conditioning on the same
positive bαi when µ = 0. The key issue is that the posterior depends not only on the
observed data bα, but also on the values of the unobserved prior parameters µ and ρ. As
a result, even when the observable input remains the same, the posterior belief about αi
can vary depending on the prior. Since µ and ρ are not part of G, the posterior is not
G-measurable. Thus, in the presence of prior ambiguity, feasibility requirement generally
excludes strategies that directly uses posterior beliefs.
Recognizing the distinction between feasible and infeasible strategies, we proceed to
investigate impact of the feasibility constraint on arbitrageurs’ behavior and the consequences thereof. This exploration necessitates deﬁning the decision-making problem
faced by arbitrageurs, which we turn to next.
14

2.3
Arbitrageurs’ Decision Problem
At time t, arbitrageurs aim to maximize mean-variance utility by selecting a strategy. To
ensure factor neutrality, they restrict attention to strategies orthogonal to the observed
β. This setup follows the APT framework of Ross (1976), where arbitrageurs eliminate
exposure to systematic factors, exploiting alphas while managing idiosyncratic risk.
The utility function is formulated as:
U(w) = E
 w⊺rt+1
Ft

−κ
2Var
 w⊺rt+1
Ft

= w⊺α −κ
2w⊺Σuw,
where κ represents the degree of risk aversion.
To focus on our main objective, we
exclude transaction costs and dynamic considerations, reducing the problem to a static,
single-period optimization. Accordingly, we suppress the time subscript t when possible.
Without the feasibility constraint, a unique strategy w⋆maximizes U(w):19
w⋆= 1
κΣ−1/2
u
MΣ−1/2
u
βΣ−1/2
u
α,
(9)
since the optimization problem maxw:w⊺β=0 U(w) is quadratic with a linear constraint.
Under rational expectations—where the parameters α and Σu are known and ﬁxed
constants—arbitrageurs face no obstacle in implementing w⋆.
In contrast, to confront parameter uncertainty—that is, the presence of other plausible
values for α and Σu—we model these parameters as random variables that lie outside the
arbitrageurs’ information set G. Yet, arbitrageurs are constrained to access only strategies
within the set
W = {w ∈G : w⊺β = 0},
namely, the set of G-measurable strategies that are orthogonal to β.
This feasibility
constraint limits arbitrageurs to capturing investment opportunities based solely on observable information, thereby excluding w⋆.
In this context, no feasible strategy w can almost surely maximize U(w), because
the arbitrageur’s objective becomes a stochastic function of historical data rather than
a deterministic function of α and Σu.
Regardless of the distribution of the realized
observed data, there is always a non-trivial—though small—probability (i.e., bad luck)
that the ﬁrst asset has a large alpha while all others have zero.
In such cases, any
sophisticated strategy that diversiﬁes risk across assets will underperform a naive strategy
that concentrates on the ﬁrst asset. The possibility of such rare but extreme events implies
that no feasible strategy can maximize utility almost surely. Instead, arbitrageurs must
pursue a more conservative objective: a strategy is considered desirable if it achieves
higher utility than alternatives with high probability. Formally, a strategy w ∈W is said
19MA = I −A(A⊺A)−1A⊺for any matrix A.
15

to outperform w′ ∈W if, for all small ﬁxed ϵ > 0 and with probability approaching one,
U(w′) ≤ϵ U(w).20
(10)
With this criterion, arbitrageurs seek a feasible strategy w that outperforms all other
feasible strategies.
Just as arbitrageurs face parameter uncertainty, they also confront prior ambiguity—
that is, uncertainty about which (prior) distribution correctly characterizes the law of
these random variables (e.g., α and Σu). This ambiguity is critical because the probability
of a strategy outperforming another is determined by a practically unknown prior speciﬁed
in the DGP. In response, we consider arbitrageurs who seek strategies that outperform
all alternatives under any admissible prior. To formalize this, we allow for a general class
of priors over α, Σu (and other nuisance parameters), while assuming that the return
model (1) is correctly speciﬁed.21 We denote by P the set of all DGPs consistent with
these priors—representing the full scope of DGPs that arbitrageurs may plausibly face.
Given this collection of possible DGPs, arbitrageurs seek uniformly optimal and feasible strategies—if such strategies exist. A strategy w ∈W is said to be uniformly optimal
if, for every alternative strategy w′ ∈W and for every ﬁxed ϵ > 0,
inf
P∈P P

U(w′) ≤ϵ U(w)

→1.
That is, w asymptotically outperforms all other feasible strategies under every DGP in
P, up to a small slack ϵ.
In addition to utility, we also evaluate investment performance using the conditional
Sharpe ratio, deﬁned as
S(w) := E(w⊺rt+1|Ft)/Var(w⊺rt+1|Ft)1/2.22
Thus far, we have fully delineated the objectives (uniform optimality) and the constraints (feasibility) faced by arbitrageurs in the presence of parameter uncertainty and
prior ambiguity. The following subsections focus on developing the corresponding solutions.
20We use a ≤ϵ b to denote that a ≤b + ϵ + ϵ|b|. Similarly, we write a =ϵ b if a ≤ϵ b and b ≤ϵ a. The
notation accommodates the case where b may be large, reducing the total error to around ϵ|b|, which
remains small relative to b itself.
21Hansen (2014) considers a third source of uncertainty—model misspeciﬁcation—in addition to parameter uncertainty and prior ambiguity. We discuss this point brieﬂy in the conclusion.
22In the presence of prior ambiguity, we consider a collection, P, of DGPs, each deﬁned on a ﬁltered
probability space (Ω, F, (Fs)s≤t, P). Expectations E(·) and variances Var(·) are taken with respect to
the particular P ∈P and are therefore P-speciﬁc, though we suppress this dependence for notational
simplicity. The same applies to U(·) and S(·), both of which depend on E(·) and Var(·).
16

2.4
Feasible Utility and Sharpe Ratio Bounds
We begin by establishing upper bounds on the utility and investment outcomes of all
feasible strategies. These bounds are economically important, as they reveal a substantial
gap between feasible and infeasible strategies. We will later show that these bounds are
in fact sharp and can be achieved by a uniformly optimal strategy that we construct.
We impose the following conditions, which must be satisﬁed by every DGP in the
collection P that arbitrageurs may potentially face:
Assumption 1. We have (1) and the following:
(a) (αi, ui) is i.i.d. across i,23 and satisﬁes E(αi|(Σu)i,i) = 0 and E∥α∥2
MAX = o(1).24
Moreover, it holds that 1 ≲P λmin(Σu) ≤λmax(Σu) ≲P 1.
(b) The pricing errors α, factors vt, factor loadings β, and idiosyncratic errors ut are,
conditionally on Σu, mutually independent.
Condition (a) suggests that our model focuses on weak alphas; as the number of
assets, N, increases, their magnitudes diminish.25 Moreover, this condition ensures that
volatilities remain within upper and lower bounds. Condition (a) therefore implies that
learning about alpha is a more arduous task than learning about volatilities. Condition
(b) is imperative for the model’s identiﬁcation. For instance, assuming independence
between α and β is key to identify the risk premia, γ, see, e.g., Giglio et al. (2022).
We now derive upper bounds on the utility and investment performance of feasible
arbitrage strategies. To do so, we adopt an expanded information set G, generated by
{rs, β, vs, Σu}t
s=t−T+1. While empirical applications typically rely only on past returns
and betas—as discussed in Section 2.1—this broader information set serves two purposes.
First, it isolates the central challenge: learning α accounts for most of the performance
gap between infeasible and feasible strategies. Second, since any strategy feasible under
a smaller information set remains feasible under a larger one, the bounds derived under
G are valid—though potentially loose—for all feasible strategies based on subsets of G.
In Section 2.6, we construct a feasible strategy using only observed returns and betas,
estimating vs and Σu to approach these bounds. This reinforces the conclusion that the
main diﬃculty lies in learning α, rather than volatilities or factor exposures. We now
present the formal results.
23The i.i.d. assumption on ui,t does not imply that Σu is a scalar multiple of the identity matrix;
rather, Σu is a diagonal matrix with each diagonal entry following the same distribution.
24For a matrix A, we use ∥A∥and ∥A∥MAX = maxi,j |aij| to denote the operator norm (or ℓ2 norm)
and the ℓ∞norm of A on the vector space. We use λmin(A) and λmax(A) to denote the minimum and
maximum eigenvalues of A.
25By Assumption 1(a), Var(αi) = E(α2
i ) = o(1). Referencing our earlier discussion (footnote 13),
a diminishing variance in α is essential for precluding near-arbitrage opportunities within Ross’ APT
framework.
17

Theorem 1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds and G is generated by {rs, β, vs, Σu}t
s=t−T+1.
We deﬁne ew := κ−1MβΣ−1
u eα, where eα := E(α|G). Then, for any w ∈W and all small
ﬁxed ϵ > 0,
inf
P∈P P

U(w) ≤ϵ U( ew) =ϵ (2κ)−1S(G)2
→1, and inf
P∈P P

S(w) ≤ϵ S( ew) =ϵ S(G)

→1,
(11)
where S(G) :=
p
eα⊺Σ−1
u eα.
The theorem proposes a strategy ew that, under all DGPs admissible by Assumption 1,
outperforms all feasible arbitrage strategies in terms of utility and, correspondingly, attains Sharpe ratios that are at least as large, up to negligible errors. Accordingly, the
utility and Sharpe ratio achieved by ew serve as upper bounds for what any feasible strategy can achieve.
By deﬁnition, the upper bound S(G) satisﬁes
E
 S(G)2
≤E
 α⊺Σ−1
u α

,
(12)
with equality if and only if eα = α almost surely. In this special case, ew—aside from the
projection adjustment via Mβ—coincides with the optimal mean-variance allocation with
perfect knowledge of α, and we have w⋆≈ew, as N →∞. The right-hand side of (12)
reﬂects the infeasible benchmark where arbitrageurs have perfect knowledge of α, as in
equation (4). This inequality highlights the gap between feasible and infeasible Sharpe
ratios, which in turn translates into a gap in the utilities they can achieve.
Notably, the strategy ew relies on arbitrageurs’ best prediction of alphas, E(α|G),
formed using their information set G and a given prior distribution P. This makes the
strategy infeasible in practice: it depends on unknown quantities such as Σu, vs, and γ
(implicitly assumed constant within G). Moreover, under prior ambiguity, P represents
only one among many plausible DGPs in P. Thus, Theorem 1 characterizes optimal behavior in an idealized setting where arbitrageurs face no uncertainty other than over α
and know the correct prior. The remaining question is whether arbitrageurs can accommodate uncertainty of the remaining parameters and prior ambiguity at virtually no cost
and still construct a feasible strategy that performs as well as ew across all DGPs. We
address this issue in the next two subsections. For clarity, we henceforth assume that ew,
eα, and S(G) are deﬁned with respect to the information set G speciﬁed in Theorem 1,
unless otherwise noted.
The projection matrix Mβ in ew ensures that it is factor-neutral, as required in Theorem 1, since (MβΣ−1
u eα)⊺β = 0. While Theorem 1 restricts attention to factor-neutral
strategies to reﬂect arbitrage-based considerations, Proposition B1 in the appendix extends the analysis to general G-measurable strategies. It shows that any such strategy w
satisﬁes the bound:
18

S(w) ≤
 S(G)2 + γ⊺Σ−1
v γ
1/2 + oP(1 + S(G)),
(13)
where γ⊺Σ−1
v γ is the squared optimal Sharpe ratio earned from the factor portfolios.
2.5
Bayes Correction for Selection Bias
A central component of ew is the posterior mean of α, eα = E(α | G). However, this
expression is implicit and not directly implementable. We now focus on reducing the
information set G to its suﬃcient statistics for α. This simpliﬁcation is crucial for three
reasons: it explains why eα achieves optimal utility and Sharpe ratios; it helps quantify
the gap between feasible and infeasible strategies; and it informs the design of a uniformly
optimal feasible strategy. To proceed, we introduce additional assumptions.
Assumption 2. For each N ≥1, it holds that
(a) ui,t = σiεi,t, where εi,t follows a standard normal distribution, and is i.i.d. across
(i, t) and independent of Σu.
(b) si := αi/σi is independent of σi.
Based on the return generating process described in Equation (1) and given the information set G, Assumptions 1 and 2(a) together ensure that the summary statistics
for αi are the volatility σi and the sample average of the ex-factor returns, expressed as
ˇαi := ¯ri −βi(γ + ¯v) = αi + ¯ui. In other words, E(αi|G) = E(αi|ˇαi, σi). Consequently,
this assumption simpliﬁes the conditional information set G in the posterior distribution
of α to merely a two-dimensional vector comprising these conditioning variables.
To
evaluate this conditional expectation, it becomes necessary to assume a speciﬁc form of
dependence between αi and σi.
Assumption 2(b) further reﬁnes this by allowing the conditional expectation to be
expressed as E(αi|ˇαi, σi) = σiE(si|ˇαi, σi) = σiE(si|ˇαi/σi).26 This leads to esi := E(si|G) =
E(si|ˇsi), where ˇsi := ˇαi/σi. Consequently, in terms of the scaled version of α, namely,
s, the conditioning information set is now a single scalar variable, which simpliﬁes the
estimation problem later. Further, in light of Theorem 1, eα, ew, and S(G)2 can all be
represented in relation to es:27
eα = Σ−1/2
u
es,
ew ∝MβΣ−1/2
u
es,
S(G)2 = es⊺es.
(14)
Finally, note that
26This equality relies on the result that conditional on bαi/σi, αi/σi is independent of σi. We impose
this condition primarily for clarity of exposition and simplicity of Algorithm 1 below.
27Given that risk aversion does not impact the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, we will use ∝to substitute
for κ−1 in our subsequent discussions on the portfolio strategy.
19

ˇsi = si + ¯εi ∼N(si, T −1),
conditional on si.
This formulation casts the original posterior inference problem into the framework of
the classical Gaussian sequence model for recovering a high-dimensional mean vector, s,
from noisy observations ˇs, which has been extensively studied in the statistics literature
(see, e.g., Robbins (1956), Efron (2011), and Efron (2019)). Although the assumption
that εi follows a Gaussian distribution may seem restrictive, this framework is suﬃciently
versatile to accommodate a wide range of distributions for si.
Arbitrageurs face the challenge of identifying the true underlying signal, s, from an
observed noisy signal ˇs. This task is complicated by what Efron (2011) described as
selection bias or “the winner’s curse”: A high observed signal, ˇsi, could reﬂect a high si, or
it could be the result of “luck”, with an unusually large noise realization ¯εi. Consequently,
arbitrageurs must carefully adjust their investment strategies to mitigate this potential
bias. The correction involves relying on the posterior of s, es, which accounts for this bias.
To see this, we present an explicit formula for es:
Theorem 2. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold and deﬁne ψ(a) := E (si|ˇsi = a). Then
we have eαi = σiesi, where esi = ψ(ˇsi). Moreover, it holds that
ψ(a) = a + 1
T
d
da log p(a),
(15)
where p(a) = E
 φ1/T(a −si)

is the probability distribution function of ˇsi.28
The preceding discussion directly leads to the ﬁrst assertion of the theorem. Equation (15) is based on Tweedie’s formula (Robbins, 1956), which links the posterior mean of
s, given ˇs = a, to the marginal distribution of ˇs. The adjustment term, T −1d log p(a)/da,
plays a critical role in correcting for selection bias in the observed signal ˇsi, and gives
rise to several notable properties. An example of these properties, as shown by Andrews
et al. (1972), is that ψ(a) is a nondecreasing function of a. This property ensures that
the relative magnitude of various signals is preserved post-correction. Moreover, the posterior mean es on average induces a shrinkage eﬀect towards the prior mean, which, in our
context, is zero.
The posterior shrinkage on s, or equivalently on α, consequently induces a “shrinkage”
eﬀect on the maximal Sharpe ratio and utility achievable by arbitrageurs represented by
S(G), as demonstrated by the inequality (12). Based on the results of Theorem 2, and
under a technical condition concerning the tail behavior of si, we can obtain a more
explicit formula for S(G):
28φx(a) is the distribution function for N(0, x).
20

Corollary
1. Suppose
Assumptions
1
and
2,
and
the
additional
condition
E(s2
i 1{|si|≥cN}) = o(N −1) hold. We arrive at the conclusion that:29
S(G) = SOPT + oP(1),
with
SOPT =

N
Z
ψ(a)2p(a)da
1/2
.
This result enables an explicit computation of S(G) and links it directly to the
marginal density of ˇs, p(·). Since diﬀerent DGPs (priors) imply diﬀerent marginal densities, it clariﬁes how S(G) depends on the prior and informs the feasibility of attaining
non-vanishing Sharpe ratios under varying DGPs. The following corollary provides illustrative calculations based on Example 1, where each DGP is fully speciﬁed by parameters
µ/σ and ρ.
Corollary 2. Suppose that the same assumptions as in Corollary 1 hold. In addition,
we assume alpha follows (5) as in Example 1. Then we have S⋆= σ−1µ(ρN)1/2 + oP(1).
Further, assuming that σ−1µ(ρN)1/2 does not vanish, then it holds that SOPT ≤(1 −
ϵ)σ−1µ(ρN)1/2 for some ϵ > 0, if and only if
T 1/2µ/σ −
p
−2 log ρ ≲1.
(16)
Corollary 2 suggests that when T 1/2µ/σ is large enough that the constraint (16) is
violated, S⋆≂P SOPT—that is, in the limit, learning does not play any role—arbitrageurs
in this scenario achieve the same Sharpe ratio as under perfect knowledge of alphas.
Furthermore, the rareness parameter ρ does not make much diﬀerence if T 1/2µ/σ gets
suﬃciently large. That said, if ρ approaches to zero so fast that √−2 log ρ dominates
T 1/2µ/σ—that is, alpha is extremely rare and suﬃciently weak—the learning problem
becomes rather challenging and the Sharpe ratio attainable by arbitrageurs, SOPT, is
dominated, in the limit, by the infeasible Sharpe ratio S⋆.
To give a concrete example of Corollary 2, consider an alternative DGP assumption
instead of (6):30
µ ≂N −η
and
ρ > 0
is ﬁxed.
(17)
In this scenario, (S⋆)2 ≂P N 1−2η, which explodes unless η > 1/2. If we further assume
that N/T →ψ > 0, then the left-hand-side of condition (16) is of order max{N 1/2−η, 1},
so that (16) holds if and only if η ≥1/2. Therefore, η < 1/2 is not consistent with absence
of (feasible) near arbitrage because S⋆explodes and, since SOPT ≂P S⋆by Corollary 2,
SOPT explodes, too. If η > 1/2, S⋆(and hence SOPT) vanishes, which does not seem like
an economically plausible case. If we think that asset demand distortions are suﬃciently
29Throughout, cN represent some sequence vanishing with N.
30It is easy to show that the setup (17) satisﬁes all assumptions of Corollary 1 for all ﬁxed η > 0.
21

big so that arbitrageur activity is required to prevent substantial mispricing, and that
arbitrageurs require some compensation for holding arbitrage positions, then a setting
where true alphas disappear asymptotically is not plausible. This suggests that under the
DGP (17), the only economically plausible case with absence of near-arbitrage, but not
absence of mispricing, is η = 1/2. That is, η can be thought as determined in equilibrium.
Mispricing should be big enough that arbitrageurs are active, earning a non-vanishing
Sharpe ratio, and at the same time small enough that near-arbitrage opportunities do
not exist.
We now illustrate the behavior of SOPT numerically and verify the theoretical predictions of Corollary 2 using the setting of Example 1. Figure 1 reports the Sharpe ratio
upper bound, SOPT, of feasible arbitrage portfolios for a range of µ/σ and ρ values in
the case of N = 1, 000 and T = 20 years. Recall that according to model (5), a fraction
ρ of assets have alphas with a Sharpe ratio µ/σ. That is, ρ characterizes the rareness
of the alpha signal, whereas µ/σ captures its strength. We intentionally choose a wide
range of µ/σ (with annualized Sharpe ratios from 0.11 to 10.95) and ρ (from 0.12% to
50%) to shed light on the dependence of Sharpe ratios on signal weakness and rareness,
although some of the resulting portfolio Sharpe ratios (the top left corner of Figure 1) are
unrealistically high. Note that when µ/σ ×
√
12 hits 0.44, its corresponding t-statistic
based on a 20-year sample exceeds 1.96, the typical t-hurdle for a standard student-t test.
The pattern of Sharpe ratios agrees with our intuition and theoretical predictions.
For any ﬁxed ρ, as the alpha signal weakens (i.e., µ/σ decreases), the feasible Sharpe
ratio bound drops. The same is true if we decrease the signal count (i.e., ρ vanishes),
for any ﬁxed value of µ/σ. The arbitrageur’s learning problem is easiest when signal is
strong and count is large (top left corner), and most challenging towards the right bottom
corner, where the feasible Sharpe ratio bound drop to near zero.
The reported Sharpe ratios in Figure 1 are only a fraction of the corresponding (infeasible) Sharpe ratios, S⋆=
p
α⊺(Σu)−1α = µ/σ√ρN, as shown by Figure 2.
The
pattern we see from Figure 2 agrees with theoretical predictions of Corollary 2. When
the annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12 is larger than 2.74, regardless of the values of ρ,
the signal-to-noise ratio of the learning problem is suﬃciently strong that the statistical
limit to arbitrage does not matter much, and hence SOPT/S⋆is close to 1. Nonetheless,
this regime is irrelevant in practice, since it is mostly associated with unrealistically high
Sharpe ratios (see Figure 1). In contrast, as µ/σ diminishes, the gap between S⋆and
SOPT widens. In almost all empirically relevant scenarios, S⋆is much larger than the
maximal Sharpe ratio than arbitrageurs can actually earn with a feasible strategy.
The example above illustrates how S(G) depends on the underlying prior, which arbitrageurs do not observe. To build a feasible strategy that adapts to any admissible
prior, one must infer the underlying prior from observable data—a task complicated by
22

10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
50.00
44.72
38.73
31.62
27.39
22.36
15.81
11.18
10.00
8.66
7.07
5.00
3.54
37.50
33.54
29.05
23.72
20.54
16.77
11.86
8.39
7.50
6.50
5.30
3.75
2.65
35.35
24.99
22.35
19.36
15.80
13.68
11.17
7.90
5.58
4.99
4.32
3.53
2.49
1.76
28.21
19.92
17.80
15.40
12.56
10.87
8.86
6.24
4.40
3.93
3.39
2.76
1.94
1.36
20.83
14.55
12.96
11.16
9.04
7.78
6.29
4.36
3.01
2.67
2.28
1.83
1.25
0.85
16.95
11.66
10.33
8.84
7.08
6.04
4.83
3.27
2.20
1.93
1.63
1.28
0.84
0.55
12.96
8.64
7.58
6.40
5.02
4.22
3.30
2.14
1.37
1.18
0.98
0.74
0.46
0.28
10.94
7.12
6.20
5.17
4.00
3.32
2.55
1.60
0.99
0.84
0.68
0.51
0.30
0.17
8.94
5.64
4.85
4.00
3.03
2.47
1.85
1.11
0.66
0.55
0.44
0.31
0.18
0.10
6.97
4.22
3.59
2.90
2.14
1.71
1.25
0.71
0.40
0.33
0.25
0.18
0.09
0.05
5.04
2.92
2.44
1.93
1.38
1.08
0.76
0.41
0.22
0.18
0.13
0.09
0.05
0.02
4.29
2.43
2.02
1.58
1.12
0.87
0.60
0.32
0.17
0.13
0.10
0.07
0.03
0.02
3.55
1.98
1.63
1.27
0.88
0.68
0.47
0.24
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.05
0.03
0.01
2.85
1.56
1.28
0.98
0.68
0.52
0.35
0.18
0.09
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.01
2.19
1.17
0.96
0.73
0.50
0.38
0.26
0.13
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.01
1.58
0.83
0.68
0.51
0.35
0.26
0.18
0.09
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
1.05
0.54
0.44
0.33
0.22
0.17
0.11
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.61
0.31
0.25
0.19
0.13
0.09
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.28
0.14
0.11
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.16
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
70.71 53.03
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Figure 1: Sharpe Ratio Bound (SOPT) of Feasible Arbitrage Portfolios
Note: The ﬁgure reports Sharpe ratio bound of feasible arbitrage portfolios in model (5), in which a
100 × ρ% of assets have alphas that correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12.
10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.66
0.63
0.66
0.53
0.49
0.73
0.72
0.65
0.62
0.58
0.48
0.36
0.31
0.72
0.69
0.65
0.62
0.54
0.51
0.47
0.37
0.27
0.22
0.73
0.71
0.67
0.63
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.42
0.39
0.35
0.27
0.19
0.14
0.65
0.63
0.59
0.54
0.50
0.44
0.38
0.30
0.28
0.24
0.18
0.12
0.09
0.72
0.57
0.54
0.49
0.43
0.39
0.34
0.28
0.21
0.19
0.16
0.12
0.07
0.05
0.68
0.52
0.49
0.44
0.39
0.35
0.30
0.24
0.18
0.16
0.13
0.10
0.06
0.04
0.63
0.48
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.31
0.26
0.21
0.15
0.13
0.11
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.58
0.43
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.27
0.22
0.17
0.13
0.11
0.09
0.07
0.04
0.03
0.52
0.38
0.35
0.31
0.26
0.23
0.19
0.15
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.45
0.32
0.30
0.26
0.22
0.19
0.16
0.12
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.37
0.26
0.24
0.21
0.17
0.15
0.12
0.10
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.29
0.20
0.18
0.16
0.13
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.20
0.14
0.12
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.15
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.10
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
1.00
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.91
0.79
0.79
1.00
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.91
0.79
0.79
1.00
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.91
0.79
0.79
1.00
0.97
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.89
0.77
0.76
0.99
0.94
0.95
0.94
0.94
0.95
0.93
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.91
0.79
0.96
0.90
0.91
0.89
0.89
0.88
0.85
0.88
0.84
0.81
0.78
0.92
0.84
0.83
0.81
0.79
0.77
0.89
0.79
0.78
0.75
0.85
0.79
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Figure 2: Ratios between SOPT and S⋆
Note: The ﬁgure reports the ratios of feasible Sharpe ratio bound and optimal infeasible Sharpe ratio.
The simulation setting is based on model (5), in which a 100×ρ% of assets have alphas that correspond
to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12.
the possibility that alphas are rare and weak. Theorem 2 shows that the inﬂuence of
the prior on the posterior mean es is fully captured by the marginal distribution of the
23

observable statistic ˇs. Leveraging this insight, the next subsection develops a uniformly
optimal feasible strategy using a nonparametric estimate of this marginal density.
2.6
Constructing Uniformly Optimal Arbitrage Portfolio
As established after Theorem 1, the key challenge is to approximate the infeasible benchmark ew uniformly across all DGPs using only observable data. Although Theorem 2
provides an explicit form for ew, its implementation depends on the marginal density p(·)
and on the ex-factor returns ¯ri −βi(γ + ¯v), which in turn require knowledge of vt and
γ—quantities that are not directly observed.
Nonetheless, arbitrageurs can construct a uniformly optimal feasible strategy. We do
so under a framework in which factor exposures are observable, but factors themselves
remain latent—a setting consistent with our empirical analysis.
The following algorithm outlines the construction of this strategy:
Algorithm 1 (Optimal Arbitrage Portfolio via Empirical Bayes).
Inputs: rs, s ∈T = {t −T + 1, . . . , t} and β.
S1. Construct cross-sectional regression estimates of alpha and idiosyncratic volatilities,
for each i = 1, 2, . . . , N:
bα = T −1 X
s∈T
Mβrs,
bσ2
i = T −1 X
s∈T
 (Mβrs)i −bαi
2,
and
bsi := bαi/bσi.
S2. Construct a nonparametric estimate of the marginal density of bs using Gaussian
kernel function φ1/T(x) and bandwidth kN ≂(log N)−1:
bp(a) =
1
NkN
X
i
φ1/T
bsi −a
kN

.
S3. Estimate es by Tweedie’s formula (15) and isotonic regression:
˘ψ(a) =a + 1 + k2
N
T
d
da log bp(a).
bψ = arg min
x∈RN
∥x −˘ψ∥2, s.t. xi ≤xj if bsi ≤bsj, for 1 ≤i, j ≤N, where ˘ψi := ˘ψ(bsi).
S4. Construct the arbitrage portfolio weights as bwOPT = κ−1Mβ bΣ−1/2
u
bψ.
Outputs: bwOPT.
Step S1 of Algorithm 1 provides feasible estimates of bα and bΣu = Diag(bσ2
i ), which in
turn leads to the suﬃcient statistic, bs. The motivation behind Steps S2 and S3 stems
from Tweedie’s formula (15); here, we employ a nonparametric empirical Bayes method
24

for estimating the posterior mean function using kernel density estimation, as suggested
by Brown and Greenshtein (2009). The incorporation of the factor (1 + k2
N) serves to
adjust for ﬁnite sample biases introduced by estimation errors in bp(a).
As discussed
earlier, ψ(·) is nondecreasing. To enhance the nonparametric estimator’s performance in
ﬁnite samples, enforcing monotonicity on the estimate of ψ(·) proves beneﬁcial. For this
purpose, isotonic regression is utilized (see Robertson et al. (1988)), yielding a monotonic
piece-wise linear approximation of ψ(·). Step S4 constructs the optimal portfolio weights,
bwOPT, following (14).
An essential step towards achieving optimality involves aggregating information from
assets with comparable bsi, as done in Step S2. This strategy outperforms the alternatives, some of which directly use estimated bs as if these estimates are not susceptible to
estimation errors even when they are rather weak, or simply ignore the contribution of
all weaker signals. Like any machine learning method, the proposed approach requires a
tuning parameter kN, which can be selected in a validation sample. The next theorem
demonstrates the success of bwOPT:
Theorem 3. Let P denote the collection of all DGPs under which the assumptions in
Corollary 1 hold, and assume that ∥β∥MAX ≲P 1, λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N, and that the distribution of si is symmetric. Further suppose that N d ≲T ≲N d′ for ﬁxed constants d > 1/2
and d′ < 1. Then, for all small ﬁxed ϵ > 0,
inf
P∈P

U( bwOPT) =ϵ U( ew)

→1,
and
inf
P∈P

S( bwOPT) =ϵ S( ew)

→1.
Thus, bwOPT is uniformly optimal and feasible with respect to the information set generated
by {rs, β}t
s=t−T+1.31
Theorem 3 imposes a mild assumption on λmin(β⊺β), which requires that all factors
are pervasive.32 This condition is frequently utilized in the factor model literature and
is particularly relevant here, given our assumption that the factors within our model
are latent. A signiﬁcant diﬀerence between our context and the traditional empirical
Bayes literature (e.g., Brown and Greenshtein (2009)) lies in our lack of direct access
to the signals, ˇsi’s.
Instead, we estimate these signals via cross-sectional regressions
in Algorithm 1. This step results in our estimators, bsi’s, being inevitably polluted by
estimation errors. The additional conditions imposed by Theorem 3 ensure that such
estimation errors become asymptotically negligible.
Theorem 3 shows that, within a linear factor model, arbitrageurs with access only to
past returns and risk exposures—and facing uncertainty over a broad class of DGPs—
31The uniform optimality remains valid for any information set that contains {rs, β}t
s=t−T +1 but is a
subset of G as deﬁned in Theorem 1.
32See, e.g., Assumption I.1 of Giglio and Xiu (2021). While our theoretical results may extend to
certain weak factor settings, this is not our emphasis here.
25

can construct bwOPT to attain the maximal Sharpe ratio among all feasible strategies
with zero factor exposure. Remarkably, they match the performance of arbitrageurs with
additional access to latent factors, risk premia, idiosyncratic volatility, or the true prior.
This implies that the economic cost of feasibility arises solely from the inability to observe
alphas; uncertainty about the prior or lack of information about factors and volatility
does not hinder optimality. The resulting Sharpe ratio precisely quantiﬁes the economic
limit of feasible arbitrage.
A key reason for this result is that idiosyncratic variances represented by Σu remain
bounded both from below and above as N and T increase, unlike alphas. This diﬀerence
is empirically plausible: alphas must be small and rare to persist in the presence of arbitrageurs, whereas there is no analogous constraint on the magnitude of idiosyncratic
risk. Consequently, uncertainty about Σu becomes negligible in the context of statistical
arbitrage limitations. Furthermore, given the low-dimensional nature of vt and γ and
arbitrageurs’ knowledge knowledge of β, the problem of learning about vt and γ is negligible as well. Finally, the inﬂuence of the unknown prior is eﬀectively eliminated by the
availability of a large cross-section of assets.
Our results also address a longstanding challenge in optimal portfolio choice under
parameter uncertainty. Kan and Zhou (2007) examine the expected performance of the
plug-in mean-variance portfolio and ﬁnd that its Sharpe ratio is smaller than the infeasible Sharpe ratio, S⋆. To construct a solution, they consider a limited class of trading
strategies that does not accommodate the broad range of strategies investors might consider in real-world scenarios. In contrast, by imposing mild restrictions on the DGP of
returns, we identify the optimal ones among all feasible strategies.
More broadly, important economic implications are carried by the fact that every uniformly optimal feasible strategy adopted by arbitrageurs realizes SOPT. In an
economy with statistical limits to arbitrage, the equilibrium compensation that arbitrageurs demand for executing such a strategy equals SOPT. If it were otherwise, arbitrageurs would continue trading until all proﬁt opportunities were exhausted. Therefore,
bSOPT := S( bwOPT), the Sharpe ratio generated by bwOPT, can be interpreted as an empirical
estimate of this equilibrium compensation, which we seek to pin down empirically.
2.7
Estimating Optimal Infeasible Sharpe Ratio
We are also interested in estimating the optimal infeasible Sharpe ratio, S⋆. This Sharpe
ratio can be estimated by an econometrician ex-post and in-sample, but it cannot be
achieved by any feasible portfolio.
The existing literature on testing the APT often
constructs test statistics in the spirit of Gibbons et al. (1989), which are eﬀectively based
on S⋆(see, e.g., Pesaran and Yamagata (2017) and Fan et al. (2015)). While such tests
are powerful and may lead to detection of alphas, their relevance for arbitrageurs might
26

be limited. The challenge for arbitrageurs lies in translating statistical evidence of alpha
discoveries into a feasible portfolio strategy that realizes proﬁts. Our proposed bSOPT
tackles this issue, providing an economically more meaningful evaluation of the APT.
To compare with bSOPT, we propose an estimator for S⋆inspired by its sample analog:
eS⋆=

¯r⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯r
1/2
.
(18)
Unfortunately, this estimator has a non-vanishing asymptotic bias for certain DGPs we
consider, as we will show later. To ﬁx this issue, we propose a new estimator that is
uniformly consistent:
bS⋆=

¯r⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯r −N/T
1/2
.
(19)
The next proposition summarizes the asymptotic properties of both estimators.
Proposition 1. Suppose that the same assumptions outlined in Corollary 1 hold. Moreover, we assume ∥β∥MAX ≲P 1 and λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N.
We also impose T ≲N and
T −1N 1/2 log N →0. Then we have
bS⋆−S⋆
 1 + S⋆
=
oP

T −1/2N 1/4p
log N

,
eS⋆−

(S⋆)2 + NT −11/2
. 1 + S⋆
=
oP

T −1N 1/2 log N

.
Similar to Theorem 3, the estimation error is relative when S⋆dominates 1.0 asymptotically, and in absolute terms if S⋆is dominated by 1.0.33 This accommodates a large
class of models, some of which have an exploding or a shrinking S⋆. While it is possible
to estimate S⋆, it is not possible to build a portfolio that realizes it, unless the signal-tonoise ratio is suﬃciently large such that S⋆= SOPT. Empirically, the diﬀerence between
bS⋆and bSOPT thereby informs us about the economic consequences of learning.
2.8
Alternative Strategies for Arbitrage Portfolios
Algorithm 1 introduces a nuanced approach that allows arbitrageurs to achieve feasible
optimality. In practice, many empirical asset pricing researchers and practitioners often
rely on simpler strategies. Given the widespread adoption of these alternative approaches,
it is useful to assess how closely they approximate the optimal feasible strategy. In this
section, we examine their strengths and weaknesses in diﬀerent DGP scenarios.
2.8.1
Cross-Sectional Regression
One of the most common strategies involves forming portfolios based directly on the crosssectional regression estimates of α, obtained in Step S1 of Algorithm 1. This method is
33Obviously, the threshold 1.0 can be replaced by any ﬁxed constant.
27

referred to as CSR, with its portfolio represented by bwCSR:
bwCSR ∝Mβ bΣ−1
u bα.
(20)
This is eﬀectively a sample analogue of the strategy ew given by Theorem 1. A speciﬁc
instance of this strategy was discussed following Example 1.
We now exploit Example 1 to illustrate the pros and cons of the CSR strategy. Figure
3 illustrates the relationship between SCSR, the theoretical Sharpe ratio achieved by
bwCSR, and SOPT across a spectrum of DGPs. According to Proposition B2 in the online
appendix, SCSR tends to be dominated by SOPT in scenarios when alpha signals are sparse
(√ρTµ/σ is not excessively large) and simultaneously strong (
√
Tµ/σ is not exceedingly
small). This speciﬁc regime of dominance is clearly marked with black numerals within
the heatmap in Figure 3. As the ratio µ/σ ×
√
12 edges closer to 1.0—either moving
towards this vertical threshold from the right hand side or descending from the upper left
corner—the gap between SCSR and SOPT enlarges increasingly.
The CSR approach takes all signal estimates directly, without diﬀerentiating the signiﬁcant ones from the insigniﬁcant ones. Consequently, even fake signals (pure noise) are
assigned non-zero weights. This hurts the portfolio’s performance. On the other hand,
the CSR strategy can achieve optimality when the strong signals are abundant (so that
portfolio weights allocated to noise are inconsequential) or when all signals are weak (so
that they do not diﬀer too much from fake ones). The latter case is interesting, as it also
suggests that simply ignoring weaker signals is not optimal. That said, Figure 1 shows
that the DGPs for which the cross-sectional regression approach is strongly dominated
by our optimal strategy are associated with realistic Sharpe ratios.
The CSR approach is a simple benchmark as it does not rely on any advanced statistical techniques to detect signals or distinguish their strength. The strategy we discuss
next is more advanced, in that it controls false discoveries among selected strong signals
using the B-H procedure proposed by Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).
2.8.2
False Discovery Rate Control
To address the aforementioned selection bias in identifying proﬁtable alpha signals, an
alternative methodology conceptualizes the search for alpha as a multiple testing problem.
In this case, with N assets that are each potentially associated with a nonzero αi, we can
establish for each asset i a null hypothesis Hi
0 : αi = 0. Rejection of this null hypothesis
leads to the discovery of a non-zero alpha. Rather than focusing on the signiﬁcance level
of individual tests, a more appropriate strategy involves controlling the FDR, an approach
recommended by Barras et al. (2010), Bajgrowicz and Scaillet (2012), and Harvey et al.
(2016) in various asset pricing contexts. Giglio et al. (2021) have proved the validity of
the B-H procedure for FDR control in a general factor model setting for alpha detection.
28

10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.77
0.71
0.58
0.45
0.76
0.73
0.68
0.60
0.47
0.35
0.75
0.62
0.58
0.52
0.45
0.33
0.24
0.68
0.54
0.50
0.45
0.38
0.28
0.20
0.73
0.61
0.48
0.44
0.39
0.33
0.25
0.19
0.72
0.59
0.47
0.43
0.39
0.33
0.26
0.20
0.73
0.60
0.49
0.46
0.42
0.37
0.31
0.25
0.74
0.63
0.53
0.50
0.46
0.42
0.36
0.31
0.78
0.68
0.59
0.57
0.54
0.50
0.45
0.41
0.75
0.68
0.67
0.65
0.62
0.59
0.56
0.77
0.76
0.75
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.95
0.91
0.85
0.82
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.95
0.92
0.86
0.98
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.91
0.89
0.85
0.97
0.95
0.93
0.91
0.88
0.85
0.79
0.97
0.93
0.92
0.89
0.84
0.80
0.97
0.93
0.91
0.88
0.83
0.79
0.98
0.95
0.93
0.89
0.84
0.79
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.91
0.85
0.81
0.99
0.97
0.95
0.92
0.87
0.83
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.94
0.90
0.87
0.82
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.89
0.84
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.95
0.93
0.91
0.88
0.85
0.85
0.84
0.83
0.83
0.82
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.89
0.89
0.88
0.88
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Figure 3: Ratios between SCSR and SOPT
Note: The ﬁgure reports the ratios between the Sharpe ratios of the OLS based portfolio and the
feasible optimal arbitrage portfolio. The theoretical Sharpe ratio achieved by CSR is denoted as SCSR,
given explicitly by Proposition B2. The simulation setting is based on model (5), in which a 100 × ρ%
of assets have alphas that correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12.
Below we describe the necessary steps to prepare alpha estimates for constructing an
arbitrage portfolio.
Begin with a series of p-values, pi, where each is the result of a t-test on the crosssectional regression estimate of αi,
√
Tbsi, for i = 1, 2, . . . , N.
These p-values assess
the signiﬁcance of each αi’s deviation from zero. Arrange these p-values in ascending
order, from the smallest to the largest, resulting in a sorted sequence p(1) ≤. . . ≤p(N).
Identify a critical index, bk, deﬁned as the maximum i such that p(i) ≤τi/N where τ is a
predetermined signiﬁcance level, commonly set at 5%.
The threshold bk is selected such that, on average, at least a fraction (1−τ) of the alpha
estimates identiﬁed as signiﬁcant (i.e., those with p-values smaller than p(bk)) are truly nonzero. This B-H criterion proves eﬀective in guarding against false discoveries irrespective
of the overall proportion of non-zero alphas present in the DGP. The selected alpha
estimates are then used as inputs for constructing an arbitrage portfolio, as illustrated
by the following equation:
bwBH(τ) ∝Mβ bΣ−1
u bαBH(τ), where bαBH
i
(τ) = bαi1{pi≤p(bk)}.
(21)
This strategy introduces a hard-thresholding mechanism to the alpha estimates, eﬀectively nullifying the impact of alphas deemed insigniﬁcant.
29

Controlling the FDR on top of the CSR estimates is intuitively appealing, but doing so incurs a potential loss of power that may hurt investment performance. Indeed,
Proposition B3 in the appendix shows, in the context of Example 1, arbitrageurs who
adopt the B-H based-trading strategy do not achieve the optimal portfolio for a large
class of DGP sequences.
As shown by Proposition B3 and illustrated numerically by Figure 4, the discrepancy
between the optimal Sharpe ratio and that achieved through the B-H method is largely
determined by signal strength.
The B-H procedure nears optimality when the signal
strength, quantiﬁed by
√
Tµ/σ, is substantial—exceeding the threshold of √−2 log ρ.
The instances where the B-H strategy reaches optimality are depicted by the white values
on Figure 4, with the boundary of this optimal region approximated by the line where
µ/σ
√
12 = 2.19. This demonstrates that the B-H method excels in identifying strong
signals, leading to near-optimal portfolios when signals are strong. Conversely, in the
presence of weak signals, the B-H procedure, which amounts to hard-thresholding, tends
to underperform compared to CSR.
This point is further elaborated in Figure 1, which underscores that even if individual
alphas are weak, their aggregated eﬀect on a portfolio’s Sharpe ratio can be non-trivial.
The B-H approach takes a notably conservative stance towards signal selection, especially
in contexts where signals are weak. This cautious approach ensures the reliability of selected alphas by focusing on those that are truly signiﬁcant. However, this method might
not fully capitalize on the potential cumulative impact of weaker signals. In contrast, our
optimal arbitrage portfolio leverages the full spectrum of alpha estimates, including false
positives, extending beyond the signiﬁcant selections made through the B-H procedure.
At its core, this delineates a subtle yet critical divergence between two objectives:
alpha testing and portfolio construction. Alpha testing prioritizes the identiﬁcation of
statistically signiﬁcant alphas while controlling FDR, whereas portfolio construction concentrates on using all available information to optimize performance. These objectives
do not always align.
The CSR and the B-H approaches represent two typical strategies in practice. The
former trades all signals without distinguishing their strength, whereas the latter only
trades the stronger signals. Neither approach always achieves optimality.
2.8.3
Shrinkage Approaches
In the strategy ew given by Theorem 1, the portfolio weights with respect to ex-factor
returns (Mβrt+1 ≈α + ut) are Σ−1
u α. The CSR approach replaces the weights Σ−1
u α with
the sample analogue bΣ−1
u bα, and the B-H approach additionally imposes hard-thresholding
regularization on those weights.34 Multiplying the ex-factor return weights by Mβ yields
34Regularizing those weights amounts to incorporating priors onto the alpha estimates.
30

10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.71
0.72
0.66
0.59
0.57
0.55
0.51
0.45
0.39
0.72
0.70
0.67
0.63
0.60
0.55
0.48
0.40
0.38
0.35
0.32
0.26
0.20
0.62
0.55
0.52
0.48
0.43
0.40
0.35
0.27
0.21
0.19
0.17
0.14
0.10
0.07
0.42
0.32
0.30
0.26
0.21
0.18
0.15
0.09
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.19
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.11
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.92
0.90
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.91
0.89
0.85
0.84
0.82
0.80
0.76
0.87
0.84
0.83
0.81
0.78
0.76
0.77
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Figure 4: Ratios between SBH and SOPT
Note: The ﬁgure reports the ratios between the Sharpe ratios of the multiple testing based portfolio
(via B-H procedure) and the feasible optimal arbitrage portfolio. The theoretical Sharpe ratio achieved
by B-H is denoted as SBH, given explicitly by Proposition B3. The simulation setting is based on model
(5), in which a 100×ρ% of assets have alphas that correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ×
√
12.
the portfolio weights in terms of raw returns (rt+1). Besides the hard-thresholding of
B-H, we can consider shrinkage-type regularization:
max
w {w⊺bα −1
2w⊺bΣuw −pλ(bΣ1/2
u w)},
where pλ(x) = λ∥x∥1 or λ∥x∥2
2, for some λ > 0. Since bΣu is diagonal, this optimization
problem has a closed-form solution of weights with respect to ex-factor returns: ˘wq,i(λ) =
bσ−1
i ψq(bsi, λ), for i = 1, 2, . . . , N, where q = 1 corresponds to the Lasso penalty and q = 2
the ridge, and ψq(s, λ) is
ψ1(s, λ) = sgn(s)(|s| −λ)+,
ψ2(s, λ) = (1 + 2λ)−1s.
This leads to the optimal portfolio weight on rt:35
bwq(λ) ∝Mβ ˘wq(λ),
q = 1, 2.
35An alternative strategy is to impose sparsity directly on the portfolio weights with respect to raw
returns. While this approach might be appealing from the transaction cost point of view, it does not
associate with an explicit prior on alpha, hence is more diﬃcult to interpret.
31

Depending on the magnitude of λ, the Lasso approach replaces all smaller signals (i.e.,
bsi) by zero and shrinks the larger ones by λ in absolute terms.
In other words, the
Lasso approach is the soft-thresholding alternative to the B-H method. In contrast, the
ridge penalty shrinks all signals proportionally. Since proportional scaling of portfolio
weights does not aﬀect the Sharpe ratio, this means that ridge is equivalent to CSR! This
“embedded” shrinkage eﬀect of CSR explains why it performs well in the case of small
signals.
Proposition B4, along with Proposition B2 in the online appendix, oﬀers explicit
formulae for the optimal feasible Sharpe ratios in the shrinkage case. The Sharpe ratio
of ridge is not aﬀected by the tuning parameter, but Lasso’s performance is contingent
on its tuning parameter. However, even with the optimal choice of tuning parameter, it
cannot achieve the optimal feasible Sharpe ratio in all DGPs.
Figure 5 compares SLasso
λ
with SOPT, where SLasso
λ
denotes the theoretical Sharpe ratio
achieved by Lasso for a given tuning parameter choice λ. In practice, the tuning parameter choice would require a cross-validation procedure. Here we adopt the theoretically
optimal tuning parameter that maximizes SLasso
λ
in Figure 5. This strategy, unlike the
B-H approach where the tuning parameter τ is selected based on a clear statistical criterion, is not fully feasible in practice, since the optimal tuning depends on the DGP,
which is not fully known. Hence, Figure 5 should be understood as showcasing the optimal performance of a class of trading strategies indexed by the tuning parameter of
Lasso, and only reports the best performance within this class. This is a fair comparison
to OPT, which represents the optimal performance of all strategies, beyond the Lasso
class, as the implementation of our algorithm to achieve SOPT would also require choice
of a tuning parameter. Although Proposition B4 suggests that Lasso is not uniformly
optimal, it performs remarkably well, achieving the optimal Sharpe ratio in almost all
regimes. Intuitively, when signals are very strong, Lasso behaves like a hard-thresholding
selector, as shrinkage has minimal eﬀect. Conversely, when signals are week, ridge (and
hence CSR) approach optimality, and Lasso can replicate their performance by setting
the tunning parameter close to zero.
3
Simulation Evidence
This section illustrates the applicability of our theory through simulations and assesses
the ﬁnite sample performance of our proposed portfolio strategies.
For simplicity and clarity, we simulate a one-factor model of returns as speciﬁed by
(1). We set the factor risk premium at 5% per annum with an annualized volatility of
25%. The distribution of beta across assets is modeled as a normal distribution with
a mean and variance of one. Given our focus on arbitrage portfolios, the parameters
of the factor component (including the number of factors) are inconsequential, because
32

10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.92
0.89
0.95
0.93
0.93
0.92
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.92
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.89
0.96
0.95
0.93
0.93
0.92
0.92
0.91
0.91
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.95
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Figure 5: Ratios between SLasso
λ
and SOPT
Note: The ﬁgure reports the ratios between the Sharpe ratios of the Lasso based portfolio and the
feasible optimal arbitrage portfolio. The theoretical Sharpe ratio achieved by Lasso is treated as the
maximum of SLasso
λ
over all λ, given explicitly by Proposition B4. The simulation setting is based on
model (5), in which a 100 × ρ% of assets have alphas that correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio
µ/σ ×
√
12. The tuning parameter λ is selected to maximize SLasso
λ
.
factors are eliminated by Mβ in the initial steps of constructing these trading strategies.
In addition, we use the model in (5) from Example 1 for the cross-sectional distribution
of alpha. We maintain a constant idiosyncratic volatility, denoted as σ for all assets,
because the ratio α/σ determines signal strength, and so there is no need to vary both α
and σ in the cross section. While our Monte Carlo experiment is stylized, it eﬀectively
demonstrates the impact of estimation errors in factors and volatilities and the ﬁnite
sample performance of our theoretical predictions.
We compare the ﬁnite sample performance of our portfolio estimators across various
DGPs. We examine a broad spectrum of signal strength (µ/σ) and sparsity (ρ) values
to cover a range of potential empirical scenarios. For each set of parameters (µ/σ, ρ),
we simulate the corresponding DGP, construct portfolio weights, bwA, where A represents
OPT, CSR, BH, or Lasso, and compute the corresponding theoretical Sharpe ratio: bSA =
bwA⊺µ/
p
bwA⊺Σ−1
u bwA.
Our algorithm requires a tuning parameter. We choose it with a validation procedure
that divides the in-sample data into two parts: the ﬁrst 80% is used for training, and
the remaining 20% is reserved for validation.
The optimal parameter maximizes the
sample Sharpe ratio in this validation subset. Once identiﬁed, this tuning parameter is
then used with the entire in-sample (training and validation) data to estimate portfolio
33

weights. We use the same validation approach to determine the tuning parameter for the
Lasso method.36
In light of Theorem 3, the following performance measure is sensible:
GapA(µ/σ, ρ) = bE

|bSA −SOPT|/(1 + SOPT)

,
where the explicit dependence of bSA and SOPT on µ/σ and ρ is not speciﬁed, and bE(·) denotes the sample average computed over Monte Carlo simulations. This formula measures
error as relative percentages of SOPT when SOPT is signiﬁcantly large (i.e., signiﬁcantly
greater than 1). Conversely, when SOPT is small (i.e., oP(1)), the error is gauged in absolute terms. This approach ensures meaningful error measurment if SOPT diverges or
diminishes depending on the parameters involved.
To evaluate the asymptotic behavior of various estimators, we also report a measure
of the estimation error:
RMSEA(µ/σ, ρ) =

bE(bSA −SA)/(1 + SOPT)
2
+ d
Var

bSA/(1 + SOPT)
1/2
,
where d
Var(·) denotes the sample variance across Monte Carlo repetitions.
Table 1 presents the maximum performance gap and estimation error across all values
of µ/σ and ρ. The results consistently show that OPT has the smallest gap to optimal
performance in comparison to CSR, BH, or Lasso. Lasso ranks second, while CSR and BH
exhibit signiﬁcantly poorer performance. Notably, as T increases from 2 years to 20 years,
the maximum gap of OPT decreases from 0.381 to 0.152 for N = 1, 000, and from 0.276
to 0.127 for N = 3, 000. In contrast, as N increases, the performance of the latter three
methods tends to deteriorate. This trend can be attributed to an increasing theoretical
performance gap, quantiﬁed as |SA −SOPT|/(1 + SOPT), that plays a dominating role.
Indeed, the bottom panel of the table illustrate that the estimation error asymptotically
diminishes with increasing N.
Finally, Figure 6 reports the sample average of estimation error
bS⋆−S⋆ 1 + S⋆
over Monte Carlo simulations for each value of µ/σ and ρ.
The results conﬁrm the
consistency result in Proposition 1. The relative error remains small when S⋆is large
or moderate (signiﬁcantly greater than 1). Conversely, near the bottom right corner of
Figure 6, where S⋆is essentially zero as shown by Figures 1 and 2, the estimation proves
more challenging. In this scenario, the error, becoming absolute (S⋆<< 1), is notably
larger due to a signiﬁcant upward bias that is diﬃcult to mitigate in ﬁnite sample.
36The speciﬁc grid we use for tuning our method consists of the set {0.25, 0.5, . . . , 4} × (log N)−1.
For the Lasso method, the parameter λ is selected from the set {2−10, 2−9, . . . , 2−1}. For our method,
theoretical guidance from Theorem 3 helps — we know a tuning parameter ≃(log N)−1 would be optimal.
For Lasso, however, the optimal rate depends on the DGP, and we lack simple theoretical results to guide
us.
34

N = 1, 000
N = 3, 000
T = 2
T = 5
T = 10
T = 20
T = 2
T = 5
T = 10
T = 20
supµ/σ,ρ GapA(µ/σ, ρ)
OPT
0.381
0.243
0.171
0.152
0.276
0.228
0.143
0.127
CSR
0.622
0.586
0.532
0.477
0.462
0.604
0.610
0.562
BH
0.739
0.759
0.743
0.704
0.781
0.822
0.814
0.791
Lasso
0.396
0.259
0.176
0.154
0.298
0.265
0.159
0.172
supµ/σ,ρ RMSEA(µ/σ, ρ)
OPT
0.521
0.445
0.441
0.446
0.333
0.346
0.273
0.236
CSR
128
0.165
0.211
0.264
0.093
0.075
0.086
0.105
BH
0.492
0.436
0.440
0.442
0.359
0.347
0.263
0.248
Lasso
0.521
0.435
0.439
0.444
0.336
0.356
0.302
0.241
Table 1: Simulation Results
Note: The top panel displays the maximum Sharpe Ratio gap, deﬁned as supµ/σ,ρ GapA(µ/σ, ρ), across
all values of µ/σ and ρ shown in Figure 1. Similarly, the lower panel details the maximum root-meansquared error, deﬁned as supµ/σ,ρ RMSEA(µ/σ, ρ). Here, A represents the methods OPT, CSR, BH, or
Lasso for various combinations of N and T (measured in years). The OPT and Lasso methods employ
a validation procedure to determine the optimal tuning parameters. The BH method ensures control of
the false discovery rate at a 5% level.
10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.10
0.21
0.23
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.09
0.19
0.20
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.09
0.18
0.16
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.08
0.17
0.14
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.06
0.03
0.01
0.09
0.15
0.10
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.09
0.14
0.07
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.08
0.10
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.06
0.04
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.07
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.05
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.04
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.14
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.06
0.05
0.10
0.21
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.08
0.13
0.24
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.06
0.08
0.11
0.11
0.17
0.28
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.03
0.09
0.11
0.15
0.16
0.21
0.32
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.13
0.15
0.19
0.20
0.26
0.36
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.09
0.18
0.21
0.25
0.26
0.31
0.41
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.03
0.15
0.25
0.27
0.31
0.33
0.38
0.46
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.06
0.10
0.23
0.33
0.35
0.38
0.40
0.44
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.06
0.12
0.17
0.22
0.34
0.43
0.45
0.01
0.07
0.11
0.14
0.21
0.25
0.30
0.41
0.09
0.19
0.23
0.26
0.32
0.36
0.41
0.51
0.47
0.49
0.52
0.57
0.49
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.60
0.50
0.55
0.57
0.58
0.59
0.61
0.64
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Figure 6: Comparison between bS⋆and S⋆
Note: The ﬁgure reports the sample average of
bS⋆−S⋆ 1+S⋆
over Monte Carlo repetitions. The
simulation setting is based on model (5), in which a 100 × ρ% of assets have αs that correspond to an
annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12. In this experiment, N = 1, 000 and T = 20 years.
4
Empirical Analysis of US Equities
To demonstrate the empirical relevance of the statistical limit of arbitrage, we analyze
US monthly equity returns. Our analysis is divided into two parts: the ﬁrst focuses on
35

individual equity returns, and the second utilizes portfolios as test assets. Employing
portfolios allows us to explore scenarios where alphas are linear functions of characteristics, aligning our approach with the common empirical practice of predicting alphas
based on such characteristics. We begin our discussion with a description of the datasets.
4.1
US Equity Data
Our monthly equity sample covers the period from January 1965 to December 2020. For
individual equities, we utilize a multi-factor model with observable factor loadings, closely
resembling the widely used MSCI Barra model. Speciﬁcally, we use 16 characteristics and
11 GICS sectors, drawing on both empirical insights from existing asset pricing literature
and industry practice. The selected characteristics include market beta, size, operating
proﬁts/book equity, book equity/market equity, asset growth, momentum, short-term
reversal, industry momentum, illiquidity, leverage, return seasonality, sales growth, accruals, dividend yield, tangibility, and idiosyncratic risk, which are downloaded directly
from the website openassetpricing.com (Stock-level Signal Datasets August 2023 Release).
Details on the construction of these characteristics can be found in Chen and Zimmermann (2020).
We download monthly return data for individual equities from CRSP and apply several
preprocessing steps. First, in the case of delistings, we use the delisting return as the ﬁnal
return in the delisting month. Next, we merge the returns data with the aforementioned
characteristics database using permnos, which yields an average of 6,540 unique permnos
per month. We then apply standard ﬁlters (require share codes 10 and 11, and exchange
codes 1, 2, and 3) to reﬁne the dataset. This process selectively removes returns for
certain months from stocks that fail to meet these criteria during those periods. After
applying these ﬁlters, the average number of stocks remaining per month totals 4,756.
We address missing characteristics in our dataset with an approach that avoids
forward-looking bias. If GICS codes are missing, we use the most recent records available
before the data is missing, but we do not copy records backwards in time. Observations
that do not have a GICS code after this procedure are excluded, which predominantly
aﬀects records before 1990. With GICS codes in place, we implement a two-step procedure to address other missing characteristics. We ﬁll each missing characteristic with
the sector-wise median for that characteristic each month. If a characteristic’s values are
missing for an entire sector in a given month, we use the cross-sectional median from all
stocks for that month. After these preprocessing steps, the average number of stocks per
month is reduced to 4,095.
Characteristics-sorted portfolio returns are directly downloaded from the website openassetpricing.com under the “Portfolio Return Datasets” section. The dataset comprises
1,322 portfolios, spanning the years from 1965 to 2020. The portfolios are long-only and
36

sorted based on 212 characteristics, including 49 industry indicators. The number of portfolios per characteristic varies depending on the speciﬁcations in the original papers that
introduced each characteristic. Additionally, some portfolios may contain missing values
due to a lack of observations in certain categories. We use value-weighted portfolios to
avoid high exposure to illiquid small stocks.
4.2
Analysis of Individual Equity Returns
We consider a speciﬁc version of the model as deﬁned in (2), setting αt as constant and
βt as observable. Each month, we regress next month’s returns on the 27 predictors,
using all stocks present in the current month’s cross-section, and including an intercept.
We normalize the 16 characteristics within each cross-section to mitigate the impact of
extreme outliers. This normalization transforms the characteristics to follow a normal
distribution.37
Figure 7 plots the time series of the cross-sectional regression R2s over time. The R2
has declined since the beginning of the sample until the 1990s. This coincides with an
increase in the number of stocks in US equity markets. The R2s are moderately low, with
an average of 8.07%, which suggests that a substantial portion of cross-sectional variation
of individual equity returns is idiosyncratic. Therefore, learning alphas from residuals of
the factor model is a diﬃcult statistical task.
4.2.1
Rare and Weak Alphas
We now study the statistical properties of individual equity alphas using the full sample
data. For each stock, we collect its regression residuals and take their average as an
estimate for its alpha. We require at least 60 observations. This ensures a suﬃciently
large sample size for inference on alpha, although the empirical distribution of alphas’
t-statistics turns out be insensitive to this requirement. Figure 8 provides histograms of
the t-statistics and Sharpe ratios for alphas of all 12,734 stocks in our sample that meet
this criterion. Because these stocks have diﬀerent sample sizes, the histograms of the
Sharpe ratios are not simply the scaled version of the histogram of the t-statistics.
Only 7.58% of the t-statistics exceed 2.0 in magnitude, and more than 1.12% exceed
3.0. This suggests that truly signiﬁcant alphas are extremely rare. Moreover, the largest
Sharpe ratio among all individual stocks’ alphas is approximately 1.86. Notably, only
0.71% of the alphas have a Sharpe ratio greater than 1.0.
These summary statistics
37For each characteristic ci,t, the normalization applies the functional form Φ−1(rank(ci,t)), where
Φ−1(·) is the inverse of the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution. Compared to uniform normalization, this approach leads to slightly improved cross-sectional R2 values,
thereby providing a more accurate representation of realized returns. It is important to note, however,
that the speciﬁc form of normalization does not signiﬁcantly impact subsequent results on arbitrage
Sharpe ratios.
37

1970-02
1977-05
1984-08
1991-11
1999-03
2006-06
2013-09
2020-12
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Figure 7: Time-series of the Cross-sectional R2s
Note: The ﬁgure provides a time series of the cross-sectional R2s for individual equity returns, derived
from regressing next month’s returns against 27 ﬁrm-level characteristics in cross-sectional regressions.
suggest that rare and weak alpha is perhaps the most relevant scenario in practice.
Student t-Statistics
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Sharpe Ratios
-2
-1
0
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Figure 8: Histograms of the t-Statistics and Sharpe Ratios of Estimated Alphas
Note: The ﬁgure provides the histograms of the Student t-statistics (left) and Sharpe ratios (right)
of estimated alphas for all tickers in our sample with at least 60 months of data. The total number of
tickers available is 12,734.
Alphas are meaningless without reference to a speciﬁc factor model. While our analy38

sis includes only 27 ﬁrm-level characteristics, constructing a factor model with additional
characteristics would transform “alpha” into risk premia. Put it diﬀerently, extracting
additional “factors” from returns would result in even rarer and weaker alphas.
4.2.2
Modest Feasible vs. Large Infeasible Sharpe Ratios
We now compare arbitrage portfolios based on various strategies discussed in Section 2.8.
At the end of each month, we construct optimal portfolio weights using these strategies.
These weights are estimated monthly with a 60-month rolling window, and the portfolios
are rebalanced accordingly.38 Both Lasso and OPT methods require a tuning parameter,
which is selected annually. For this purpose, the ﬁnal year of the rolling window is set
aside as the validation sample to optimize the tuning parameter selection.
All these strategies yield modest Sharpe ratios. OPT reaches the top of the chart,
yielding 0.82, followed by CSR at 0.70. The BH and Lasso approaches obtain Sharpe
ratios of 0.65 and 0.62, respectively. To compare cumulative returns, we normalize all
strategies to have the same (ex-post) volatility. The resulting time-series of normalized
cumulative returns are shown in Figure 14. Notably, most returns are generated during
the late 1980s to early 2000s. After 2005, the cumulative returns of all strategies tend to
plateau, indicating a decrease in proﬁtability of statistical arbitrage.
A detailed examination of these strategies oﬀers further insights. The BH strategy
is highly conservative; over 51 years of out-of-sample trading (from January 1970 to
December 2020), there are 284 months with zero holdings. The maximum number of
stocks held in any month is 32, with an average of only 6 stocks during months when
holdings are non-zero. In contrast, the CSR and OPT strategies hold all stocks that
meet the sample criteria, averaging 2,833 stocks per month. The number of stocks held
by the Lasso strategy is notably volatile, ranging from none to almost all stocks in a given
month, with an average of 722 stocks per month. This volatility reﬂects the underlying
weakness in their alphas, whose estimates are prone to ﬂuctuate with diﬀerent samples.
In contrast to the simulation study where performance of strategies are evaluated
over a large class of DGPs, results presented in the empirical analysis here all originate
from a single DGP, i.e., the one that generated the empirically observed stock returns.
Given the strong performance of CSR and the weaker performance of BH, it is likely
that the alphas in reality are rare and weak to the extent that CSR is rather close to
the optimal strategy. In this case, Lasso could only perform equally well as CSR if we
were able to select the optimal tuning, i.e., zero, (no selection or shrinkage), which crossvalidation cannot reliably achieve in all rolling windows. If empirically observed returns
were generated by a DGP that made CSR suboptimal in many rolling windows, Lasso
38Empirical results based on 36- and 84-month windows are reported in Table A2 in the appendix for
robustness checks.
39

1970-02
1977-05
1984-08
1991-11
1999-03
2006-06
2013-09
2020-12
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Cumulative Return
CSR
LASSO
BH
OPT
Figure 9: Normalized Cumulative Returns of Arbitrage Portfolios
Note: This ﬁgure compares the cumulative returns of OPT (black solid), CSR (red dotted), BH
(green dashed), and Lasso (blue dot-dashed) strategies. We normalize all returns by their realized
volatilities calculated by the square root of the sum of the squared returns over the entire sample, only
for comparison purpose.
would have a chance to outperform, given its ability to achieve optimality within a larger
class of DGPs.
We also estimate the infeasible Sharpe ratios using (18) within the same 60-month
rolling window.
Our estimate, eS⋆, averages 4.81 (with negative estimates truncated
at 0), but it can occasionally exceed 16.0. These estimates are much higher than the
feasible Sharpe ratios (0.6 ∼0.8) we obtain for any of these strategies. This supports
our theoretical prediction that the impact of statistical learning alone can eliminate a
substantial portion of investment opportunities.
4.3
Analysis of Portfolio Returns
When portfolios are chosen as test assets, we opt for latent factor models due to the
absence of natural choices of their factors or factor exposures. This approach aligns with
the return generating process presented in (1) but with unknown β and vt. Our factor
model estimation step follows Algorithm 4 outlined in Giglio et al. (2021). We estimate
this model using a 60-month rolling window, consistent with the main empirical analysis
above.39 Using the estimated factor loadings from each rolling window, we then conduct a
cross-sectional regression of the average returns over this window against these loadings,
39Results based on alternative 3-year and 7-year windows, which show similar outcomes, are reported
in Tables A1 and A2 in the appendix for reference.
40

augmented with a column of ones, to determine the risk premia of the latent factors,
the zero-beta rate, and the residuals, which serve as estimates for α’s. It is important
to note that these loadings are identiﬁable only up to a rotation; hence, we report only
those results that are invariant to such rotations, for instance, R2 values and summary
statistics for α’s.
4.3.1
Portfolio Alphas
These latent factor models demonstrate substantial in-sample cross-sectional explanatory
power for expected returns,40 accounting for an average of approximately 48% of the
cross-section variation in average returns across all rolling windows, with 10 factors.41
This results in notably smaller Sharpe ratios for the alphas compared to the portfolios’
own Sharpe ratios. Figure 10 contrasts the histograms of their respective Sharpe ratios.
Notably, the distribution of the alphas’ Sharpe ratios in darker gray exhibits thinner tails
compared to those of the portfolios’ Sharpe ratios in lighter gray.
We then apply the same algorithms to the portfolios’ alphas that we previously used
for individual stocks. The normalized cumulative returns are displayed in Figure 11. All
strategies earn substantially higher Sharpe ratios than those achieved with individual
stocks. Notably, the OPT strategy once again leads, yielding a Sharpe ratio of 1.71,
closely followed by CSR at 1.67. Meanwhile, the BH and Lasso strategies register Sharpe
ratios of 1.49 and 1.18, respectively.
Next, we visualize the average portfolio weights over time using a heatmap in Figure
12. The portfolios in this ﬁgure are sorted by the average weight they receive with the
OPT method, with the highest positive weights on top and the biggest negative weights
at the bottom. The ﬁgure shows that both OPT and CSR exhibit similar allocation
patterns, with non-zero weights assigned to many portfolios.
However, OPT, which
applies shrinkage to portfolio alphas, tends to assign smaller weights than CSR. Due to
the absence of shrinkage, CSR has consistently higher weights than all other methods.
As previously mentioned, CSR achieves the same Sharpe ratio as ridge, because uniform
shrinkage of all assets’ alphas does not aﬀect the Sharpe ratio. BH selects a narrower
range of portfolios, most of which have zero or near-zero weights, indicating a highly
selective strategy. Lasso, although less conservative than BH, also shows lighter colors
on the heatmap, reﬂecting a signiﬁcant level of selection and shrinkage in the portfolio
weights.
Among all characteristics, those assigned higher positive weights by these methods
include portfolios sorted by dividend seasonality identiﬁed by Hartzmark and Solomon
40This is diﬀerent from the cross-section R2 with observable characteristics reported for individual
equities, which represents the (in-sample) explanatory power for realized returns.
41Results for models with varying numbers of factors are included in Tables A1 and A2 in the appendix
for comparison.
41

Figure 10: Sharpe Ratios of Portfolio Returns and Alphas
Note: This ﬁgure compares the histograms of the Sharpe ratios of portfolios’ returns and their alphas.
1970-01
1977-04
1984-08
1991-11
1999-02
2006-05
2013-09
2020-12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Cumulative Return
CSR
LASSO
BH
OPT
Figure 11: Normalized Cumulative Returns of Arbitrage Portfolios
Note: This ﬁgure compares the cumulative returns of OPT (black solid), CSR (red dotted), BH
(green dashed), and Lasso (blue dot-dashed) strategies. We normalize all returns by their realized
volatilities calculated by the square root of the sum of the squared returns over the entire sample, only
for comparison purpose. The base assets for each strategy are all portfolios sorted by characteristics.
(2013), price as discussed in Blume and Husic (1973), intangible return from Daniel and
Titman (2006), gross proﬁts to total assets analyzed by Novy-Marx (2013), and industry
42

BH
CSR
LASSO
OPT
Portfolio Weights
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure 12: Average Weights Assigned to Portfolios by Diﬀerent Methods
Note: This ﬁgure displays a heatmap that shows the average portfolio weights over time for portfolios
sorted by characteristics, formed using BH, CSR, Lasso, and OPT methods.
return of big ﬁrms studied in Hou (2007). Conversely, the characteristics with the most
negative weights include portfolios sorted by spinoﬀs documented by Cusatis et al. (1993),
past trading volume from Brennan et al. (1998), initial public oﬀerings from Ritter (1991),
size from Dharan and Ikenberry (1995), and exchange switch as in Banz (1981).
4.3.2
Accounting for Publication Eﬀects
Many of the characteristics used in the construction of the portfolio return data set were
introduced to the academic literature later in the sample period. For this reason, the
above analysis may overstate achievable Sharpe ratios. If arbitrageurs were not aware of
the predictive power of these characteristics in the early parts of the sample, these Sharpe
ratios were not truly achievable. Moreover, academics’ discovery of the predictive power
of these characteristics could potentially reﬂect ex-post selection bias, rendering the insample predictive power spurious. To address this issue, we revise our portfolio analysis
to only include characteristics from the year following their publication. Except for the
49 industry portfolios (assumed) available since 1965, few portfolios were introduced in
earlier years. As illustrated in Figure 13, a signiﬁcant number of these characteristics
were introduced after 2000.
With this adjusted approach, the Sharpe ratios for the OPT and CSR are now substantially lower at 0.61 and 0.66, respectively. These magnitudes align more closely with
the Sharpe ratios we obtained from individual stocks. The Lasso and BH strategies now
43

achieve only 0.45 and 0.35, respectively. Consistent with McLean and Pontiﬀ(2016), this
suggests that some of the initial discoveries of signals may have been “lucky,” performing
well in-sample but then failing to replicate this success out-of-sample, or that competition
among arbitrageurs shrinks the alphas once the discoveries become public.
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Number of Portfolios
Original
Adjusted
Figure 13: Number of Portfolios Before and After Adjusting for Publication Years
Note: This ﬁgure plots two curves: one showing the total monthly count of characteristics-sorted
portfolios and the other displaying the count adjusted for only those portfolios whose characteristics
have been previously published.
Figure 15 shows infeasible Sharpe ratios estimated both before and after adjusting
for publication eﬀects. Before this adjustment, the infeasible Sharpe ratio is consistently
above 20, but after this adjustment, including characteristics only after their publication
year, it is much lower in the early part of the sample, starting around 5 in the early 1970s.
As more signals are discovered over time, the infeasible Sharpe ratio increases, eventually
reaching levels similar to those estimated without adjustment.
Despite these adjustments, a signiﬁcant gap still exists between the theoretical infeasible Sharpe ratios that range from 5 to 20 and the achievable Sharpe ratios, which are
smaller than 0.7. This highlights the quantitative relevance of statistical limits of arbitrage in real-world scenarios. The large reduction in Sharpe ratios suggests that statistical
limits may play an even more critical role than publication eﬀects for characterizing the
investment opportunities that are actually feasible for arbitrageurs.
44

1970-01
1977-04
1984-08
1991-11
1999-02
2006-05
2013-09
2020-12
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Cumulative Return
CSR
LASSO
BH
OPT
Figure 14: Normalized Cumulative Returns of Arbitrage Portfolios
Note: This ﬁgure compares the cumulative returns of OPT (black solid), CSR (red dotted), BH
(green dashed), and Lasso (blue dot-dashed) strategies. We normalize all returns by their realized
volatilities calculated by the square root of the sum of the squared returns over the entire sample, only
for comparison purpose. The base assets only include portfolios sorted by characteristics that were
previously published.
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Sharpe Ratio
Original
Adjusted
Figure 15: Time Series Plots of Infeasible Sharpe Ratios
Note: This ﬁgure compares the Infeasible Sharpe ratios on the basis of portfolios before and after
adjusting for publication years.
45

5
Conclusion
Taking stock, our paper provides a new theoretical framework for understanding the implications of statistical learning in asset pricing. Rather than endowing arbitrageurs with
perfect knowledge of the economic model, we expose them to the challenge of learning
about alphas. Arbitrageurs in reality arguably face a high-dimensional world, with many
assets and many alpha signals, which can make statistical learning diﬃcult. These difﬁculties give rise to statistical limits of arbitrage, which manifest as a gap between the
infeasible Sharpe ratio that arbitrageurs could earn with perfect knowledge of alphas and
the feasible Sharpe ratio that arbitrageurs attain in equilibrium with statistical learning.
While high-dimensional, the linear factor model environment that arbitrageurs face
in our analysis is still quite simple.
The gap between feasible and infeasible Sharpe
ratios would further increase if arbitrageurs faced additional statistical challenges, e.g.,
model misspeciﬁcation, omitted factors, weak factors, or a large non-sparse idiosyncratic
covariance matrix.
Our approach to characterizing the feasible Sharpe ratio is in important ways diﬀerent
from other analyses of statistical learning in asset pricing. Many papers applying machine
learning methods in the construction of trading strategies have documented impressive
Sharpe ratios. Such strategies often rely on ad-hoc model design (e.g., a neural network
with a speciﬁc architecture) and tuning parameters selection. In this regard, the empirical
analysis can at best provide a “lower bound” on the performance of machine learning
strategies. Our paper provides a theoretical framework to understand the “upper bound”
on the performance of any statistical learning strategy in a speciﬁc context. The decision
rule of arbitrageurs in turn ties this upper bound to the equilibrium compensation that
arbitrageurs require in equilibrium, giving it an important economic interpretation.
In addition to the optimal strategy that attains the feasible Sharpe ratio, we also
examine, theoretically and empirically, the performance of other portfolio construction
approaches that rely multiple testing correction, variable selection, and shrinkage. While
these approaches are well motivated statistically, they do not perform as well as the
optimal strategy in economic terms, as measured by the Sharpe ratio.
This ﬁnding
highlights that good statistical properties, such as, for example, with regards to Type
I and Type II errors or the false discovery rate, do not necessarily translate into good
economic performance. For instance, a statistical procedure that guards against false
discoveries may be overly conservative for investment purposes. This divergence between
statistical and economic objectives suggests some caution when applying statistical tools
imported from other areas—as in the current machine learning literature in asset pricing—
without proper consideration of the economic objectives.
46

References
Andrews, D. W. K., X. Cheng, and P. Guggenberger (2020). Generic results for establishing the asymptotic size of conﬁdence sets and tests. Journal of Econometrics 218(2),
496–531.
Andrews, R. L., J. C. Arnold, and R. G. Krutchkoﬀ(1972). Shrinkage of the posterior
mean in the normal case. Biometrika 59(3), 693–695.
Avramov, D. and G. Zhou (2010). Bayesian portfolio analysis. Annual Review of Financial
Economics 2(1), 25–47.
Bajgrowicz, P. and O. Scaillet (2012, December). Technical trading revisited False discoveries, persistence tests, and transaction costs. Journal of Financial Economics 106(3),
473–491.
Banz, R. W. (1981). The relationship between return and market value of common stocks.
Journal of ﬁnancial economics 9(1), 3–18.
Barras, L., O. Scaillet, and R. Wermers (2010). False discoveries in mutual fund performance: Measuring luck in estimated alphas. Journal of Finance 65(1), 179–216.
Bekker, P. A. (1994). Alternative approximations to the distributions of instrumental
variable estimators. Econometrica 62(3), 657–681.
Benjamini, Y. and Y. Hochberg (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series B (Methodological) 57(1), 289–300.
Black, F. and R. Litterman (1992). Global portfolio optimization. Financial Analysts
Journal 48(5), 28–43.
Blume, M. E. and F. Husic (1973). Price, beta, and exchange listing. The Journal of
Finance 28(2), 283–299.
Brennan, M. J., T. Chordia, and A. Subrahmanyam (1998). Alternative factor speciﬁcations, security characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal
of ﬁnancial Economics 49(3), 345–373.
Brown, L. D. and E. Greenshtein (2009). Nonparametric empirical Bayes and compound
decision approaches to estimation of a high-dimensional vector of normal means. The
Annals of Statistics 37(4), 1685 – 1704.
Chamberlain, G. and M. Rothschild (1983).
Arbitrage, factor structure, and meanvariance analysis on large asset markets. Econometrica 51, 1281–1304.
47

Chen, A. Y. and T. Zimmermann (2020).
Open source cross-sectional asset pricing.
Available at SSRN .
Collin-Dufresne, P., M. Johannes, and L. A. Lochstoer (2016). Parameter learning in general equilibrium: The asset pricing implications. American Economic Review 106(3),
664–698.
Connor, G., M. Hagmann, and O. Linton (2012). Eﬃcient semiparametric estimation of
the fama-french model and extensions. Econometrica 80(2), 713–754.
Connor, G. and R. A. Korajczyk (1986). Performance measurement with the arbitrage
pricing theory: A new framework for analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 15(3),
373–394.
Cusatis, P. J., J. A. Miles, and J. R. Woolridge (1993). Restructuring through spinoﬀs:
The stock market evidence. Journal of ﬁnancial economics 33(3), 293–311.
Daniel, K. and S. Titman (2006). Market reactions to tangible and intangible information.
The Journal of Finance 61(4), 1605–1643.
Dharan, B. G. and D. L. Ikenberry (1995). The long-run negative drift of post-listing
stock returns. The Journal of Finance 50(5), 1547–1574.
Donoho, D. and J. Jin (2004). Higher criticism for detecting sparse heterogeneous mixtures. Annals of Statistics 32(3), 962–994.
Efron, B. (2011). Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 106(496), 1602–1614.
Efron, B. (2019). Bayes, Oracle Bayes and Empirical Bayes. Statistical Science 34(2),
177 – 201.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33(1), 3–56.
Fan, J., Y. Liao, and J. Yao (2015).
Power enhancement in high-dimensional crosssectional tests. Econometrica 83(4), 1497–1541.
Frost, P. A. and J. E. Savarino (1986). An empirical bayes approach to eﬃcient portfolio
selection. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21(3), 293–305.
Gagliardini, P., E. Ossola, and O. Scaillet (2016). Time-varying risk premium in large
cross-sectional equity datasets. Econometrica 84(3), 985–1046.
Gibbons, M. R., S. A. Ross, and J. Shanken (1989). A test of the eﬃciency of a given
portfolio. Econometrica 29, 1121–1152.
48

Giglio, S., B. Kellly, and D. Xiu (2022). Factor models, machine learning, and asset
pricing. Annual Review of Financial Economics 14, 337–368.
Giglio, S., Y. Liao, and D. Xiu (2021). Thousands of alpha tests. Review of Financial
Studies 34(7), 3456–3496.
Giglio, S. and D. Xiu (2021). Asset pricing with omitted factors. Journal of Political
Economy 129(7), 1947–1990.
Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1989). Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior.
Journal of mathematical economics 18(2), 141–153.
Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2010). Limits of arbitrage. Annual Review of Financial
Economics 2, 251–275.
Guijarro-Ordonez, J., M. Pelger, and G. Zanotti (2022). Deep learning statistical arbitrage. Technical report, Stanford University.
Hansen, L. P. (2007). Beliefs, doubts, and learning: Valuing macroeconomic risk. American Economic Review 97(2), 1–30.
Hansen, L. P. (2014). Nobel lecture: Uncertainty outside and inside economic models.
Journal of Political Economy 122(51), 945–987.
Hartzmark, S. M. and D. H. Solomon (2013). The dividend month premium. Journal of
Financial Economics 109(3), 640–660.
Harvey, C. R. and Y. Liu (2020). False (and missed) discoveries in ﬁnancial economics.
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Harvey, C. R., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu (2016). ... and the cross-section of expected returns.
Review of Financial Studies 29(1), 5–68.
Hou, K. (2007). Industry information diﬀusion and the lead-lag eﬀect in stock returns.
The review of ﬁnancial studies 20(4), 1113–1138.
Huberman, G. (1982). A simple approach to arbitrage pricing theory. Journal of Economic Thoery 28(1), 183–191.
Imbens, G. W. and C. F. Manski (2004). Conﬁdence intervals for partially identiﬁed
parameters. Econometrica 72(6), 1845–1857.
Ingersoll, J. E. (1984).
Some results in the theory of arbitrage pricing.
Journal of
Finance 39(4), 1021–1039.
49

Johns, M. V. (1957). Non-parametric empirical bayes procedures. Annals of Mathematical
Statistics 28, 649–669.
Jorion, P. (1986). Bayes-stein estimation for portfolio analysis. The Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 21(3), 279–292.
Kan, R., X. Wang, and G. Zhou (2022). Optimal portfolio choice with estimation risk:
No risk-free asset case. Management Science, forthcoming.
Kan, R. and G. Zhou (2007).
Optimal portfolio choice with parameter uncertainty.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42(3), 621–656.
Kelly, B., S. Pruitt, and Y. Su (2019). Some characteristics are risk exposures, and the
rest are irrelevant. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Kim, S., R. Korajczyk, and A. Neuhierl (2020). Arbitrage portfolios. Review of Financial
Studies, forthcoming.
Kozak, S. and S. Nagel (2023). When do cross-sectional asset pricing factors span the
stochastic discount factor? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Leeb, H. and B. M. P¨otscher (2005). Model selection and inference: Facts and ﬁction.
Econometic Theory 21(1), 21–59.
Maccheroni, F., M. Marinacci, and A. Rustichini (2006). Ambiguity aversion, robustness,
and the variational representation of preferences. Econometrica 74(6), 1447–1498.
Martin, I. W. and S. Nagel (2022). Market eﬃciency in the age of big data. Journal of
ﬁnancial economics 145(1), 154–177.
McLean, R. D. and J. Pontiﬀ(2016). Does academic research destroy stock return predictability? The Journal of Finance 71(1), 5–32.
Novy-Marx, R. (2013). The other side of value: The gross proﬁtability premium. Journal
of ﬁnancial economics 108(1), 1–28.
Pastor, L. (2000).
Portfolio selection and asset pricing models.
The Journal of Finance 55(1), 179–223.
Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2000). Comparing asset pricing models: An investment
perspective. Journal of Financial Economics 56, 335–381.
Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2009). Learning in ﬁnancial markets. Annual Review of
Financial Economics 1(1), 361–381.
50

Pesaran, H. and T. Yamagata (2017). Testing for alpha in linear factor pricing models
with a large number of securities. Technical report.
Ritter, J. R. (1991). The long-run performance of initial public oﬀerings. The journal of
ﬁnance 46(1), 3–27.
Robbins, H. (1956). An empirical bayes approach to statistics. Berkeley Symposium on
Mathematical Statistics and Probability 3, 157–163.
Robertson, T., R. Dykstra, and F. Wright (1988). Order restricted statistical inference.
New York: Wiley.
Rosenberg, B. (1974). Extra-market components of covariance in security returns. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 9(2), 263–274.
Ross, S. A. (1976). The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic
Theory 13(3), 341–360.
Shanken, J. (1992). The current state of the arbitrage pricing theory. Journal of Finance 47(4), 1569–1574.
Staiger, D. and J. H. Stock (1997). Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments. Econometrica 65(3), 557–586.
Tu, J. and G. Zhou (2010). Incorporating economic objectives into bayesian priors: Portfolio choice under parameter uncertainty. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 45(4), 959–986.
Tukey, J. W. (1976). The higher criticism. course notes, statistics 411. Technical report,
Princeton University.
Zhang, C.-H. (1997). Empirical bayes and compound estimation of normal means. Statistica Sinica 7(1), 181–193.
51

Online Appendix for
The Statistical Limit of Arbitrage
Rui Da∗
Indiana University
Stefan Nagel†
University of Chicago
NBER and CEPR
Dacheng Xiu‡
University of Chicago
NBER
This version: June 22, 2025
Abstract
The appendix contains additional empirical and theoretical results, as well as
all the mathematical proofs.
∗Address: 1275 E 10th St, Bloomington, IN 47405. E-mail: ruida@iu.edu.
†Address: 5807 S Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. E-mail: stefan.nagel@chicagobooth.edu.
‡Address: 5807 S Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. E-mail: dacheng.xiu@chicagobooth.edu.
1

Appendix A
Additional Empirical Results
In this appendix we expand our empirical analysis. We ﬁrst estimate latent factor models
of portfolio returns, outlined in Section 4.3, under various alternative estimation windows
and numbers of factors. The estimation is conducted for both the original portfolios and
the ones adjusted for publication eﬀects. We report the results in Table A1, which include
the cross-sectional in-sample explanatory power (R2) of expected returns of the factor
models, the infeasible Sharpe ratios (S⋆) corresponding to the portfolio alphas, and the
distributions of portfolio alphas’ t-statistics.
# of
R2
S⋆
|t-stat|
|t-stat|
R2
S⋆
|t-stat| >
|t-stat|
T
Factors
> 2
> 3
> 2
> 3
Original Portfolios
Adjusted for Publication Eﬀects
3 yrs
5
0.41
27.58
12.17
2.63
0.48
13.47
9.93
1.67
10
0.46
33.04
17.90
5.19
0.58
16.31
15.53
3.91
15
0.50
39.69
24.44
8.98
0.63
19.77
21.78
7.29
5 yrs
5
0.41
20.60
11.54
2.37
0.47
10.05
9.11
1.37
10
0.47
23.11
14.78
3.68
0.59
11.25
12.06
2.45
15
0.51
25.53
17.73
5.07
0.66
12.46
14.94
3.55
7 yrs
5
0.38
17.62
12.49
2.76
0.43
8.56
9.57
1.45
10
0.46
19.01
14.15
3.45
0.59
9.14
11.12
1.99
15
0.50
20.44
16.02
4.39
0.65
9.93
13.27
2.81
Table A1: Latent Factor Models of Portfolio Returns
Note: The left panel displays the results of estimating latent factor models with the original portfolio
returns as test assets. Across estimation windows and numbers of factors, the panel reports the crosssectional R2, the infeasible Sharpe ratios (S⋆), and the percentages of portfolio alphas with large tstatistics. Similarly, the right panel details the result when the test assets are portfolio returns adjusted
for publication eﬀects.
The cross-sectional R2s by these models are similar across estimation windows, and
moderately increase with more factors included and publication eﬀects adjusted for. Indeed, in both cases, a larger proportion of cross-sectional variation of expected returns
will be attributed to risk premia. Considering that these R2s are in-sample ones, we
choose to focus on the 10-factor model in Section 4. Regarding the strength and rareness
of alphas, both the percentage of portfolio alphas with large t-statistics and the infeasible Sharpe ratio (S⋆) increase with the number of factors. It suggests that, when we
control for more factors, the removal of factor risks is perhaps more prominent than the
attribution of expected returns to risk premia (thereby less to alphas), which ultimately
allows alphas to stand out and to be proﬁted from more easily. On the other hand, with
longer estimation window, we see both the infeasible Sharpe ratio and the percentage of
large t-statistics reduce. This result could originate from that many alphas are only moderately persistent and is behind our choice of 5-year window in Section 4. Lastly, since
2

fewer alphas are left after the publication eﬀects are adjusted for, we observe increased
cross-section R2, and both the infeasible Sharpe ratios and the proportion of strong alpha
signals shrink.
With the portfolio alphas obtained from the factor models, we show in Table A2 the
investment performance of the four diﬀerent trading strategies: OPT method, CSR, BH,
and Lasso, measured by the average Sharpe ratios between January 1970 and December
2020.1 It complements the analysis of Section 4.3, which focuses on 5-year estimation
window and 10-factor speciﬁcation. As a robustness check for the analysis on individual
equity returns by Section 4.2, we also report in Table A2 the average Sharpe ratios
generated by applying the four trading strategies to individual equity alphas.
# of
5
10
15
5
10
15
T
Factors
Individual Equities
Original Portfolios
Adjusted for Publication Eﬀects
3 yrs
OPT
0.71
1.23
1.33
1.25
0.54
0.59
0.54
CSR
0.65
1.22
1.30
1.27
0.52
0.57
0.56
BH
0.49
1.06
1.22
1.25
0.25
0.43
0.57
Lasso
0.56
0.87
1.08
1.09
0.45
0.56
0.47
5 yrs
OPT
0.71
1.50
1.71
1.71
0.51
0.66
0.67
CSR
0.70
1.47
1.67
1.70
0.55
0.61
0.66
BH
0.65
1.52
1.49
1.67
0.25
0.35
0.48
Lasso
0.62
0.95
1.18
1.23
0.48
0.45
0.47
7 yrs
OPT
0.81
1.71
1.95
2.01
0.72
0.73
0.79
CSR
0.90
1.64
1.93
1.98
0.77
0.74
0.76
BH
0.38
1.68
1.75
1.87
0.42
0.60
0.48
Lasso
0.83
1.10
1.32
1.54
0.66
0.60
0.74
Table A2: Sharpe Ratios of Arbitrage Portﬁolios
Note: The table reports the average Sharpe ratios generated by arbitrage portfolios constructed using
OPT method, CSR, BH, and Lasso, with estimation windows set as 3, 5, and 7 years. The left panel
displays the results when we invest in individual equity alphas. The center panel provides the Sharpe
ratios generated when the investment universe is composed of portfolio alphas. The right panel displays
the results when the publication eﬀects are adjusted for when using portfolio alphas. The center and
right panels include outputs under various numbers of factors in the latent factor model estimation.
Consistent with the evidence on the strength and rareness of alphas from Table A1,
the investment gains from trading portfolio alphas signiﬁcantly decline after the adjustment for publication eﬀects. OPT method and CSR yield leading performance under
most model speciﬁcations and for both individual equity alphas and portfolio alphas.
Lasso generates second-tier outputs, due to the challenge of locating the optimal tuning
parameter based on highly noisy return data. Notably, for portfolio alphas, we generally capture smaller Sharpe ratios when we control for fewer factors, which echoes the
1The Sharpe ratio is the average between January 1972 and December 2020 under the 7-year estimation window, since our return data start from at January 1965.
3

suggestive evidence from Table A1 on the impact of factor risks.
Appendix B
Additional Theoretical Results
Proposition B1. Suppose the same assumptions and information set G as in Theorem
1. Moreover, we assume that (a) ∥β∥MAX ≲P 1 and λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N; (b) vt is i.i.d.
across t, E(vt) = 0, and its covariance matrix Σv satisﬁes 1 ≲λmin(Σv) ≤λmax(Σv) ≲1.
Then it holds that, for any strategy w that is G-measurable,
S(w) ≤(S(G)2 + γ⊺Σ−1
v γ)1/2 + oP(1 + S(G)).
Proposition B2. Suppose that rt follows (1), Assumption 1 holds, ui,t ∼N(0, σ2), and
α following (5) as in Example 1. We also assume µ ≲N −d, N d ≲T ≲N 1−d, and
N −d′ ≲ρ ≲N −d for some ﬁxed d′ > d > 0. We denote the Sharpe ratio of the arbitrage
portfolio given by (20), as bSCSR. Then it satisﬁes bSCSR −SCSR = oP(1), where
SCSR =
N 1/2ρµ2σ−2
(T −1 + ρµ2σ−2)1/2.
Suppose further that SOPT does not vanish. It follows that SCSR = SOPT(1 + o(1)), if and
only if there exists cN →0, such that
√
Tµ/σ ≤cN or √ρTµ/σ ≥c−1
N holds for all large
N.
Proposition B3. Suppose the same assumptions as in Proposition B2 hold. For any
given τ, the Sharpe ratio of the arbitrage portfolio with weights given by (21) denoted by
bSBH
τ
, satisﬁes bSBH
τ
= SBH
τ
+ oP(1 + SOPT), where2
SBH
τ
= N 1/2E(αiˇsi1{|ˇsi|≥s∗})
σ
p
E(ˇs2
i 1{|ˇsi|≥s∗})
=
N 1/2ρµ
R ∞
−∞x1{|x|≥s∗}φ1/T(x −µσ−1)dx
σ
qR ∞
−∞x21{|x|≥s∗}((1 −ρ)φ1/T(x) + ρφ1/T(x −µσ−1))dx
,
ˇsi = (αi + ¯ui)/σi, and s∗is the smallest positive solution of the equation
2(1 −τ)Φ(−T 1/2s) = τρΦ(T 1/2(µ/σ −s)).3
(B.1)
Suppose further that SOPT does not vanish.
Then there exists, for any ﬁxed ϵ > 0,
some τ > 0 such that, as N, T →∞, SBH
τ
> (1 −ϵ)SOPT, if and only if
√
Tµ/σ ≥
√−2 log ρ(1 + o(1)).
Proposition B4. Suppose the same assumptions as in Proposition B2 hold. The Sharpe
ratio of the arbitrage portfolio with weights given by bwq(λ), denoted as bSq,λ for q = 1, 2,
2If bwBH = 0, i.e., no asset is selected, we set bSBH = 0 by convention.
3Φ(·) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function.
4

satisﬁes bS1,λ −SLasso
λ
= oP(1 + SOPT) and bS2,λ −SCSR = oP(1 + SOPT), where
SLasso
λ
= N 1/2E(αiψ1(ˇsi, λ))
σ
p
E(ψ1(ˇsi, λ)2)
=
N 1/2ρµ
R ∞
−∞sgn(x)(|x| −λ)+φ1/T(µσ−1 −x)dx
σ
qR ∞
−∞((|x| −λ)+)2((1 −ρ)φ1/T(x) + ρφ1/T(µσ−1 −x))dx
,
(B.2)
and SCSR is deﬁned in Proposition B2.
Furthermore, if SOPT does not vanish, then SLasso
λ
= SOPT(1 + o(1)), under some
deterministic non-negative sequence of λ, if and only if, for some cN →0, either
√
Tµ/σ ≤cN or
√
Tµ/σ −√−2 log ρ ≥c−1
N holds for all large N.
Moreover, when
√
Tµ/σ ≤cN, SLasso
λ
approaches SOPT if and only if λ satisﬁes
T 1/2λ →0. When
√
Tµ/σ −√−2 log ρ ≥c−1
N , SLasso
λ
approaches SOPT if and only if
λ satisﬁes
√
T(µ/σ −λ) →∞and
φ(
√
Tλ)
ρ(1+Tλ2)T(µ/σ−λ)2 →0.
Appendix C
Mathematical Proofs
C.1
Proof of Equation (9)
The constrained maximization problem is equivalent with maximizing
w⊺α −κ
2w⊺Σuw + λw⊺β,
where λ is the Lagrange multiplier such that the solution w satisﬁes w⊺β = 0.
As
the objective function is clearly strictly concave, we only need to look at the ﬁrst-order
condition, which reads
w = 1
κΣ−1
u (α + λβ).
We can pin down λ by requiring β⊺Σ−1
u (α+λβ) = 0, which gives λ = (β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1β⊺Σ−1
u α
and thereby
w = 1
κΣ−1
u (IN + β(β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1β⊺Σ−1
u )α = 1
κΣ−1/2
u
MΣ−1/2
u
βΣ−1/2
u
α.
C.2
Proof of Theorem 1
To simplify the notation, we omit the dependence of β, Σ on N, and w on N and T.
All limits are taken as N →∞. The derivation applies to either ﬁxed T or T →∞
together with N. We ﬁrst show that, under any sequence of probability measures {PN}
that satisﬁes Assumption 1, and for all ﬁxed positive ε,
5

PN(U(w) ≤ε (2κ)−1S(G)2 =ε U( ew)) →1,
and
PN(S(w) ≤ε S(G) =ε S( ew)) →1.
(C.3)
The following derivation proceeds under any such sequence of probability measures and
we omit the subscript N. We ﬁrst note that, given (1), conditioning on G is equivalent
to conditioning on the information set generated by
{(αi + ui,s, βi, vs, σi) : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t, i ≤N}.
According to Assumption 1, conditionally on Σu, {(αi, αi + ui,s) : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t}
is independent of {(αj + uj,s, βj′, vs) : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t, j, j′ ≤N, j̸ = i}. Therefore,
the G-conditional distribution of αi is the same as the distribution of αi conditional on
{αi + ui,s : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t} and Σu. Because σj is independent with (αi, ui) for j̸ = i,
the G-conditional distribution of αi is the same as the the Gi-conditional distribution of
αi, where Gi is the information set generated by {(αi + ui,s, σi) : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t}.
Since Gi is independent across i by Assumption 1, we conclude that, conditionally on G,
αi remains independent across i.
Now deﬁne E = E(w⊺rt+1|Ft) −E(w⊺rt+1|G). By the deﬁnition of S(w), we have
S(w) = E(w⊺rt+1|G)/Var(w⊺rt+1|Ft)1/2 + E/Var(w⊺rt+1|Ft)1/2.
(C.4)
Since w is G-measurable, it follows that E = w⊺(α −E(α|G)) and that E(E2|G) =
w⊺Var(α|G)w. Then, using Chebyshev’s inequality, we have, for all positive ﬁxed ϵ,
P(|E|/∥w∥≥ϵ) ≤E(E2/∥w∥2)/ϵ2 = E(w⊺Var(α|G)w/∥w∥2)/ϵ2.
(C.5)
Because conditionally on G, αi is independent across i, we have Var(α|G)i,j
=
δi,jVar(αi|G). It thereby follows that
E(w⊺Var(α|G)w/∥w∥2) ≤E(max
i≤N Var(αi|G)) ≤E(max
i≤N α2
i ) = o(1),
(C.6)
where the last step comes from condition (a) of Assumption 1. Combining (C.5) and
(C.6), and using Var(w⊺rt+1|Ft) = w⊺Σw ≥λmin(Σu)∥w∥2 ≳P ∥w∥2, we obtain
|E|/Var(w⊺rt+1|Ft)1/2 ≲P |E|/∥w∥= oP(1).
(C.7)
(C.7) and (C.4) lead to
S(w) = w⊺E(rt+1|G)(w⊺Σw)−1/2 + oP(1).
(C.8)
Furthermore, if w⊺β = 0, then it follows that w⊺rt = w⊺(α + ut) and w⊺Σw = w⊺Σuw.
6

Equation (C.8) then becomes
S(w) = w⊺eα(w⊺Σuw)−1/2 + oP(1).
(C.9)
Applying Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we obtain
|w⊺eα|2(w⊺Σuw)−1 ≤eα⊺Σ−1
u eα = S(G)2,
which, combined with (C.9), proves the second inequality in (C.3).
Next, we have that, for all w that is G-measurable and satisﬁes β⊺w = 0, and for all
positive ﬁxed ϵ and with probability approaching one,
U(w) = w⊺α −κ
2w⊺Σuw = E + w⊺eα −κ
2w⊺Σuw ≤w⊺eα −κ
2(1 −ε)w⊺Σuw,
(C.10)
where the last inequality comes from (C.7). Cauchy-Schwarz inequality leads to
w⊺eα −κ
2(1 −ε)w⊺Σuw ≤
1
2κ(1 −ε)eα⊺Σueα.
Substituting this result into (C.10), we obtain the ﬁrst inequality in (C.3).
We move on to the remaining results: the two equalities in (C.3). They all hinge on
the property of ew. As a ﬁrst step, we introduce short-hand notation
ˇw := 1
κPβΣ−1
u eα,
with
Pβ := IN −Mβ.
We can then write
ew = 1
κΣ−1
u eα −ˇw.
(C.11)
To establish the two equalities in (C.3), we now prove that ∥ˇw∥is oP(1), which will then
quickly leads to those results.
To this end, we start by analyzing E(eα|β, Σu) and Cov(eα|Σu, β). We note that
E(eα|β, Σu) = E(α|β, Σu) = E(α|Σu) = 0.
(C.12)
The ﬁrst equality comes from that eα := E(α|G) and that β and Σu are G-measurable. The
second equality comes from Assumption 1 (b). The last equality comes from Assumption
1 (a).
Moreover, from the analysis above (C.4), eαi is a function of {(αi + ui,s, σi) :
t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t}. According to Assumption 1 (b), {(αi + ui,s, σi) : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t}
and β are, conditionally on Σu, independent. Therefore,
Cov(eαi, eαj|Σu, β) = Cov(eαi, eαj|Σu) = δi,jVar(eαi|Σu).
(C.13)
7

The second equality comes from Cov(eαi, eαj|Σu) = 0 for i̸ = j, which is because (αi, ui)
is i.i.d. across i per Assumption 1 (a). Therefore, it holds that
Cov(eα|Σu, β) ≤E(∥α∥2
MAX|Σu)IN
(C.14)
It hence holds that
E(∥ˇw∥2|Σu, β)
=
Tr(PβΣ−1
u Cov(eα|Σu, β)Σ−1
u Pβ)
≤
E(∥α∥2
MAX|Σu)Tr(PβΣ−2
u Pβ).
(C.15)
The equality comes from (C.12). The inequality comes from (C.13), (C.14), and the wellknown result on Loewner order (see, e.g., Theorem 7.7.2 at Horn and Johnson (2012)).
On the other hand, it holds that
Tr(PβΣ−2
u Pβ) ≲P Tr(Pβ) = rank(β) = K.
(C.16)
The inequality comes from Σu ≳P IN by Assumption 1 (a). Substituting (C.16) into
(C.15), we obtain
E(∥ˇw∥2|Σu, β) ≲P E(∥α∥2
MAX|Σu) = oP(1),
(C.17)
where the last bound comes from Assumption 1 (a). Applying Chebyshev’s inequality to
(C.17), we obtain
∥ˇw∥= oP(1).
(C.18)
To prove the equalities in (C.3), we note that, using (C.11),
ew⊺eα = 1
κeα⊺Σ−1
u eα −ˇw⊺eα,
ew⊺Σu ew = 1
κ2 eα⊺Σ−1
u eα + ˇw⊺Σu ˇw −2
κ ˇw⊺eα.
(C.19)
On the other hand, applying that Σu ≲P IN by Assumption 1 (a) and (C.18), we obtain
ˇw⊺Σu ˇw ≲P ∥ˇw∥= oP(1),
| ˇw⊺eα| ≤
p
ˇw⊺Σu ˇwS(G) ≲P ∥ˇw∥S(G) = oP(S(G)).
(C.20)
Substituting (C.19) into (C.20), we establish
ew⊺eα = 1
κS(G)2 + oP(S(G)),
ew⊺Σu ew = 1
κ2S(G)2 + oP(1 + S(G)).
(C.21)
Suppose S(G) ≳P 1.
Then, the second equality in (C.3) indeed follows from (C.21).
Suppose S(G) = oP(1). Then S( ew) ≤oP(1) and −S( ew) = S(−ew) ≤oP(1) according
to the ﬁrst inequality of (C.3) as ew is both G-measurable and factor-neutral. In other
words, we have S( ew) = oP(1) and that the second equality in (C.3) also holds. Applying
the classic subsequence argument, we establish that the second equality in (C.3) holds.
8

Given (C.21) and (C.7), we obtain the ﬁrst equality in (C.3) as
U( ew) = E + ew⊺eα −κ
2 ew⊺Σu ew = ew⊺eα −κ
2(1 + oP(1)) ew⊺Σu ew = 1
2κS(G)2 + oP(1 + S(G)).
Now we prove (11) using (C.3). First, from the deﬁnition of ≤ε and =ε, (C.3) holds
under any sequences of probability measuring satisfying Assumption 1 and for all ﬁxed
ε > 0 is equivalent with that, under any such sequence and for all ﬁxed ε > 0,
PN(U(w) ≤ε U( ew) =ε (2κ)−1S(G)2) →1,
and
PN(S(w) ≤ε S( ew) =ε S(G)) →1.
(C.22)
Next, suppose the ﬁrst inequality of (11) does not hold. Then we have, for some ﬁxed
ε > 0,
lim inf
N→0 inf
P∈P P(U(w) ≤ε U( ew)) < 1.
Hence there is a subsequence {PNk}k≥1 with PNk ∈P for each k ≥1 such that, for some
ﬁxed ε > 0,
lim
k→∞PNk(U(w) ≤ε U( ew)) < 1.
(C.23)
Since P only collects probability measures under which Assumption 1 holds, (C.23) gives
a contradiction to (C.22), which means that the ﬁrst inequality of (11) must hold. Symmetric arguments establish the second inequality and the two equalities of (11).
C.3
Proof of Theorem 2, Corollary 1, and Corollary 2
Proof of Theorem 2. We have established in the beginning of the proof of Theorem 1
that the G-conditional distribution of αi is the same as the Gi-conditional distribution of
αi, where Gi is the information set generated by {(αi + ui,s) : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t} and
σi. Note that ui,s is centered normal, we have that the conditional probability density of
{r∗
i,s := αi + ui,s, t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t} given si and σi, denoted by p(r∗
i |si, σi), is
p(r∗
i |si, σi) =
Y
t−T+1≤s≤t
σ−1
i φ(σ−1
i r∗
i,s −si) = φ(T 1/2(ˇsi −si))f(r∗
i ).
(C.24)
Here f(r∗
i ) is a function of r∗
i and σi that does not depend on si. Hence, applying Bayes’
theorem, we have
eαi = E(αi|Gi) = σiE(si|Gi)
=
σi
Z
xp(si = x|r∗
i , σi)dx
=
σi
Z
x
p(r∗
i |si = x, σi)p(si = x|σi)
R
p(r∗
i |si = x′, σi)p(si = x′|σi)dx′dx
=
σi
Z
x
p(r∗
i |si = x, σi)ps(x)
R
p(r∗
i |si = x′, σi)ps(x′)dx′dx
9

=
σi
Z
x
φ(T 1/2(ˇsi −x))ps(x)
R
φ(T 1/2(ˇsi −x′))ps(x′)dx′dx = σiE(si|ˇsi),
The second line comes from the Bayes’ theorem. In the third line, ps(·) is the marginal
density of si that is invariant across i, and we use the fact that si and σi are independent,
given by condition (a) of Assumption 2. The ﬁrst equality in the last line comes from
(C.24). The second equality in the last line comes from the Bayes’ theorem and that
φ(T 1/2(ˇsi −x)) is, up to a constant, the density of ˇsi conditional on si = x. We hence
establish the ﬁrst statement in the theorem.
Next, we note that ψ(a) = E(si|ˇsi = a) and, conditional on si = a, ˇsi ≂N(a, T −1).
The marginal density of ˇsi is then indeed E(φ1/T(a −si)). Therefore, (15) directly comes
from the Tweedie’s formula, see, e.g., Robbins (1956) . The proof ends.
Proof of Corollary 1. Apparently, ˇsi = si + σ−1
i
¯ui is i.i.d. across i. By direction calculation and the deﬁnition of SOPT in the statement of the corollary, we have
E(eα⊺Σ−1
u eα) =
X
i
E(E(si|G)2) = N
Z
ψ(a)2p(a)da = (SOPT)2.
(C.25)
Now we study S(G) = eα⊺Σ−1
u eα = P
i E(si|G)2. Using the fact that a2 −b2 = (a −b)2 +
2b(a −b), we have
E(|E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2 −E(si|G)2|)
≤
E(E(si1{|si|>cN}|G)2) + 2E(|E(si|G)E(si1{|si|>cN}|G)|)
≤
E(s2
i 1{|si|>cN}) + 2
q
E(E(si|G)2)E(E(si1{|si|>cN}|G)2)
≤
E(s2
i 1{|si|>cN}) + 2
q
E(E(si|G)2)E(s2
i 1{|si|>cN})
≤
cNN −1 +
p
E(E(si|G)2)cNN −1,
(C.26)
where the last step holds by the assumption E(s2
i 1{|si|≥cN}) = o(N −1). Then we have
E
 
|
X
i
E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2 −
X
i
E(si|G)2|
!
≤
X
i
E(|E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2 −E(si|G)2|)
≤
cN +
sX
i
E(E(si|G)2)cN = o(1 + SOPT),
(C.27)
where the second inequality is a direct result of (C.26), and the last estimate is given by
(C.25). From (C.27) and (C.25), it follows, respectively, using Markov’s inequality and
triangle inequality that
10

X
i
E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2 =
X
i
E(si|G)2 + oP(1 + SOPT),
(C.28)
E
 X
i
E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2
!
= (SOPT)2 + o(1 + SOPT).
(C.29)
Further, we have
Var
 X
i
E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2
!
=
X
i
Var(E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2)
≤
c2
N
X
i
E(E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2) = o(1 + (SOPT)2). (C.30)
For the ﬁrst line, we use that E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G) is independent across i. The second line
is obvious as |si|1{|si|≤cN} ≤cN. The last line comes from (C.29). Combining (C.29) and
(C.30), we obtain
X
i
E(si1{|si|≤cN}|G)2 = (SOPT)2 + o(1 + SOPT) + oP(1 + (SOPT)2)1/2.
Along with (C.28), we obtain
X
i
E(si|G)2 = (SOPT)2 + oP(1 + SOPT).
In light of the deﬁnition of S(G), and the fact that
((SOPT)2 + oP(1 + SOPT))1/2 = SOPT + oP(1),
we conclude the proof.
Proof of Corollary 2. Because of the tail condition E(s2
i 1{|si|≥cN}) ≤cNN −1 for some
sequence cN →0 and that σi is constant across i, we have
E
α⊺α −
X
i
α2
i 1{|αi|<cN}
 = E

X
i
α2
i 1{|αi|≥cN}
 = o(1),
which, by Markov’s inequality and triangle inequality, respectively, leads to
α⊺α =
X
i
α2
i 1{|αi|<cN} + oP(1),
E
 X
i
α2
i 1{|αi|<cN}

= µ2ρN.
(C.31)
On the other hand, it holds that
Var
 X
i
α2
i 1{|αi|<cN}

≤
X
i
E(α4
i 1{|αi|<cN}) ≤c2
N
X
i
E(α2
i ) = c2
Nµ2ρN.
(C.32)
11

Combining (C.31) and (C.32), we obtain
α⊺α = µ2ρN + oP(1 + µ
p
ρN).
As a result, it holds that
S⋆= σ−1√
α⊺α = σ−1µ(ρN)1/2 + oP(1).
(C.33)
Further, in light of the explicit distribution of α in Example 1, we have
ψ(a)
=
µρφ(a −T 1/2µ/σ) −µρφ(a + T 1/2µ/σ)
(2 −2ρ)φ(a) + ρφ(a −T 1/2µ/σ) + ρφ(a + T 1/2µ/σ),
(C.34)
 SOPT2
=
µρN
2σ2
Z
ψ(a)(φ(a −T 1/2µ/σ) −φ(a + T 1/2µ/σ))da.
(C.35)
Suppose that T 1/2µσ−1 −√−2 log ρ ≤C < ∞. Then we have
sup
a≥C
ρφ(a)
φ(a −T 1/2µ/σ)
=
exp

log ρ + T 1/2µσ−1
1
2T 1/2µσ−1 −C

≤
exp

log ρ + 1
2
p
−2 log ρ + C
 p
−2 log ρ −C

≤1.
(C.36)
On the other hand, in light of (C.34) and (C.35), we have
 SOPT2
=
µρN
σ2
Z
ψ(a)φ(a −T 1/2µ/σ)da
≤
µρN
σ2
Z
µρφ(a −T 1/2µ/σ)
(2 −2ρ)φ(a) + ρφ(a −T 1/2µ/σ)φ(a −T 1/2µ/σ)da
=
µ2ρN
σ2
Z
ρφ(a)
(2 −2ρ)φ(a −T 1/2µ/σ) + ρφ(a)φ(a)da.
We hence obtain from (C.36) that, for N suﬃciently large,
 SOPT2 ≤µ2ρN
σ2
Z
a≥C
1
3 −2ρφ(a)da +
Z
a≤C
φ(a)da

≤µ2ρN
σ2

1 −1
2Φ(−C)

.
This proves the “if” part, given (C.33) and that µ2ρN/σ2 does not vanish. Now suppose
T 1/2µσ−1 −√−2 log ρ →∞. Then, for all ﬁxed x > 0, we have, for suﬃciently large N,
sup
a:|a|≤x
φ(a + T 1/2µ/σ)
ρφ(a)
=
exp

−log ρ −T 1/2µσ−1
1
2T 1/2µσ−1 −x

≤
exp

−log ρ −1
2
p
−2 log ρ + c−1
N
 p
−2 log ρ + c−1
N

≤
exp
 −c−2
N /2

→0,
(C.37)
12

sup
a:|a|≤x
φ(a + 2T 1/2µ/σ)
φ(a)
=
exp

−2T 1/2µσ−1(T 1/2µσ−1 −x)

→0.
(C.38)
Given (C.34), it holds that
ψ
 a + T 1/2µ/σ

= µ
1 −φ(a+2T 1/2µ/σ)
φ(a)
1 + (2−2ρ)φ(a+T 1/2µ/σ)
ρφ(a)
+ φ(a+2T 1/2µ/σ)
φ(a)
.
Substituting (C.38) into the numerator, and (C.37) and (C.38) into the denominator, we
obtain that, for all ﬁxed x > 0,
sup
a:|a|≤x
µ−1ψ
 a + T 1/2µ/σ

−1
 →0.
(C.39)
Since the integrand of (C.35) is always positive and even in a, it holds that, for all ﬁxed
x > 0,
 SOPT2
≥
µρN
σ2
Z
|a−T 1/2µ/σ|≤x
ψ(a)(φ(a −T 1/2µ/σ) −φ(a + T 1/2µ/σ))da
≥
µρN
σ2
Z
|a−T 1/2µ/σ|≤x
ψ(a)φ(a −T 1/2µ/σ)(1 −cN)da
≥
µρN
σ2
Z
|a−T 1/2µ/σ|≤x
µφ(a −T 1/2µ/σ)(1 −cN)da
≥
µ2ρN
σ2
(1 −cN −2Φ(−x)).
Here the second inequality comes from (C.38), the third inequality is a result of (C.39),
and the last inequality is obvious. Because this result holds for all ﬁxed x > 0, the “only
if” part is proved.
C.4
Proof of Theorem 3
Given the length of the proof, a brieﬂy explanation is warranted to clarify the key ideas
and structure.
The whole proof is organized into 5 steps. Steps 1 - 4 demonstrate that the distance
between the conditional expectation vector ψ := Σ−1/2
u
E(α|G) = (ψ(ˇs1), . . . , ψ(ˇsN))⊺,
and the estimate ˘ψ := (˘ψ(bs1), . . . , ˘ψ(bsN))⊺, measured by L2 norm, is small compared
to SOPT. Based on the result, step 5 shows the gap between monotonicity-preserving
estimate bψ and ψ in L2 norm is also small compared to SOPT. This leads to that the
utility and Sharpe ratio generated by bwOPT = κ−1Mβ bΣ−1/2
u
bψ converges to, respectively,
(2κ)−1 SOPT2 and SOPT, proved in the last step.
We note that, because of the rare and weak nature of alphas, E(αi|G) converges to zero
in probability for each individual i, despite their large collective contribution to Sharpe
13

ratio. Therefore, we need instead the L2 norm of errors involved in bψ to converge to zero.
Step 1. Throughout the proof, we use the following notation, introduced in the main
text of the paper,
ˇsi = T −1 X
s∈T
(si + εi,s),
bsi = bαi/bσi,
p(a) = E(φ1/T(a −si)),
ψ(a) = E(si|ˇsi = a).
(C.40)
As in that statement, p(a) is the density of ˇsi, and ψ(a) is the expectation of si, conditional
on ˇsi = a.
Intuitively, for assets with large ˇsi, ˇsi is a relatively precisely estimate the true si.
In contrast, for assets with small ˇsi, more likely ˇsi is driven by noise. As a result, we
introduce B = {i ≤N : |ˇsi| ≤ekNT −1/2} to separate the two cases, where ekN = k−2
N .
Moreover, we set ˘ψ and ψ as the N-dimensional vectors with entries ˘ψi := ˘ψ(bsi) and
ψi := ψ(ˇsi). It holds that
∥˘ψ −ψ∥2 ≤
X
i∈B
(˘ψi −ψi)2 +
X
i∈Bc
(˘ψi −ψi)2.
(C.41)
The majority of the proof (steps 2 - 4) is to establish that bψ constructed by us estimates
conditional expectation vector ψ suﬃciently precisely in the following sense:
∥˘ψ −ψ∥2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2).
(C.42)
The last two steps prove optimality of our portfolio strategy based on the above result.
We end this step by noting that Corollary 1 states
∥ψ∥= S(G) = SOPT + oP(1).
(C.43)
Step 2. This step control the magnitude of P
i∈B(˘ψi −ψi)2 of (C.41). It does so by
showing
X
i∈Bc
(ψi −ˇsi)2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2)
and
X
i∈Bc
(˘ψi −ˇsi)2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2).
(C.44)
Since ψi := ψ(ˇsi), to bound P
i∈Bc(ψi −ˇsi)2, we show that |ψ(a) −a| is small. On the
other hand, Tweedie’s formula reads
ψ(a) −a = T −1p′(a)
p(a) .
(C.45)
Moreover, we have, for all positive sequence bN and all a,
14

|p′(a)|
≤
T
Z
|x −a|φ1/T(a −x)ps(x)dx
≤
bNT
Z
|x−a|≤bN
φ1/T(a −x)ps(x)dx +
sup
x:|x−a|>bN
T|x −a|φ1/T(a −x)
≤
bNTp(a) +
sup
y:|y|>bN
T 3/2|y| exp(−Ty2/2).
(C.46)
The second inequality comes from the ps(x), as a density, integrates to one.
Then,
choosing bN that satisﬁes bN ≳T −1/2(log N)d with d > 1/2 and bN = o(T −1/2ekN), which
is always possible, we obtain, for all a,
|p′(a)| ≤cNT 1/2ekNp(a) + cNTN −2.
(C.47)
It hence holds that
max
i
|p′(ˇsi)|
p(ˇsi) ≲P sup
a
|p′(a)|
p(a) 1{p(a)≥T 1/2N−3/2} ≤cNT 1/2ekN.
(C.48)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from (D.13) of Lemma D3. The second directly follows from
(C.47). Combining (C.48) and (C.45), we obtain
P((ˇsi −ψ(ˇsi))2 ≤cNT −1ek2
N, ∀i ≤N) ≥1 −cN.
(C.49)
As a result,
X
i∈Bc
(ˇsi −ψ(ˇsi))2 ≲P cNT −1ek2
N|Bc| ≤cN
X
i∈Bc
ˇs2
i ≲P cN
X
i∈Bc
ψ(ˇsi)2.
(C.50)
Here the ﬁrst inequality is simply (C.49), the second holds since ˇs2
i ≥T −1ek2
N for all i ∈Bc
by deﬁnition, and the last inequality is a direct implication of the ﬁrst two. Given (C.50),
we obtain the ﬁrst part of (C.44) by noting P
i∈Bc ψ(ˇsi)2 ≲P (SOPT)2 + 1 due to (C.43).
Now we establish the second part of (C.44). By construction we have
˘ψ(a) −a = 1 + k2
N
T
bp′(a)
bp(a) ,
with
bp(a) =
1
NkN
X
i
φ1/T
bsi −a
kN

.
(C.51)
Similar to (C.46), we have, for all positive sequence bN and all a,
|bp′(a)|
≤
T
Nk2
N
X
i
|bsi −a|
kN
φ1/T
bsi −a
kN

≤
T
Nk2
N
X
i:|bsi−a|/kN≤bN
|bsi −a|
kN
φ1/T
bsi −a
kN

+ T
k2
N
sup
i:|bsi−a|/kN>bN
|bsi −a|
kN
φ1/T
bsi −a
kN

≤
TbN
kN
bp(a) + T
k2
N
sup
y:|y|>bN
|y| exp(−Ty2/2).
15

Choosing bN that satisﬁes bN ≳T −1/2(log N)d with d > 1/2 and bN = o(T −1/2ekNkN),
which is always possible, we obtain, for all a,
|bp′(a)| ≤cNT 1/2ekN bp(a) + cNT 1/2N −2.
(C.52)
Therefore, it holds that
max
i
|bp′(bsi)|
bp(bsi) ≤cNT 1/2ekN,
(C.53)
which comes from (C.52) and that bp(bsi) ≥
1
NkN φ1/T(0) ≳
√
T
NkN for all i. As a result, we
obtain the second part of (C.44):
X
i∈Bc
(˘ψi −ˇsi)2 ≤cNT −1|Bc|ek2
N + |Bc| max
i≤N |bsi −ˇsi|2 ≤cNT −1|Bc|ek2
N ≲P cN(SOPT)2 + cN.
Here the ﬁrst inequality is simply substituting (C.53) into (C.51), the second inequality
comes from maxi≤N |bsi −ˇsi| ≤cNT −1/2ekN by Lemma D2, the last inequality holds by
(C.43) and (the last two inequalities of) (C.50).
Step 3. To analyze P
i∈B(bψi −ψi)2 of (C.41), we introduce an auxiliary function:
¯ψ(a) =
R
xφv2/T(a −x)ps(x)dx
R
φv2/T(a −x)ps(x)dx ,
with
v :=
q
1 + k2
N.
(C.54)
¯ψ(a) is essentially the expectation of si, conditional on ˇs′
i = a, where ˇs′
i ≂N(si, v2), i.e.,
ˇs′
i has slightly more noisy than ˇsi. The goal is to establish
X
i∈B
(ψi −¯ψ(ˇsi))2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2)
and
X
i∈B
(˘ψi −¯ψ(ˇsi))2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2). (C.55)
Then the triangle inequality would give us the desired bound on P
i∈B(˘ψi −ψi)2. The
current step proves the ﬁrst part, whereas the next step will be devoted to show the
second part.
We use ¯p(a) and ¯π(a) to denote the denominator and numerator of ¯ψ(a) as in (C.54),
and use π(a) to denote
R
xφ1/T(a −x)ps(x)dx so that ψ(a) = π(a)/p(a). The goal is
to show that ¯p(a) and ¯π(a) are, respectively, close to p(a) and π(a). We ﬁrst note that
φv2(y) and φ(y) are close in that, for all y,
|φv2(y) −φ(y)|
≤
sup
y:|y|≤k−1
N
|φv2(y) −φ(y)| +
sup
y:|y|>k−1
N
|φv2(y) + φ(y)|
≤
cNk−1
N φ(y)
sup
y:|y|≤k−1
N
|y/v −y| + cNN −2 ≤cNφ(y) + cNN −2.(C.56)
Here we use (D.17) of Lemma D4 (choose j = 0) and that |v−1 −1| ≂k2
N. We note
16

φ1/T(y) =
√
Tφ
√
Ty

(and symmetrically for φv2/T(y)). Hence, using (C.56), we directly obtain that, for all a,
|¯p(a) −p(a)|
≤
Z
|φv2/T(a −x) −φ1/T(a −x)|ps(x)dx
≤
cN
Z
φ1/T(a −x)ps(x)dx + cN
√
TN −2 = cNp(a) + cN
√
TN −2.
(C.57)
Now we bound the diﬀerence |π(a) −¯π(a)|. Because ps(x) is a even function, we note
that, for all a ≥0,
π(a) =
Z ∞
0
x¯φ(|a|, x)ps(x)dx,
and
¯π(a) =
Z ∞
0
x¯φ(a/v, x/v)ps(x)dx,
(C.58)
where
¯φ(a, x) := φ1/T(a −x) −φ1/T(a + x) = φ1/T(a −x)(1 −e−2Txa).
Since |(1−e−y)−(1−e−y/v2)| ≤cN(1−ey) for all y ≥0, it follows from (C.56) and direct
calculations that, for all a ≥0 and x ≥0,
|¯φ(a/v, x/v) −¯φ(a, x)| ≤cN ¯φ(a, x) + cN
√
TN −2.
(C.59)
Substituting (C.59) into (C.58), we obtain, for all a ≥0,
|¯π(a) −π(a)| ≤cN|π(a)| + cN
√
TN −2
Z ∞
0
xps(s)dx ≤|π(a)| + cN
√
TN −2.
(C.60)
Here the last inequality holds by E(|s|) ≤
p
E(s2) ≤cN due to condition (a) of Assumption 2. Because π(a) and ¯π(a) are both odd functions in a due to that ps(x) is a even
function of x, (C.60) apparently holds for all a.
To establish from (C.57) and (C.60) that ¯ψ(a) and ψ(a) are close, we set A := {a :
|a| ≤ekNT −1/2, p(a) ≥
√
TN −3/2}. Then we obtain that, for all a ∈A,
|¯ψ(a) −ψ(a)|
=

¯π(a)
¯p(a) −π(a)
¯p(a)
 +

π(a)
¯p(a) −π(a)
p(a)

≤
(1 + cN)|¯π(a) −π(a)|
p(a)
+ cN
|π(a)|
p(a) ≤cN
N −2
p(a) + cNψ(a). (C.61)
Here the ﬁrst equality is obvious, the ﬁrst inequality comes from the lower bound of p(a)
(by the deﬁnition of A) and (C.57), the second inequality is a result of (C.60). From
(C.61), it follows that, for all a satisfying a ∈A,
|¯ψ(a) −ψ(a)|2 ≤cN
N −2
p(a) + cNψ(a)2.
(C.62)
17

where we use Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and the lower bound of p(a). Therefore, we
arrive at
N
Z
A
|¯ψ(a) −ψ(a)|2p(a)da ≤cN + cNN
Z ∞
−∞
ψ(a)2p(a)da ≤cN + cN(SOPT)2,
(C.63)
which comes from (C.62) and that
R
A da ≤2ekN. Therefore, using Chebyshev’s inequality
and comparing the deﬁnitions of sets A and B, we obtain
X
i∈B
(ψi −¯ψ(ˇsi))21{p(ˇsi)≥
√
TN−3/2}
≲P
E
X
i∈B
(ψi −¯ψ(ˇsi))21{p(ˇsi)≥
√
TN−3/2}
=
N
Z
A
|¯ψ(a) −ψ(a)|2p(a)da ≤cN + cN(SOPT)2,
where the last inequality holds by (C.63). Given (D.13) of Lemma D3, we obtain the ﬁrst
part of (C.55).
Step 4. This step proves the second part of (C.55), i.e., we bound P
i∈B(˘ψi −¯ψ(ˇsi))2.
We introduce ep(a) and eψ(a) that mimick bp(a) and bψ(a) by replacing the data input ˇsi
with bsi:
ep(a) =
1
NkN
X
i
φ1/T
ˇsi −a
kN

,
and
eψ(a) = a + v2
T
ep′(a)
ep(a) .
(C.64)
Then we can decompose the quantity of interest:
X
i∈B
(˘ψi −¯ψ(ˇsi))2 ≤
X
i∈B
(eψ(ˇsi) −¯ψ(ˇsi))2 +
X
i∈B
(˘ψi(bsi) −eψ(ˇsi))2.
(C.65)
We ﬁrst show that P
i∈B(eψ(ˇsi)−¯ψ(ˇsi))2 is small. Since we have ep(ˇsi) ≥
1
NkN φ1/T(0) ≳
√
T
NkN
for all i, symmetric to the derivation of (C.53), we have
max
i
ep′(ˇsi)
ep(ˇsi) ≤cNT 1/2ekN.
(C.66)
On the other hand, symmetric to the derivation of (C.48), we obtain
max
i
¯p′(ˇsi)
¯p(ˇsi) ≲P max
i
¯p′(a)
¯p(a) 1{p(a)≥N−3/2} ≲cNT 1/2ekN.
(C.67)
where for the second inequality we note ¯p(a) ≳p(a) for all a due to 1 ≤v ≲1. Substituting (C.66) and (C.67) into the deﬁnitions of eψ(a) and ¯ψ(a) ((C.64) and (C.54)), we
obtain
max
i
|eψ(ˇsi) −¯ψ(ˇsi)| ≲P cNekNT −1/2.
(C.68)
According to Lemma 3 of Brown and Greenshtein (2009), with the additional condition
18

that maxi≤N
√
T|si| = o(N d′) for every d′ > 0, we have (in our notation) that, for every
d > 0,
E
 X
i
T(eψ(ˇsi) −¯ψ(ˇsi))2
!
≲N d.
A scrutiny of their proof of the lemma reveals that this additional condition is only
indispensable (a) to derive three equalities: (48), (59), and (62) (the way it is used is
similar across the three), and (b) to guarantee that maxi≤N
√
T ¯ψ(ˇsi) = o(N d) for every
d > 0.
In the absence of this additional condition, a weaker result holds: for every
d > d′ > 0,
E
 X
i
min{T(eψ(ˇsi) −¯ψ(ˇsi))2, N d′}1{
√
T|ˇsi|≤Nd′,p(ˇsi)≥
√
TNd′−1}
!
≲N d.
(C.69)
(C.69) turns out suﬃcient for establishing a desired bound on P
i∈B(eψ(ˇsi)−¯ψ(ˇsi))2, which
we demonstrate now. Then we have, for every d > d′ > 0,
X
i∈B
T(eψ(ˇsi) −¯ψ(ˇsi))2 ≲P
X
i∈B
min{T(eψ(ˇsi) −¯ψ(ˇsi))2, N d′}
≲P
N d +
X
i∈B
min{T(eψ(ˇsi) −¯ψ(ˇsi))2, N d′}1{p(ezi)≥
√
TNd′−1} ≲N d.
(C.70)
Here the ﬁrst inequality comes from (C.68), the second inequality comes from that
E
P
i∈B 1{p(ˇsi)<
√
TNd′−1}

≲ekNN d′ (by the deﬁnition of set B), and the last is simply
(C.69).
Next, we show that P
i∈B(eψ(ˇsi) −¯ψ(ˇsi))2 is small. Lemma D2 states that
max
i∈B |bsi −ˇsi| ≲P χN := N −1/2(ϵN + E(s2
j)1/2),
with
ϵN := k5
N.
(C.71)
Since ˘ψ(bsi) and eψ(ˇsi) depends on {bsj} and {ˇsj} in the exactly same way, we can obtain the
desired result by exploiting that such dependence is suﬃciently “continuous”. Concretely,
we write, uniformly over i ∈B,
|bp(bsi) −ep(ˇsi)|
≤
1
NkN
X
j
φ1/T
bsj −bsi
kN

−φ1/T
ˇsj −ˇsi
kN
 ≲P
√
TχNk−2
N ep(ˇsi) +
√
TN −2k−1
N , (C.72)
|bp′(bsi) −ep′(ˇsi)|
≤
T
Nk3
N
X
j
(bsj −bsi)φ1/T
bsj −bsi
kN

−(ˇsj −ˇsi)φ1/T
ˇsj −ˇsi
kN

≲P
TχNk−4
N ep(ezi) + TN −2k−1
N .
(C.73)
19

Here the ﬁrst inequalities for both results hold by deﬁnition (note φ1/T(a) =
√
Tφ(
√
Ta)
and φ′(a) = −aφ(a)). The second inequalities for both results comes from substituting
(C.71) into (D.17) of Lemma D4. Since ep(ˇsi) ≥
1
NkN φ1/T(0) ≳
√
T
NkN by deﬁnition, we
obtain from (C.72) and (C.73) that
max
i∈B
|bp(bsi) −ep(ˇsi)|
ep(ˇsi)
≲P
√
TχNk−2
N + N −1 ≲
√
TχNk−2
N ,
(C.74)
max
i∈B
|bp′(bsi) −ep′(ˇsi)|
ep(ˇsi)
≲P
TχNk−4
N +
√
TN −1 ≲TχNk−4
N .
(C.75)
Then we have
max
i∈B

bp′(bsi)
bp(bsi) −ep′(ˇsi)
ep(ˇsi)

≤
max
i∈B
ep(ˇsi)
bp(bsi)
|bp′(bsi) −ep′(ˇsi)|
ep(ˇsi)
+ max
i∈B
ep(ˇsi)
bp(bsi)
ep′(ˇsi)
ep(ˇsi)
|bp(bsi) −ep(ˇsi)|
ep(ˇsi)
≲P TχNk−4
N .(C.76)
The ﬁrst inequality is direct algebra. Substituting (C.66), (C.74), and (C.75) into the
right-hand-side of the ﬁrst inequality, we obtain the second inequality. Combining (C.71)
and (C.76) with the deﬁnitions of bψ and eψ ((C.51) and (C.64)), we obtain
X
i∈B
(˘ψ(bsi) −eψ(ˇsi))2 ≤N max
i∈B |bsi −ˇsi|2 + N
T 2 max
i∈B

bp′(bsi)
bp(bsi) −ep′(ˇsi)
ep(ˇsi)

2
≲P k−8
N (ϵ2
N + E(s2
j)).
(C.77)
The goal is to show P
i∈B(˘ψ(bsi) −eψ(ˇsi))2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2), which is apparently true
from (C.77) if E(s2
j) ≤ϵ2
N. For the case E(s2
j) > ϵ2
N, we observe
E(s2
j) = E(s2
j1{ϵN/2<|si|≤1})+E(s2
j1{|si|≤ϵN/2})+E(s2
j1{|si|>1}) ≤P(|si| > ϵN/2)+ϵ2
N/4+cNN −1,
where the last step comes from condition (a) of Assumption 2. We hence obtain P(|si| >
ϵN/2) ≳ϵ2
N, which futher indicates P
i 1{|si|≥ϵN/2} ≳P Nϵ2
N (the sum follows binomial
distribution with its standard deviation dominated by its mean). As a result, we write
Nϵ4
N ≲P
X
i
ϵ2
N1{|si|≥ϵN/2} ≲P
X
i
ˇs2
i 1{|ˇsi|≥ϵN/4} ≲
X
i∈Bc
ˇs2
i ≲P 1 + (SOPT)2.
(C.78)
Here the second inequality comes from ˇsi −si = ¯εi and maxi |¯εi| ≲
p
(log N)/T by the
uniform bound on i.i.d normal variables. The thrid inequality holds by the deﬁnition
of B, and the last inequality can be established from holds by (C.43) and (the last
two inequalities of) (C.50). Since E(s2
j) ≤1 + E(s2
j1{|si|>1}) ≲1 by condition (a) of
Assumption 2, it follows from (C.78) that k−8
N E(s2
j) = oP(1 + (SOPT)2). Given (C.77),
we prove P
i∈B(˘ψ(bsi) −eψ(ˇsi))2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2). Substituting this result and (C.70)
into (C.65), we obtain P
i∈B(˘ψ(bsi) −eψ(ˇsi))2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2), i.e., the second part of
20

(C.55). Substituting (C.44) and (C.55) into (C.41), we ﬁnally establish (C.42).
Step 5. The goal of this step is to establish
∥bψ −ψ∥= oP(1 + SOPT).
(C.79)
We start by deﬁning
lj = arg min
i≤N |ˇsi −bsj|.
(C.80)
Suppose ˇsli > ˇslj and bsi ≤bsj for some (i, j). According to (C.80), we have |ˇsli −bsi| ≤
|ˇslj −bsi| and |ˇslj −bsj| ≤|ˇsli −bsj|. The former would lead to ˇsli + ˇslj < 2bsi, and the
latter would lead to ˇsli + ˇslj > 2bsj. They together contradict bsi ≤bsj. Hence we have
ˇsli ≤ˇslj if bsi ≤bsj for all (i, j). Since ψ(a) is increasing in a (see, e.g., Efron (2011)),
letting ψ∗
i = ψ(ˇsli), we have ψ∗
i ≤ψ∗
j if bsi ≤bsj for all (i, j). As a result, we have
∥bψ −˘ψ∥≤∥ψ∗−˘ψ∥≤∥ψ∗−ψ∥+ oP(1 + SOPT).
(C.81)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from the deﬁnition of bψ and that ψ∗
i ≤ψ∗
j if bsi ≤bsj for all
(i, j) established above. The second inequality comes from (C.42) proved in steps 2 - 4.
Given (C.42) and (C.81), to obtain (C.79) we only need to bound ∥ψ∗−ψ∥. For this
purpose, we note that (C.80) leads to |ˇsli −bsi| ≤|ˇsi −bsi| for all i. Applying Lemma D2,
we obtain
max
1≤i≤N |ˇsli −ˇsi| ≲P cNekNT −1/2,
max
i∈B |ˇsli −ˇsi| ≲P χN,
(C.82)
where χN = N −1/2(ϵN + E(s2
j)1/2) with ϵN := k5
N. Similar to (C.50), we have
X
i∈Bc
((ˇsli −ψ(ˇsli))2 + (ˇsli −ˇsi)2) ≲P cNT −1ek2
N|Bc| ≤cN
X
i∈Bc
ψ(ˇsi)2 ≲P oP(1 + (SOPT)2).
(C.83)
Here the ﬁrst inequality comes from (C.49) and the ﬁrst part of (C.82). The second
inequality is already shown in (C.50). The last inequality is established right below (C.50).
Combining (C.83) and the ﬁrst part of (C.44), and applying the triangle inequality, we
obtain
X
i∈Bc
(ψ(ˇsli) −ψ(ˇsi))2 = oP(1 + (SOPT)2).
(C.84)
Next, it holds that, uniformly over i ∈B,
|p(ˇsli) −p(ˇsi)|
≤
Z
|φ1/T(ˇsli −x) −φ1/T(ˇsi −x)|ps(x)ds
≲
(T log N)1/2|ˇsli −ˇsi|p(ˇsi) + cN
√
TN −2
≲P
(T log N)1/2χNp(ˇsi) + cN
√
TN −2.
(C.85)
21

|p(ˇsli)′ −p(ˇsi)′|
≤
T
Z
|(ˇsli −x)φ1/T(ˇsli −x) −(ˇsi −x)φ1/T(ˇsi −x)|ps(x)ds
≲
(T log N)|ˇsli −ˇsi|p(ˇsi) + cNTN −2
≲P
(T log N)χNp(ˇsi) + cNTN −2.
(C.86)
For both (C.85) and (C.86), the ﬁrst inequalities holds by deﬁnition of p(a), the second
inequalities come from (D.17) of Lemma D4 (choose j = 0 and j = 1 respectively), and
the last inequalities come from the second part of (C.82). Then we have, uniformly over
i for which ˇsi ∈A (A is deﬁned above (C.61)),
|ψ(ˇsli) −ψ(ˇsi)|
≤
|ˇsli −ˇsi| + 1
T
|p(ˇsli)′ −p(ˇsi)′|
p(ˇsli)
+ |p(ˇsi)′|
T

1
p(ˇsli) −
1
p(ˇsi)

≲P
χN + χN + χN
√
T
p(ˇsi)′
p(ˇsi) ≲χN

ekN +
√
T|ψ(ˇsi)|

.
(C.87)
The ﬁrst inequality is obvious. The second inequality comes from the second part of
(C.82), (C.85), (C.86), that p(ˇsi) ≥
√
TN −3/2 by the deﬁnition of A, and that 1/
√
NT ≲
χN as T ≳N d for ﬁxed d > 1/2 by assumption. The last inequality comes from (C.45)
and |ˇsi| ≤ekN as ˇsi ∈A. Therefore, we have
X
i∈B
(ψ(ˇsli) −ψ(ˇsi))21{p(ˇsi)≥
√
TN−3/2}
=
X
i:ˇsi∈A
(ψ(ˇsli) −ψ(ˇsi))2 ≲P Nχ2
Nek2
N + Tχ2
N
X
i∈B
ψ(ezi)2
≲P
(ϵ2
N + E(s2
j))ek2
N + oP(1 + (SOPT)2) = oP(1 + (SOPT)2).
(C.88)
The equality is obvious and the ﬁrst inequality comes from (C.87). The second inequality
comes from (C.43) and that Tχ2
N = o(1) due to E(s2
j) = o(1) and T ≲N d′ for ﬁxed d′ < 1.
The last inequality is established in the analysis after (C.77). Combining (C.88), Lemma
D3, and (C.84), we establish ∥ψ∗−ψ∥= oP(1+SOPT). Substituting this into (C.81) and
using (C.42) lead to (C.79).
Step 6. This step combines (C.79) with (C.43) to prove that the utility and Sharpe
ratio of the strategy bwOPT we construct achieves, respectively, (2κ)−1(SOPT)2 and (SOPT)2
asymptotically, which, combined with the two equalities of (C.3) and Corollary 1, proves
the theorem. For convenience, we write bwOPT = κ−1Mβ ˘w, where ˘w := bΣ−1/2
u
bψ.
We ﬁrst show that, under any sequence of probability measures {PN} that satisﬁes
all the conditions described in the statement of the theorem, and for all ﬁxed positive ε,
PN(U( bwOPT) =ε U( ew)) →1,
and
PN(S( bwOPT) =ε S( ew)) →1.
(C.89)
22

The following derivation proceeds under any given sequence of probability measures and
we omit the subscript N. Using condition (a) of Assumption 1 and (D.1) of Lemma D1,
we have maxi≤N |bσi/σi −1| ≲P cN. As a result, we obtain ∥Σ1/2 ˘w −bψ∥≲P cN∥bψ∥. Then,
it follows from (C.79) and (C.43) that
∥Σ1/2
u
˘w −ψ∥≤∥Σ1/2 ˘w −bψ∥+ ∥bψ −ψ∥≲P cN∥ψ∥+ ∥bψ −ψ∥= oP(1 + SOPT). (C.90)
Hence we have
|( ˘w⊺Σ1/2
u
−ψ⊺)ψ|
≤
∥Σ1/2
u
˘w −ψ∥∥ψ∥= oP(1 + (SOPT)2),
(C.91)
| ˘w⊺Σu ˘w −ψ⊺ψ|
≤
∥Σ1/2
u
˘w −ψ∥2 + 2∥Σ1/2
u
˘w −ψ∥∥ψ∥= oP(1 + (SOPT)2).(C.92)
Here for both (C.91) and (C.92), the ﬁrst inequalities come from Cauchy-Schwarz, whereas
the last equalities come from (C.90) and (C.43). Further, substituting (C.43) into (C.91)
and (C.92), we obtain
˘w⊺Σ1/2
u ψ = (SOPT)2 + oP(1 + (SOPT)2),
˘w⊺Σu ˘w = (SOPT)2 + oP(1 + (SOPT)2). (C.93)
Next, we note that
∥Pβ ˘w∥
≤
∥PβΣ−1/2
u
ψ∥+ ∥Pβ( ˘w −Σ−1/2
u
ψ)∥
=
∥PβΣ−1
u eα∥+ ( ˘w −Σ−1/2
u
ψ)⊺Pβ( ˘w −Σ−1/2
u
ψ)
≤
∥PβΣ−1
u eα∥+ ∥˘w −Σ−1/2
u
ψ∥= oP(1 + SOPT).
(C.94)
To obtain the last equality, we note that the ﬁrst term can be bounded using (C.18) as
ˇw′ := 1
κPβΣ−1
u eα and that the second term can be bounded using (C.90) and 1 ≲P λmin(Σu).
As a result, we obtain
˘w⊺MβΣuMβ ˘w = ˘w⊺Σu ˘w+ ˘w⊺PβΣuPβ ˘w−2 ˘w⊺ΣuPβ ˘w = ˘w⊺Σu ˘w+oP(1+(SOPT)2). (C.95)
For the last equality, we use (C.92), (C.94), and λmax(Σu) ≲P 1 by condition (a) of
Assumption 1. Similarly, we write
˘w⊺Mβeα = ˘w⊺eα −˘w⊺Pβeα = ˘w⊺eα + oP(1 + (SOPT)2),
(C.96)
where for the last equality, we use (C.94) and ∥eα∥2 ≲P eαΣ−1
u eα = (SOPT)2.
Now we obtain the ﬁrst part of (C.89):
U( bwOPT)
=
1
κ ˘w⊺Mβα −1
2κ ˘w⊺MβΣuMβ ˘w = 1
κ ˘w⊺eα −1
2κ ˘w⊺Σu ˘w + oP(1 + (SOPT)2)
23

=
1
2κ(SOPT)2 + oP(1 + (SOPT)2) = U( ew) + oP(1 + U( ew)).
where the ﬁrst equality holds by deﬁnition, the second comes from (C.95) and (C.96),
the third equality comes from (C.93), and for the last one we use (C.3) and Corollary 1.
We can further conclude that, when SOPT does not vanish,
S( bwOPT)
=
( bwOPT)⊺α
p
( bwOPT)⊺Σ bwOPT =
˘w⊺Mβα
p
˘w⊺MβΣMβ ˘w
=
˘w⊺Mβeα
p
˘w⊺MβΣuMβ ˘w + oP(1) =
˘w⊺eα
√˘w⊺Σu ˘w + oP(1 + SOPT)
=
SOPT + oP(1 + SOPT) = S( ew) + oP(1 + S( ew)).
(C.97)
The ﬁrst two equalities hold by deﬁnition. The third one comes (C.9) and that Mβ ˘w
is G-measurable and factor-neutral. The fourth one comes from (C.95), (C.96), and the
second part of (C.93). The ﬁfth equality comes from (C.93) (eα = Σ1/2
u ψ). For the last one
we use (C.3) and Corollary 1. Because bwOPT is G-measurable and β⊺bwOPT = 0, Theorem
1 applies. We hence have S( bwOPT) ≤S( ew) + oP(1 + S( ew)). Because −S( bwOPT) is the
Sharpe ratio generated by −bwOPT, we also have −S( bwOPT) ≤S( ew) + oP(1 + S( ew)). As
a result, when SOPT does vanish, we have S( bwOPT) = oP(1). We also have S( ew) = oP(1)
per Corollary 1. Therefore, given (C.97) and using the subsequence argument (see, e.g.,
Andrews and Cheng (2012)), we have
S( bwOPT) = S( ew) + oP(1 + S( ew)),
which gives us the second part of (C.89).
Now we prove the theorem using (C.89). Suppose the ﬁrst convergence of the theorem
does not hold. Then we have, for some ﬁxed ε > 0,
lim inf
N→0 inf
P∈P P(U(w) =ε U( ew)) < 1.
Hence there is a subsequence {PNk}k≥1 with PNk ∈P for each k ≥1 such that, for some
ﬁxed ε > 0,
lim
k→∞PNk(U(w) =ε U( ew)) < 1.
(C.98)
Since P only collects probability measures under which all the conditions described in the
statement of the theorem hold, (C.98) gives a contradiction to (C.89), which means that
the ﬁrst convergence of the theorem must be true. A symmetric argument establishes the
second convergence and proves the theorem.
24

C.5
Proof of Proposition 1
By deﬁnition we have
(bS⋆)2 = α⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβα + 2α⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u + ¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u −T −1N.
We start with the analysis of α⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβα. From (D.1) of Lemma D1, it follows
∥bΣu −Σu∥MAX ≲P
p
T −1 log N.
(C.99)
As a result, noting P(0 ≤Mβ ≤IN) →1 and P(Σu ≂IN) →1 by the assumption
∥β∥MAX ≲P 1 and λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N, and recalling (S⋆)2 = α⊺Σ−1
u α, we have
|α⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβα −α⊺MβΣ−1
u Mβα| ≲P
p
T −1 log N(S⋆)2.
(C.100)
On the other hand, it holds that
|α⊺MβΣ−1
u Mβα −α⊺Σ−1
u α|
≤
α⊺PβΣ−1
u Pβα + 2
q
(α⊺Σ−1
u α)(α⊺PβΣ−1
u Pβα)
≲P
α⊺Pβα +
q
(α⊺Σ−1
u α)(α⊺Pβα)
≲P
N −1∥α⊺β∥2 +
p
N −1(α⊺Σ−1
u α)∥α⊺β∥2
≲P
E(s2
i ) + S⋆E(s2
i )1/2.
(C.101)
Here the ﬁrst inequality comes from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. The second comes from
P(Σu ≂IN) →1 and P2
β = Pβ. We obtain the third line by using λmin(β⊺β) ≳N.
The last line holds because of Chebyshev’s inequality and that E(∥α⊺β∥2|β, Σu) ≲
N∥β∥2
MAXE(α2
i |Σu) ≤N∥β∥2
MAXλmax(Σu)E(s2
i ) by condition (a) of Assumption 1 and
condition (b) of Assumption 2.
On the other hand, because of the assumption E(s2
i 1{|si|≥cN}) ≤cNN −1, we have
E
α⊺Σ−1
u α −
X
i
s2
i 1{|si|<cN}
 = E

X
i
s2
i 1{|si|≥cN}
 = o(1),
which, by Markov’s inequality, leads to
α⊺Σ−1
u α =
X
i
s2
i 1{|si|<cN} + oP(1).
Moreover, it holds that
Var

X
i
s2
i 1{|si|<cN}
 ≤
X
i
E(s4
i 1{|si|<cN}) ≤c2
N
X
i
E(s2
i 1{|si|<cN}).
25

Using Chebyshev’s inequality, we obtain
(S⋆)2 = α⊺Σ−1
u α ≥
X
i
s2
i 1{|si|<cN} ≳P
X
i
E(s2
i 1{|si|<cN}) ≥NE(s2
i ) + o(1).
Combining this result with (C.101) and (C.100), we have
α⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβα = (S⋆)2 + oP
p
T −1 log N((S⋆)2 + 1)

.
(C.102)
Next, we study α⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u. It holds that
α⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u ≲α⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβα
√
¯u⊺¯u ≲α⊺α
√
¯u⊺¯u = OP(((S⋆)2 + 1)T −1/2).
(C.103)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from Cauchy-Schwarz. The second inequality holds because
P(Mβ ≂IN) →1, M2
β = Mβ, and P(bΣu ≂IN) →1 due to P(Σu ≂IN) →1 and (C.99).
The third inequality holds by P(bΣu ≂IN) →1 as well.
Now we analyze ¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u −T −1N. We write
N = tr(bΣ−1
u bΣu)
=
X
i≤N
(bΣ−1
u )i,i
 
T −1 X
s∈T
(Mβus)2
i −(Mβ¯u)2
i
!
=
T −1 X
s∈T
u⊺
sMβ bΣ−1
u Mβus −¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u
=
T −1 X
s∈T
u⊺
sMβ bΣ−1
u Mβus + OP(N/T).
(C.104)
The last line comes from ¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u ≲P ¯u⊺¯u because of M2
β = Mβ and P(bΣu ≂IN) →
1. Furthermore, I have
¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u −¯u⊺bΣ−1
u ¯u
≤
2|¯u⊺bΣ−1
u Pβ¯u| + ¯u⊺Pβ bΣ−1
u Pβ¯u
≲P
√
¯u⊺¯u
p
¯u⊺Pβ¯u + ¯u⊺Pβ¯u ≲P N 1/2/T.
(C.105)
Here we obtain the second inequality using P(bΣu ≂IN) →1 and the last inequality using
P(Pβ ≲IN) →1. Similarly, it holds that
T −2 X
t∈T
(u⊺
t Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβut −u⊺
t bΣ−1
u ut)
=
T −2 X
t∈T

2
p
u⊺
t ut
q
u⊺
t Pβ bΣ−1
u Pβut + u⊺
t Pβ bΣ−1
u Pβut

≲P
T −2 X
t∈T
p
u⊺
t ut
q
u⊺
t Pβut + u⊺
t Pβut

≲P
N 1/2
T
.
(C.106)
From (C.104), (C.105), and (C.106), it directly follows
26

¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u −T −1N = ¯u⊺bΣ−1
u ¯u −T −2 X
s∈T
u⊺
s bΣ−1
u us + OP(N 1/2/T + N/T 2).
(C.107)
On the other hand, we have
bΣ−1
u
= −Σ−2
u (bΣu −2Σu) + Σ−2
u bΣ−1
u (bΣu −Σu)2.
It then follows from (C.99) and P(Σu ≂IN) →1 that
¯u⊺bΣ−1
u ¯u
=
−¯u⊺Σ−2
u (bΣu −2Σu)¯u + OP(T −1(log N)¯u⊺¯u)
=
−¯u⊺Σ−2
u (bΣu −2Σu)¯u + OP(T −2N log N).
(C.108)
Similarly, we have
T −2 X
t∈T
u⊺
t bΣ−1
u ut = −T −2 X
t∈T
u⊺
t Σ−2
u (bΣu −2Σu)ut + OP(T −2N log N).
(C.109)
Substituting (C.108) and (C.109) into (C.107), we have
¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u −T −1N
=
−¯u⊺Σ−2
u (bΣu −2Σu)¯u + T −2 X
t∈T
u⊺
t Σ−2
u (bΣu −2Σu)ut
+OP(T −1N 1/2 + T −2N log N).
(C.110)
Now we analyze bΣu. We write
(bΣu)i,i
=
(T −1uu⊺)i,i + (Mβ¯u¯u⊺Mβ)i,i
+(PβT −1uu⊺)i,i + (T −1uu⊺Pβ)i,i + (PβT −1uu⊺Pβ)i,i.
(C.111)
From the uniform bound on i.i.d. random variables and ∥Pβ∥MAX ≲N −1 by the assumption ∥β∥MAX ≲P 1 and λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N, it follows
∥Mβ¯u¯u⊺Mβ∥MAX ≲P ∥¯u¯u⊺∥MAX = ∥¯u∥2
MAX ≲T −1 log N.
Using P(Σu ≂IN) →1, this gives
X
i≤N
|¯u2
i (Σ−2
u )i,i(Mβ¯u¯u⊺Mβ)i,i| ≲P T −1(log N)
X
i≤N
¯u2
i ≲P T −2N log N,
(C.112)
and
T −2 X
t∈T
X
i≤N
|u2
i,t(Σ−2
u )i,i(Mβ¯u¯u⊺Mβ)i,i| ≲P T −3(log N)
X
t∈T
X
i≤N
u2
i,t ≲P T −2N log N.
(C.113)
27

Further, we obtain
X
i≤N,j≤K
E(|(T −1uu⊺β)i,j||β, Σu)
≤
X
i≤N,j≤K
q
E((T −1uu⊺)i,i|Σu)E((T −1β⊺uu⊺β)j,j|β, Σu)
=
X
i≤N,j≤K
q
(Σu)i,i(β⊺Σuβ)j,j ≤N 3/2K∥β∥MAXλmax(Σu) ≲P N 3/2.
(C.114)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from Cauchy-Schwarz. The last inequality directly follows
from condition (a) of Assumption 1. Similarly,
X
j≤K,k≤K
E(|(T −1βuu⊺β)j,k||β, Σu)
≤
X
j≤K,k≤K
q
E((T −1β⊺uu⊺β)j,j|β, Σu)E((T −1β⊺uu⊺β)j,j|β, Σu)
=
X
j≤K,k≤K
q
(β⊺Σuβ)j,j(β⊺Σuβ)k,k ≤KN∥β∥MAXλmax(Σu) ≲P N.
(C.115)
From (C.114) and (C.115), it directly follows
X
i≤N,j≤K
|(T −1uu⊺β)i,j| ≲P N 3/2,
X
j≤K,k≤K
|(T −1βuu⊺β)j,k| ≲P N.
(C.116)
Using (C.116), and noting maxi≤N |¯ui| ≲P
p
T −1 log N from the uniform bound on i.i.d.
random variables and ∥(β⊺β)−1β∥MAX ≲N −1 by assumption, we obtain
X
i≤N
|¯u2
i (T −1uu⊺Pβ)i,i|
≤
X
i≤N,j≤K
|¯u2
i (T −1uu⊺β)i,j|∥(β⊺β)−1β∥MAX
≲P
N −1T −1 log N
X
i≤N,j≤K
|(T −1uu⊺β)i,j| ≲P N 1/2T −1 log N,
(C.117)
and
X
i≤N
|¯u2
i (Pβ(T −1uu⊺)Pβ)i,i|
≤
X
i≤N,j≤K,k≤K
¯u2
i |(T −1βuu⊺β)j,k|∥(β⊺β)−1β∥2
MAX
≲P
N −1T −1 log N
X
j≤K,k≤K
|(T −1βuu⊺β)j,k| ≲P T −1 log N.
(C.118)
28

Symmetric reasoning leads to
1
T 2
X
s∈T
X
i≤N
|u2
i,s(T −1uu⊺Pβ)i,i|
≲P
N 1/2T −1,
(C.119)
1
T 2
X
s∈T
X
i≤N
|u2
i,s(Pβ(T −1uu⊺)Pβ)i,i|
≲P
T −1.
(C.120)
Substituting (C.112), (C.113), (C.117), (C.119), (C.118), and (C.120) into (C.110) and
(C.111), we obtain
¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u −T −1N = −T −2 X
i:i≤N
Ai + OP(T −1N 1/2 log N + T −2N log N).
(C.121)
Here and only here we use short-hand notation
Ai =
X
t∈T
X
t′∈T:t′̸=t
(Σ−2
u )i,i(T −1uu⊺−2Σu)i,iui,tui,t′.
Since Ai is i.i.d. across i, we only need to analyze it for a single i. It obviously holds
that E(Ai|Σu) = 0. We also note E(((T −1uu⊺−2Σu)i,i)2ui,tui,t′ui,sui,s′|Σu) = 0 unless
two elements of {t, t′, s, s′} are the same, and E(((T −1uu⊺−2Σu)i,i)2ui,tui,t′ui,sui,s′|Σu) ≲
T −2E(u8
i,t|Σu) unless elements of {t, t′, s, s′} only take two diﬀerent values.
Then we
obtain
E(A2
i |Σu) ≲T 2(Σ−4
u )i,iE(u8
i,t|Σu).
It hence follows that
T −2 X
i:i≤N
Ai ≲P T −1N 1/2E(u8
i,t(Σ−4
u )i,i) ≲T −1N 1/2,
(C.122)
where the last inequality comes from that εi,t has ﬁnite eighth moment by condition (a)
of Assumption 2. Subsituting (C.122) into (C.121), we obtain
¯u⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯u −T −1N = OP(T −1N 1/2 log N + T −2N log N).
(C.123)
Combining (C.102), (C.103), and (C.123), and noting N 1/2T ≤cN and T ≲N by
assumption, we obtain
(bS⋆)2
=
(S⋆)2 + oP

T −1/2p
log N((S⋆)2 + 1) + T −1N 1/2 log N

=
(S⋆)2 + oP(T −1N 1/2 log N((S⋆)2 + 1)).
Therefore, we obtain, under S⋆≥C,
29

(bS⋆)2 = (S⋆)2(1 + oP(T −1N 1/2 log N))
=⇒
bS⋆−S⋆
S⋆
= oP(T −1N 1/2 log N).
And, under S∗≤cN, we have
(bS⋆)2 = (S⋆)2 + oP(T −1N 1/2 log N)
=⇒
bS⋆−S⋆= oP
p
T −1N 1/2 log N

.
We note by construction (eS⋆)2 = (bS⋆)2 + N/T. Then, under S⋆≥C, it holds that
(bS⋆)2 = (S⋆)2+N
T +(S⋆)2oP
√
N log N
T

=⇒
bS⋆−
p
(S⋆)2 + N/T
S⋆
= oP
√
N log N
T

.
Similarly, under S∗≤cN, we have
(bS⋆)2 = (S⋆)2 + N
T +oP
√
N log N
T

=⇒
bS⋆−
p
(S⋆)2 + N/T = oP
√
N log N
T

.
The proof concludes.
C.6
Proof of Proposition B1
We note that all the assumptions in Theorem 1, other than the factor-neutrality, are assumed here as well. Therefore, equation (C.8) in the proof of Theorem 1 stays valid, since
factor-neutrality is used only after the derivation of (C.8). Applying Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to (C.8), we obtain
|S(w)| ≤
p
E(rt+1|G)⊺Σ−1E(rt+1|G) + oP(1).
(C.124)
On the other hand, it implies by Woodbury matrix identity and from the fact that
Σ = βΣvβ⊺+ Σu,
Σ−1 = Σ−1
u −Σ−1
u β(Σ−1
v
+ β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1β⊺Σ−1
u .
(C.125)
By direct calculations, we have
β⊺Σ−1β = ((β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1 + Σv)−1.
Let H1 = (β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1 and H2 = Σv, and using the fact that (H1 + H2)−1 −H−1
2
=
−(H1 + H2)−1H1H−1
2 , we have
β⊺Σ−1β −Σ−1
v
= −((β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1 + Σv)−1(β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1Σ−1
v .
Therefore, using the fact that λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N and that λmax(Σu) ≲P 1 by assumption,
we have
30

λmax((β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1) = λ−1
min(β⊺Σ−1
u β) ≤λ−1
min(β⊺β)λmax(Σu) ≲P N −1.
(C.126)
Also, note that λmax(Σ−1
v ) = λ−1
min(Σv) ≲1, and that
λmax(((β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1 + Σv)−1) = λ−1
min((β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1 + Σv) ≤λ−1
min(Σv) ≲1,
we have
∥β⊺Σ−1β −Σ−1
v ∥≲P N −1,
which in turn leads to
γ⊺β⊺Σ−1βγ = γ⊺Σ−1
v γ + oP(1).
(C.127)
Next, we show
E(α|G)⊺Σ−1βγ = oP(1).
(C.128)
Notice that E(E(α|G)|Σ, β) = E(α|Σ, β) = E(α|Σ) = 0 (by conditions (a) and (b) of
Assumption 1), and that, conditionally on (Σ, β), E(αi|G) is independent across i as
demonstrated in the beginning of the proof of Theorem 1. Therefore,
E((E(α|G)⊺Σ−1βγ)2|Σ, β) ≤
X
i≤N
E(E(αi|G)2|Σ, β) max
j≤N (γ⊺β⊺Σ−1)2
j.
(C.129)
On the other hand, from (C.125), we obtain
γ⊺β⊺Σ−1 = γ⊺Σ−1
v (Σ−1
v
+ β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1β⊺Σ−1
u .
Because of λmin(Σv) ≳1, ∥β∥MAX ≲P 1, ∥Σu∥MAX ≤∥Σu∥≲P 1, λmin(Σu) ≳P 1, Σu is
diagonal, and (C.126), we have
∥γ⊺β⊺Σ−1∥MAX ≲∥(Σ−1
v
+ β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1∥∥β⊺Σ−1
u ∥MAX ≲P λmax((β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1) ≲P N −1.
Hence, we have, for all positive ﬁxed ϵ,
P(|E(α|G)⊺Σ−1βγ| ≥ϵ|Σ, β) ≤E((E(α|G)⊺Σ−1βγ)2|Σ, β)/ϵ2 = oP(1),
(C.130)
where the last equality comes from (C.129) and that E
 P
i≤N E(E(αi|G)2|Σ, β)

≤
P
i≤N E(α2
i ) = o(N) by condition (a) of Assumption 1.
Since P(|E(α|G)⊺Σ−1βγ| ≥
ϵ|Σ, β) ≤1 are uniformly bounded for all N (by deﬁnition), we obtain by taking expectations on both sides of (C.130) that, for all positive ﬁxed ϵ,
P(|E(α|G)⊺Σ−1βγ| ≥ϵ) = o(1),
which is equivalent to (C.128).
31

Finally, we derive
E(α|G)⊺Σ−1E(α|G) = E(α|G)⊺Σ−1
u E(α|G) + oP(1).
(C.131)
Following the same derivation for (C.129), we obtain
E(|E(α|G)⊺Σ−1
u β|2
F|Σ, β) ≤
X
i≤N
E(E(αi|G)2|Σ, β) max
j (Σ−1
u ββ⊺Σ−1
u )j,j.
Because ∥β∥MAX ≲P 1 and λmin(Σu) ≳P 1, we have
max
j (Σ−1
u ββ⊺Σ−1
u )j,j ≲∥Σ−1
u β∥2
MAX ≲P 1.
Then given the above result that E
 P
i≤N E(E(αi|G)2|Σ, β)

= o(N), we obtain that
E(|E(α|G)⊺Σ−1
u β|2
F|Σ, β) = oP(N). Therefore, similar to the derivation of (C.128), we
obtain
|E(α|G)⊺Σ−1
u β|2
F = oP(N).
On the other hand, using (C.126), we obtain
∥(Σ−1
v
+ β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1∥= λ−1
min(Σ−1
v
+ β⊺Σ−1
u β) ≤λmax((β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1) ≲P N −1.
(C.132)
Then, using (C.132), we have
E(α|G)⊺Σ−1
u β(Σ−1
v
+ β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1β⊺Σ−1
u E(α|G)
≤|E(α|G)⊺Σ−1
u β|2
F∥(Σ−1
v
+ β⊺Σ−1
u β)−1∥= oP(1),
and hence, in light of (C.125), we obtain (C.131).
Given that E(rt+1|G) = E(α|G) + βγ, it follows from (C.127), (C.128), and (C.131)
that
E(rt+1|G)⊺Σ−1E(rt+1|G) = E(α|G)⊺Σ−1
u E(α|G) + γ⊺Σ−1
v γ + oP(1).
In light of (C.124), we conclude the proof.
C.7
Proof of Propositions B2, B3, and B4
We present the notation that is used throughout Section C.7 and Appendix E to facilitate
the exposition of our proofs. We write
ζ :=
√
Tµ/σ,
ˇzi :=
√
T ˇsi,
bzi :=
√
Tbsi.
ζ represents the signal strengh of our alphas. bzi is simply the t-statistic and ˇzi is hypothetically what the t-statistic would be in the absence of risk factors. Next, we introduce
32

soft- and hard-thresholding functions:
eψ1(a, λ) := sgn(a)(|a| −λ),
eψ2(a, λ) := a1{|a|≥λ}.
Then, for q ∈{1, 2} and i ∈{1, . . . , N},
eψq,i(λ) := eψq(ˇz1, λ),
bψq,i(λ) := eψq(bzi, λ).
Further, eψq(λ) and bψq(λ) to represent, repectively, the vectors (eψq(ˇz1, λ), . . . , eψq(ˇzN, λ))⊺
and (bψq,1(λ), . . . , bψq,N(λ))⊺. Based on bψq(λ), we introduce bw′
q(λ) := bΣ−1/2
u
bψq(λ). The
purpose of doing so is that bw′
q(λ), with appropriate choice of λ, incorporates the weights
of Lasso, CSR, and BH methods all as special cases. Lastly, we deﬁne
bS′
q(λ) :=
bw′
q(λ)Mβα
σ∥Mβ bw′
q(λ)∥,
Sq(λ) := N 1/2E(eψq,i(λ)ψi)
E(eψq,i(λ)2)1/2
.
bS′
q(λ) is the Sharpe ratio generated by the strategy bw′
q(λ). Sq(λ), again with appropriate
choice of λ, incorporates as special cases SCSR, SBH, and SLASSO (the probability limits
of Sharpe ratios) all as special cases.
C.7.1
Proof of Proposition B2
By deﬁnition it holds that bΣ−1
u bα = ˘w1(λ) under λ = 0. Hence we have bSCSR = bS1(λ),
choosing λ = 0. In other words, CSR is a special case of Lasso. On the other hand, by
deﬁnition we have, choosing λ = 0,
SLasso
λ
= N 1/2E(ˇsisi)E(ˇs2
i )−1/2.
(C.133)
Moreover, we can write
√
T × E(ˇsisi)
=
ρµ
2σ
Z
a(φ(a −ζ) −φ(a + ζ))da = ρµζ
σ ,
(C.134)
T × E(ˇs2
i )
=
Z
a2(φ(a) + ρφ(a −ζ))da = 1 + ρ(1 + ζ2) = (1 + o(1))(1 + ρζ2).(C.135)
For both lines, the ﬁrst equalities come from the distribution of αi imposed by Example 1,
si = αiσ−1 by deﬁnition, and
√
T(ˇsi −si) is standard normal. The second equalities hold
by direct calculations. The last equality of the second line comes from ρ →0. Therefore,
it holds that, choosing λ = 0,
bSCSR = bS1(λ) = SLasso
λ
+ oP(1 + SOPT) = SCSR + oP(1 + SOPT).
(C.136)
33

Here the second equality comes from bS1(λ) = SLasso
λ
+oP(1+SOPT) as in Proposition B4.
The third equality comes from (C.133), (C.134), (C.135), ζ =
√
Tµ/σ by deﬁnition, and
that |SCSR| ≤SOPT + oP(1) by Theorem 1 and Corollary 1.
Now we verify the suﬃcient and necessary condition. We utilize the last equality of
(C.136), i.e., that CSR is a special case of Lasso, and the optimality conditions for Lasso
provided in Proposition B4. We start with the “if” part. Invoking the classic subsequence
argument, we only need to consider the two cases
√
Tµ/σ →0 and √ρTµ/σ →∞
separately. The former case is obvious since λ = 0 certainly satisﬁes T 1/2λ →0 condition
required by Proposition B4. For the latter case, noting that √ρTµ/σ →∞always leads
to
√
Tµ/σ −√−2 log ρ →∞due to −log ρ ≂log N by assumption, we only need to
verify that, under λ = 0, we have both
√
T(µ/σ −λ) →∞and
φ(
√
Tλ)
ρ(1+Tλ2)T(µ/σ−λ)2 →0 as
in Proposition B4. Both are obviously true.
Next we show the “only if” part. As
√
Tµ/σ →0 is violated, we only need to show
that, if √ρTµ/σ →∞is violated, we would not have
φ(
√
Tλ)
ρ(1+Tλ2)T(µ/σ−λ)2 →0 under λ = 0.
This is also obvious. The proof ends.
C.7.2
Proof of Proposition B3
Proof of Proposition B3, Part 1. In this part we prove bSBH
τ
= SBH
τ
+ oP(1 + SOPT). By
assumption there exists ﬁxed d > 0 such that µ ≤N −d. Then there exists ﬁxed (d1, d2, d3)
such that 0 < d1 < d2 < d3 < min{d, 1}. We also set cx =
p
2(1 −x) log N.
We let ˘z = −Φ−1(p(bk)/2) and ˘z′ = −Φ−1(p(bk+1)/2), where we recall Φ is the standard
normal cdf. In other words, ˘z and ˘z′ are the t-statistics whose p-values, calculated based
on standard normal distribution, are p(bk) and p(bk+1). We further deﬁne, for j ∈{0, +, −},
mj(a) =
X
i∈Hj
1{|bzi|≥a},
ˇmj(a) =
X
i∈Hj
1{|ˇzi|≥a},
where H0 = {i ≤N : αi = 0}, H+ = {i ≤N : αi = ζ}, H−= {i ≤N : αi = −ζ}, and
bzi = T 1/2bsi is the t-statistic of stock i. From the deﬁnitions of ˘z and ˘z′, we obtain
2NΦ(−˘z)
P
j∈{0,+,−} mj(˘z) ≤τ,
2NΦ(−˘z′)
P
j∈{0,+,−} mj(˘z′) > τ,
X
j∈{0,+,−}
mj(˘z′) =
X
j∈{0,+,−}
mj(˘z) + 1.
(C.137)
Given (E.74) and the monotonicity of mj(z) in z, there exists a positive sequence bN =
o
 1/√log N

such that, with high probability, uniformly over x, and for j ∈{0, +, −},
ˇmj(x + bN) ≤mj(x) ≤ˇmj(x −bN).
(C.138)
Further, noting ˇzi is i.i.d. across i, we obtain from equation (13) of Liu and Shao (2014)
that, for all deterministic sequences (aN, a′
N) satisfying NΦ(−aN) →∞and ρNΦ(ζ −
34

a′
N) →∞,
sup
0≤z≤aN

ˇm0(z)
2NΦ(−z) −1
 = oP(1),
sup
0≤z≤a′
N

2 ˇm±(z)
ρNΦ(ζ −z) + ρNΦ(−ζ −z) −1
 = oP(1).
(C.139)
Using (E.15) and −Φ−1(N −1) ≂√log N, we note that, for bN = o
 1/√log N

, Φ(−z ±
bN) = Φ(−z)(1 + o(1)) uniformly over |z| ≤−Φ−1(N −1). Hence we obtain from (C.138)
and (C.139) that, for all deterministic sequences (aN, a′
N) satisfying NΦ(−aN) →∞and
ρNΦ(ζ −a′
N) →∞,
sup
0≤z≤aN

m0(z)
2NΦ(−z) −1
 = oP(1),
sup
0≤z≤a′
N

2m±(z)
ρNΦ(ζ −z) + ρNΦ(−ζ −z) −1
 = oP(1).
(C.140)
In addition, it follows from (E.15) and the second part of (E.1) that, uniformly over z ≥0,
ρΦ(ζ −z)
Φ(−z)
≂h(z),
with
h(z) :=
z
1 + (z −ζ)+
e(z−a∗)ζ.
(C.141)
Here a∗is introduced in the statement of Lemma E1, so is ζ∗which appears below. We
now establish that, for all ﬁxed (x, x′) satisfying 0 < x′ < x ≤2, if sup0≤z≤cx h(z) ≳1,
then
inf
z≥cx′ h(z) →∞.
(C.142)
Since h(z) ≲elog z+(z−a∗)ζ by deﬁnition, it holds that, if sup0≤z≤cx h(z) ≳1, there exists
0 ≤aN ≤cx such that h(aN) ≳1 and thereby
elog aN+(aN−a∗)ζ ≳1.
Because a∗ζ−log aN ≳log N by the ﬁrst part of (E.1), ζ∗≳√log N due to our assumption
on ρ, and aN = o(log N), we have ζ ≳a−1
N log N ≳√log N. For all z satisfying z −aN ≥
cx′ −cx ≳√log N, it holds that h(z) ≳h(aN)z−1e(z−aN)ζ →∞as ζ ≳√log N. We hence
establish (C.142).
We ﬁrst suppose z∗≥cd2.
From (C.141) and the deﬁnition of z∗(B.1) we have
h(z∗) ≂1. Then, since d2 < d3, it follows from (C.142) (by contradiction) that
sup
0≤z≤cd3
ρΦ(ζ −z)
Φ(−z)
→0.
(C.143)
Using (C.143), and applying (C.140) and the monotonicity of mj(z) and Φ(−z) in z, it
holds that, for all (random) sequence z satisfying 0 ≤z ≤cd3,
m0(z) = 2NΦ(−z)(1 + oP(1)),
m±(z) = oP(NΦ(−z)).
(C.144)
35

Here we also use ρΦ(−ζ −z) ≤Φ(−z). Comparing (C.144) with (C.137), we have that
P(˘z ≤cd3) →0. We hence have, with high probability,
µ2ρNΦ(ζ −˘z) ≤µ2ρNΦ(ζ −cd3) ≤µ2NΦ(−cd3) = oP(µ2N d) = oP(1).
(C.145)
Here the second inequality comes from (C.143), the ﬁrst equality comes from d3 < d,
and the last equality comes from µ ≤N −d. (The situation where ˘z does not exists is
equivalent with ˘z being so large that supi |bzi| < ˘z and is hence a special case.) Given
(C.145), Lemma E7 applies and we obtain bSBH
τ
= eS2(˘z) = oP(1).
On the other hand, we have
SBH
τ
=
N 1/2E(eψ2,i(z∗)si)
E(eψ2,i(z∗)2)1/2
≤µN 1/2E(|eψ2,i(z∗)|1{αi̸=0,|ˇzi|≥z∗})
σE(eψ2,i(z∗)2)1/2
≤
µ
σ
q
NE(1{αi̸=0,|ˇzi|≥z∗}) ≤µ
σ
p
2ρNΦ(ζ −z∗) ≲µ
p
NΦ(−z∗) = o(1).
The second inequality comes from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, the last inequality comes
from (B.1), and the last equality comes z∗≥cd2 and NΦ(−cd2) = oP(N d) as d2 < d.
Hence we prove bSBH
τ
−SBH
τ
= oP(1) under z∗≥cd2.
Now suppose z∗≤cd2. Then it follows from (C.141), (B.1) and (C.142) that, as
d1 < d2,
inf
z≥cd1
ρΦ(ζ −z)
Φ(−z)
→∞.
(C.146)
Since d1 > 0, we have NΦ(−cd1) →∞. Given (C.146), we further have ρNΦ(ζ −cd1) →
∞. Applying (C.140), and using (C.146), it holds that
m0(cd1) = oP(ρΦ(ζ −cd1)),
m±(cd1) = ρΦ(ζ −cd1)(1 + oP(1)).
(C.147)
Let eh(z) := 2NΦ(−z)/ P
j∈{0,+,−} mj(z). From (C.147), we know that h(cd1) = oP(1).
Since eh(0) = 1, we know that with high probability ˘z exists and satisfy 0 ≤˘z ≤cd1. Since
Φ(−z) is decreasing in z, we have NΦ(−˘z) →∞and ρNΦ(ζ −˘z) →∞in probability.
Therefore, we obtain from (C.140) that
m0(˘z) = 2NΦ(−˘z)(1+oP(1)),
m±(˘z) = ρ
2N(Φ(ζ −˘z)+Φ(−ζ −˘z))(1+oP(1)). (C.148)
Since ˘z′ ≤˘z, (C.148) would still hold if all ˘z are replaced by ˘z′. Hence, substituting
(C.148) back into (C.137), and noting Φ(−ζ −z) ≤Φ(−z), we have
2(1 −τ)Φ(−˘z)
τρΦ(ζ −˘z)
= 1 + oP(1).
(C.149)
Next, using (B.1) and (E.15), we note that z∗≤cd2 leads to that ζ ≳√log N (see a few
36

lines after (C.142)). As a result, using (E.15), and comparing (B.1) and (C.149), we have
|˘z −z∗| = oP

1/
p
log N

.
(C.150)
We ﬁnally obtain
bSBH
τ
=
bw′
q(T −1/2˘z)⊺Mβα
σ∥Mβ bw′
q(T −1/2˘z)∥= S2(z∗) + oP(SOPT + 1) = SBH
τ
+ oP(SOPT + 1).
where the ﬁrst equality holds by deﬁnition, the second comes from (C.150), ρNΦ(ζ−z∗) ≥
ρNΦ(ζ −cd1) →∞(see after (C.146)), and Lemma E6 (choose q = 2 and (λ′, λ) =
(˘z, z∗))), and the last holds by S2(z∗) = SBH
τ
due to ψi = E(si|G) and that eψq,i(z∗) is
G-measurable. We hence prove bSBH
τ
−SBH
τ
= oP(SOPT + 1) under z∗≤cd2.
Proof of Proposition B3, Part 2. In this part we prove that the suﬃcient and necessary
condition is correct. By deﬁnition it holds that
SBH
τ
SOPT = S2(z∗)
SOPT =
E(eψ2,i(z∗)ψi)
E(eψ2,i(z∗)2)1/2E(ψ2
i )1/2 = Corr(ψi, eψ2,i(z∗)).
(C.151)
The ﬁrst equality holds by S2(z∗) = SBH
τ
due to ψi = E(si|G) and that eψq,i(z∗) is Gmeasurable. Since ρ →0 by assumption, we know that z∗→0 does not hold as it
contradicts its deﬁnition (B.1). Moreover, we have that, using the ﬁrst part of (E.1) and
that −log ρ ≂log N by assumption, ζ −a∗≥−cN
√log N and ζ −ζ∗≥−cN
√log N are
equivalent. Hence, according to (E.23) and (E.24) of Lemma E3 (choose q = 2), using
(C.151) and the subsequence argument, and recalling ζ =
√
Tµ/σ and ζ∗= √−2 log ρ,
we readily obtain the “only if” part. Then we study the “if” part, according to (E.25),
we only need to show that, for all ﬁxed ϵ > 0, there exists a ﬁxed τ > 0 such that, for
large N,
Φ(−z∗)
ρΦ(ζ −a∗) ≤ϵ.
(C.152)
The rest of the proof is to show (C.152). Rewritting the deﬁnition of z∗, and noting τ is
ﬁxed, we have
ρΦ(ζ −z∗)
2Φ(−z∗)
= 1 −τ
τ
≂1.
(C.153)
Using (E.15) and the second part of (E.1) (recall χ(a) and a∗are introduced in the
statement of Lemma E1), noting χ(a) := ρ
2φ(a −ζ)/φ(a), we obtain from (C.153) that
h(z∗) :=
z∗
1 + (z∗−ζ)+
e(z∗−a∗)ζ ≂1.
(C.154)
Here we also introduce h(z∗) as short-hand notation.
Suppose z∗≥a∗+ 1.
Then
37

h(z∗) ≥e(z∗−a∗)ζ →∞. Suppose a∗≤z∗≤a∗+ 1. Then h(z∗) ≥
1+a∗
2+(a∗−ζ)+ →∞.
Suppose z∗≤a∗−1. Then h(z∗) ≤a∗e−ζ →0. Hence we conclude a∗−1 ≤z∗≤a∗for
large N. Therefore, it follows from (C.154) that
e(a∗−z∗)ζ ≂
a∗
1 + (a∗−ζ)+
.
(C.155)
It then holds that, when ζ −ζ∗≥−cN
√log N,
a∗−z∗
≲
1
ζ log
a∗
1 + (a∗−ζ)+
≲
1
1 + (a∗−ζ)+
1 + (a∗−ζ)+
a∗
log
a∗
1 + (a∗−ζ)+
≤o

1
1 + (a∗−ζ)+

.(C.156)
The ﬁrst inequality follows from (C.155). The second inequality comes from a∗≂ζ due
to the ﬁrst part of (E.1) and ζ∗≂√log N by the assumption on ρ. To obtain the last
inequality, we utilize that (a∗−ζ)+ = o(a∗), again due to the ﬁrst part of (E.1), and that
limx→∞x−1 log x = 0. We hence obtain
|Φ(ζ −z∗) −Φ(ζ −a∗)|
Φ(ζ −a∗)
≲(a∗−z∗) max
z∗≤a≤a∗φ(a−ζ) = o

φ(a∗−ζ)
1 + (a∗−ζ)+

= o(Φ(ζ −a∗)).
(C.157)
The ﬁrst inequality is obvious given that z∗≤a∗for large N.
The ﬁrst equality comes
from (C.156) and that supy:|y|≲(1+|x|)−1 φ(x+y) ≲φ(x) uniformly over x. The last equality
is a result of (E.15). It follows from (C.157) that Φ(ζ−a∗) = Φ(ζ−z∗)(1+o(1)). Combining this result with (C.153), we further have 2Φ(−z∗)/(ρΦ(ζ −a∗)) = (1+o(1))τ/(1−τ).
We hence prove (C.152) and the proof concludes.
C.7.3
Proof of Proposition B4
By deﬁnition, we have ˘w1,i(λ) = bσ−1
i ψ1(bsi, λ) = T −1/2bσ−1
i ψ1(bzi, T 1/2λ) = T −1/2 ew′
1(T 1/2λ)
and ψ1(ˇsi, λ) = T −1/2eψ1(T 1/2λ). Hence, it holds that
bS1,λ =
˘w1(λ)⊺Mβα
σ∥Mβ ˘w1(λ)∥= bS′
1(T 1/2λ),
SLasso
λ
= N 1/2E(ψiψ1(ˇsi, λ))
p
E(ψ1(ˇsi, λ)2)
= S1(T 1/2λ), (C.158)
where the ﬁrst equality in the second part comes from ψi = E(si|G) and that ψ1(ˇsi, λ) is
G-measurable.
Suppose λ satisﬁes ρNΦ(ζ −T 1/2λ) →∞. Then we have
bS1,λ = bS′
1(T 1/2λ) = S1(T 1/2λ) + oP(SOPT + 1) = SLasso
λ
+ oP(SOPT + 1).
(C.159)
Here the ﬁrst and last equality comes from (C.158) and the second equality comes from
38

Lemma E6 as ρNΦ(ζ −T 1/2λ) →∞(replace both λ′ and λ with T 1/2λ and choose q = 1).
Now suppose ρNΦ(ζ −T 1/2λ) ≲1. It holds that
S1(T 1/2λ) = N 1/2E(eψ1,i(T 1/2λ)si)
E(eψ1,i(T 1/2λ)2)1/2
≤µ
σ
q
NE(1{|ˇsi|≥0,αi̸=0}) ≤µ
σ
q
2ρNΦ(ζ −T 1/2λ) = o(1).
(C.160)
Here the ﬁrst equality comes from ψi = E(si|G) and that eψ1,i(λ) is G-measurable. The
ﬁrst inequality holds by |si| =
µ
σ1{αi̸=0} and Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
The second
inequality is obvious.
The last equality comes from µ = o(1) by assumption.
Since
ρNΦ(ζ −T 1/2λ) ≲1 leads to µ2ρNΦ(ζ −T 1/2λ) →0, Lemma E7 applies and hence
bS′
1(T 1/2λ) = oP(1). Combining with (C.160), we obtain bS′
1(T 1/2λ) = S1(T 1/2λ) + oP(1).
Given (C.158), we obtain bS1(λ) = SLasso
λ
+ oP(1) under ρNΦ(ζ −T 1/2λ) ≲1. Hence we
establish bS1(λ) = SLasso
λ
+ oP(1) with the classic subsequence argument.
Finally, it holds that
SLasso
λ
SOPT = S1(T 1/2λ)
SOPT
=
E(eψ1,i(T 1/2λ)ψi)
E(eψ1,i(T 1/2λ)2)1/2E(ψ2
i )1/2 = Corr(ψi, eψ1,i(T 1/2λ)),
(C.161)
where the ﬁrst equality comes from (C.158) and the second comes from the deﬁnition
of S1 and SOPT = N 1/2E(ψ2
i )1/2. On the other hand, we have that, using the ﬁrst part
of (E.1) and that −log ρ ≂log N by assumption, ζ −a∗→∞and ζ −ζ∗→∞are
equivalent. Hence, according to (E.23) and (E.24) of Lemma E3 (replace λ with T 1/2λ
and choose q = 2), using (C.161), and recalling ζ =
√
Tµ/σ and ζ∗= √−2 log ρ, we
obtain the remaining statements of Proposition B4.
Appendix D
Lemmas supporting Section C.4
Lemma D1. We deﬁne ¯ui = T −1 P
s∈T ui,s. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold and that
∥β∥MAX ≲P 1 and λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N. Also suppose log N ≲T ≲N d with ﬁxed d < 1.
Then it holds that, as N, T →∞,
max
1≤i≤N |bσ2
i −σ2
i |
=
OP
p
(log N)/T

,
(D.1)
max
1≤i≤N |(Pβ¯u)i|
=
OP

1/
√
TN

,
(D.2)
max
1≤i≤N |(Pβα)i|
=
OP(N −1/2E(s2
i )1/2).
(D.3)
Proof. We start with (D.1). First of all, we write
max
1≤i≤N |bσ2
i −σ2
i |
≤
∥Mβ(T −1uu⊺−¯u¯u⊺)Mβ −Σu∥MAX
≤
∥MβΣuMβ −Σu∥MAX + ∥Mβ(T −1uu⊺−¯u¯u⊺−Σu)Mβ∥MAX.(D.4)
39

Now we establish the upper bounds of the two terms in the second line. We write
∥MβΣuMβ −Σu∥MAX
≤
∥PβΣuPβ∥MAX + 2∥PβΣu∥MAX
≤
(N∥Pβ∥MAX + 2)∥Pβ∥MAX∥Σu∥MAX ≲P N −1.
(D.5)
The last inequality comes from ∥Pβ∥MAX ≤C∥β∥2
MAX∥(β⊺β)−1∥MAX ≲P N −1, which is
true by assumption. On the other hand, we have
∥Mβ(T −1uu⊺−¯u¯u⊺−Σu)Mβ∥MAX
≤
∥T −1uu⊺−¯u¯u⊺−Σu∥MAX(1 + 2N∥Pβ∥MAX + N 2∥Pβ∥MAX) ≲P
p
(log N)/T,
(D.6)
where the last inequality comes from the uniform bound on i.i.d.
normal variables,
log N ≲T by assumption, and that λmax(Σu) ≲P 1 by condition (a) of Assumption 1.
Substituting (D.5) and (D.6) into (D.4), and noting N −1 ≤C
p
(log N)/T by assumption,
we obtain (D.1).
We obtain (D.2) by writing
max
1≤i≤N |(Pβ¯u)k| ≤C∥β∥MAX∥(β⊺β)−1∥MAX max
1≤k≤K |(β⊺¯u)k| ≲P max
1≤k≤K N −1|(β⊺¯u)k| ≲P 1/
√
TN.
Here the last inequality comes from that K is ﬁxed, E(¯ui¯uj|β, Σu) ≲δi,jσ2
i T −1 by conditions (a) and (b) of Assumption 1, and λmax(Σu) ≲P 1.
Finally, we write
max
1≤i≤N |(Pβα)i| ≤C∥β∥MAX∥(β⊺β)−1∥MAX max
1≤k≤K |(β⊺α)k| ≤CN −1 max
1≤k≤K |(β⊺α)k|. (D.7)
On the other hand, from condition (a) and (b) of Assumption 1 and condition (a)
of Assumption 2, we have E(αiαj|β, Σu) = δi,jσ2
i E(s2
i ). Therefore, as K is ﬁxed and
λmax(Σu) ≲P 1, we have
max
1≤k≤K |(β⊺α)k| ≲P cNN 1/2∥β∥MAX ≲P N 1/2E(s2
i )1/2.
(D.8)
Substituting (D.8) into (D.7), we obtain (D.3).
Lemma D2. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold and that ∥β∥2
MAX
≲P
1 and
λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N. Also assume N d ≲T ≲N d′ with ﬁxed d > 0 and d′ < 1. Then it
holds that, as N, T →∞,
max
1≤i≤N |bsi −ˇsi| ≲P cNT −1/2ekN.
(D.9)
If we additionally have T ≳N d with ﬁxed d > 1/2, then it holds that, as N, T →∞,
40

max
i∈B |bsi −ˇsi| ≲P χN.
(D.10)
Here χN :=
p
1/N(k5
N + E(s2
j)1/2), and set B is B := {i ∈N : T 1/2|ˇsi| ≤ekN}, with
ekN := k−2
N .
Proof. By deﬁnition we have
bsi −ˇsi = −(Pβα)i
bσi
−(Pβ¯u)i
bσi
+
σi
bσi
−1

ˇsi.
(D.11)
Since T ≳N d with d > 0 by assumption, (D.1) of Lemma D1 leads to max1≤i≤N |bσ2
i −
σ2
i | = oP(1). Then, noting mini σi ≳P 1 by condition (d) of Assumption 1, we obtain
mini bσi ≳P 1. Applying (D.1) again, we have maxi
 σi
bσi −1
 ≲P
p
(log N)/T. Using these
two results, and substituting (D.2) and (D.3) of Lemma D1 into (D.11), we obtain
max
1≤i≤N |bsi−ˇsi| ≲P χN+
p
(log N)/T max
1≤i≤N |ˇsi|,
max
i∈B |bsi−ˇsi| ≲P χN+
p
(log N)/T max
i∈B |ˇsi|.
(D.12)
Since P(|si| ≥1) ≤E(s2
i 1{|si|≥1}) ≤cNN −1 by condition (a) of Assumption 2, we have
P(maxi |si| ≥1) ≤cN. Combining this result with maxi |¯εi| ≲P
p
(log N)/T by the
uniform bound on i.i.d. normal variables, we obtain max1≤i≤N |ˇsi| ≲P 1 (again noting
T ≳N d with d > 0 by assumption).
Then we have
p
(log N)/T max1≤i≤N |ˇsi| ≲P
T −1/2√log N. Also, we have χN ≤cNT −1/2 since T = o(N) by assumption and E(s2
j) ≲
1 + E(s2
i 1{|si|≥1}) ≲1 by condition (a) of Assumption 2. Substituting the two bounds
into the ﬁrst part of (D.12), we achieve (D.9).
On the other hand, the deﬁnition of set B leads to maxi∈B |ˇsi| ≤T −1/2ekN. Then, noting T ≳N d with d > 1/2 by assumption, we have
p
(log N)/T maxi∈B |ˇsi| ≲
p
1/Nk5
N ≤
χN. Given the second part of (D.12), we obtain (D.10).
Lemma D3. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold and that ∥β∥2
MAX
≲P
1 and
λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N. N d ≲T ≲N d′ with ﬁxed d > 1/2 and d′ < 1. Then it holds that, as
N, T →∞,
P(p(ˇsi) ≥T 1/2N −3/2, ∀i ≤N) ≥1 −cN.
(D.13)
Proof. Note that when |x| < 1, we can ﬁnd C > 1 such that a ≥C implies |a−x| ≥C−1.
Therefore, for |x| < 1, we have
Z
|a|≥C
φ1/T(x −a)da ≤
Z
|a|≥C−1
√
T exp(−Ta2/2)da ≲exp(−T) ≤cNN −1.
(D.14)
The last step comes from T ≳N d for some d > 1/2 by assumption. Then we can bound
Z
|a|≥C
p(a)da
≤
Z
|x|≥1
ps(x)dx +
Z
|x|<1
Z
|a|≥C
φ1/T(x −a)daps(x)dx
41

≤
Z
|x|≥1
ps(x)dx + sup
x:|x|<1
Z
|a|≥C
φ1/T(x −a)da ≤cNN −1.
(D.15)
Here the last inequality comes from (D.14) and
R
|x|≥1 ps(x)dx ≤E(s2
i 1{|si|≥1}) ≤
E(s2
i 1{|si|≥cN}) ≤cNN −1 by condition (a) of Assumption 2. It follows from (D.15) that
P(p(ˇsi) < T 1/2N −3/2)
=
Z
1{p(a)<T 1/2N−3/2}p(a)da
≤
cNN −1 +
Z
|a|<C
1{p(a)<T 1/2N−3/2}p(a)da ≤cNN −1.(D.16)
The last inequality also uses T = o(N) by assumption. (D.16) proves the lemma by
Bonferroni inequalities.
Lemma D4. It holds that, for j ∈{0, 1} and for all (a, ¯a) satisfying |¯a−a| ≤1/√6 log N,
as N →∞,
|ajφ(a) −¯ajφ(¯a)|
≲
(log N)(j+1)/2|¯a −a|φ(a) + cNN −2,
(D.17)
φ(¯a)
≲
(log N)(j+1)/2(1 + |a|)−(j+1)(φ(a) + cNN −2).
(D.18)
Proof. We ﬁrst write that, for all a and for j ∈{0, 1},
|ajφ(a) −¯ajφ(¯a)|
≤
|¯aj −aj|φ(a) + (|¯aj −aj| + |a|j)|φ(¯a) −φ(a)|
≤
|¯a −a|φ(a) + (|¯a −a| + |a|j)φ(a)|e−(a2−¯a2)/2 −1|.
On the other hand, for all sequence bN satisfying bN ≥1, and for all (a, ¯a) satisfying
|a| ≤bN and |¯a −a| ≤b−1
N , we have |e−(a2−¯a2)/2 −1| ≲|¯a −a|bN. As a result, for all such
bN and (a, ¯a), it holds that, for j ∈{0, 1},
|ajφ(a) −¯ajφ(¯a)| ≲bj+1
N |¯a −a|φ(a).
(D.19)
Moreover, it holds that, for j ∈{0, 1, 2} and for all b′
N that satisﬁes b′
N ≥√5 log N,
sup
a:|a|≥b′
N
|ajφ(a)| ≤cNN −2.
(D.20)
Then, choosing bN = √6 log N, which ensures bN ≥√5 log N and bN −b−1
N ≥√5 log N
for large N, we obtain (D.17) by combining (D.19) and (D.20). Further, (D.18) would
directly come from (D.17) by choosing j = 0 when |a| ≤√6 log N, which guarantees
(log N)(1 + |a|)−2 ≳1. For |a| ≥√6 log N, we obtain (D.18) from (D.20) by choosing
j = 2, because in this case we have |¯a| ≥√5 log N for large N, and 1 + |a| ∼1 + |¯a|. The
proof ends.
42

Appendix E
Lemmas supporting Section C.7
Lemma E1. Suppose that rt follows (1), Assumption 1 holds, ui,t ≂N(0, σ2), and
α following (5) as in Example 1. Also assume N −d′ ≤ρ ≤N −d with ﬁxed d′ > d > 0.
Recall we deﬁne p(a) and ψ(a) in Corollary 1 and Φ(x) is the standard normal cumulative
distribution function. Then it holds that (i) when ζ −ζ∗≲−√log N,
Z
ψ(a)2p(a)da ≂(1 ∧ζ2)µ2ριΦ(a∗−2ζ);
(ii) when ζ −ζ∗≥−cN
√log N,
Z
ψ(a)2p(a)da ≂µ2ρΦ(ζ −a∗).
Here ι := e3ζ2/2−ζa∗, ζ∗and χ(a) are deﬁned by ζ∗:=
p
−2 log(ρ/2) and χ(a) := ρ
2φ(a −
ζ)/φ(a), and a∗is the solution of χ(a) = 1.
Proof. It follows from deﬁnition that
a∗= ζ
2 + ζ∗2
2ζ
and
χ(a) = exp((a −a∗)ζ).
(E.1)
By deﬁnition we have
T −1/2p(T −1/2a) = (1 −ρ)φ(a) + ρ
2φ(|a| −ζ) + ρ
2φ(|a| + ζ).
Because φ(|a| + ζ) ≤φ(a) and ρ →0 we have, uniformly over a ≥0,
T −1/2p(T −1/2a) = (1 + o(1))ρ
2φ(a −ζ)(1 + χ(a)−1).
(E.2)
We also note φ(a + ζ) = exp(−2aζ)φ(a −ζ). Therefore, uniformly over a ≥0,
ψ(T −1/2a) = (1 + o(1))µ1 −exp(−2aζ)
1 + χ(a)−1
.
(E.3)
As a result of (E.2) and (E.3), it holds that
Z
ψ(a)2p(a)da = (1+o(1))µ2ρB∗,
with
B∗:=
Z ∞
0
(1−exp(−2aζ))2
χ(a)
1 + χ(a)φ(a−ζ)da.
(E.4)
Then the goal becomes characterization of B∗across diﬀerent cases. For this purpose,
we introduce two set sequences A1 = (0, a∗) and A2 = (a∗, ∞). Based on these sets, we
deﬁne, for j ∈{1, 2},
43

Bj =
Z
Aj
(1 −exp(−2aζ))2
χ(a)
1 + χ(a)φ(a −ζ)da,
B′
j :=
Z
Aj
(1 −exp(−2aζ))2φ(a −2ζ)da.
(E.5)
It apparently holds that B∗= B1 +B2. Furthermore, from the ﬁrst part of (E.1), we note
ζa∗→∞and thereby supa≥a∗exp(−2aζ) →0. From the second part of (E.1), χ(a) ≤1
for all a ≤a∗and χ(a) ≥1 for all a ≥a∗. Hence, it follows from (E.5) that
B1 ≂
Z a
0
(1 −exp(−2aζ))2χ(a)φ(a −ζ)da,
B2 ≂
Z ∞
a∗φ(a −ζ)da.
(E.6)
We note χ(a)φ(a −ζ) = ιφ(a −2ζ). Applying this relation to the two parts of (E.6), we
obtain, respectively,
B1 ≂ιB′
1,
B2 ≲ιB′
2.
(E.7)
where, for the second result, we use that infa≥a∗(1 −exp(−2aζ))2χ(a) ≳1 due to
infa≥a∗χ(a) ≥1 and infa≥a∗aζ →∞by the ﬁrst part of (E.1).
Now we gauge the magnitude of B1 and B2 for cases (i) and (ii). We further separate
case (i) into two subcases: case (ia) where ζ ≲1 (under which ζ −ζ∗≲−√log N always
holds, as ζ∗≳√log N by the assumption ρ ≤N −d with ﬁxed d > 0), and case (ib) where
ζ →∞and ζ −ζ∗≲−√log N. We start with case (ia) where ζ ≲1. We note
φ(a −2ζ) exp(−2aζ) = φ(a) exp(−2ζ2),
φ(a −2ζ) exp(−4aζ) = φ(a + 2ζ).
(E.8)
Using (E.8), we obtain
B′
1 + B′
2 =
Z
(1 −exp(−2aζ))2φ(a −2ζ)da = 1 −exp(−2ζ2).
(E.9)
Moreover, it apparently holds
B′
2 ≤
Z
A2
φ(a −2ζ)da = Φ(2ζ −a∗).
(E.10)
On the other hand, when ζ ≲1, we have a∗−2ζ ≥ζ∗2/(3ζ) for N suﬃciently large.
Then, when ζ ≲1
ζ−2Φ(2ζ −a∗) ≲1
ζ∗4
ζ∗2
ζ exp(−ζ∗4/(18ζ2)) →0.
(E.11)
where the last convergence comes from ζ∗→∞(by the assumption ρ ≤N −d with ﬁxed
d > 0), ζ∗2/ζ →∞(as ζ ≲1), and limx→∞x exp(−x2) = 0. Since 1 −exp(−2ζ2) ≂ζ2
under ζ ≲1, combining (E.9), (E.10), and (E.11), we obtain that, when ζ ≲1,
B′
1 ≂ζ2,
B′
2 = o(ζ2).
(E.12)
44

Substituting (E.12) into (E.7), we obtain (recall B∗= B1 + B2) that, when ζ ≲1,
B∗≂ζ2e−ζa∗.
(E.13)
(E.4) and (E.13) together lead to
R
ψ(a)2p(a)da ≂µ2ζ2ρe−ζa∗. Given ι ≂e−ζa∗and
Φ(a∗−2ζ) ≂1 (by the ﬁrst part of (E.1)) when ζ ≲1, we prove the lemma for case (ia).
Next, we study cases (ib) and (ii). We note in both cases we have ζ →∞. Using
(E.8) and Φ(x) = 1 −Φ(−x), we obtain by direct calculation
B′
1 =
Z a∗
0
φ(a −2ζ)da = Φ(a∗−2ζ) −2Φ(−2ζ) + Φ(−a∗−2ζ) −exp(−2ζ2)(2Φ(a∗) −1).
(E.14)
We note that, uniformly over x,
Φ(−x) ≂
1
1 + x+
φ(x+),
(E.15)
where x+ = max{x, 0}. Using (E.15), we obtain Φ(a∗−2ζ) ≥Φ(−3ζ/2) ≂
1
1+ζφ(3ζ/2) ≂
1
1+ζ exp(−9ζ2/8). Then we have, Φ(−2ζ) = o(Φ(a∗−2ζ)) and exp(−2ζ2) = o(Φ(a∗−2ζ))
when ζ →∞. Since Φ(−a∗−2ζ) ≤Φ(−2ζ) and 0 ≤Φ(a∗) ≤1, we obtain from (E.14)
that, when ζ →∞,
B′
1 = (1 + o(1))Φ(a∗−2ζ).
(E.16)
Substituting (E.16) into the ﬁrst part of (E.7), and noting the second part of (E.6), we
obtain that, when ζ →∞,
B1 ≂ιΦ(a∗−2ζ),
B2 ≂Φ(ζ −a∗).
(E.17)
We ﬁrst investigate case (ib), in which it holds that a∗−ζ ≳√log N according to the ﬁrst
part of (E.1) and ζ∗≂√log N by the assumption on ρ. Then from (E.17) and (E.15), it
follows that, in case (ib),
B1 ≳
1
1 + (2ζ −a∗)+
φ(a∗−ζ),
B2 ≂
1
1 + (a∗−ζ)+
φ(a∗−ζ).
(E.18)
Here the ﬁrst part comes from φ(x+) ≥φ(x) for all x, and φ(2ζ−a∗)e3ζ2/2−ζa∗= φ(a∗−ζ).
The second part comes from a∗−ζ ≳√log N. Since 1+(2ζ −a∗)+ ≲(a∗−ζ)+ according
to the ﬁrst part of (E.1) and ζ∗≂√log N by the assumption on ρ, we obtain from (E.18)
that, in case (ib),
B2 ≲B1.
(E.19)
Now we study case (ii), in which it holds that a∗−ζ ≤cN
√log N by the ﬁrst part of
(E.1) and ζ∗≂√log N. Hence, we have 2ζ −a∗≳1. Therefore, from (E.17) and (E.15),
45

it follows that, in case (ii),
B1 ≂
1
1 + (2ζ −a∗)+
φ(a∗−ζ),
B2 ≳
1
1 + (a∗−ζ)+
φ(a∗−ζ).
(E.20)
Here the ﬁrst part comes from 2ζ −a∗≳1 and φ(2ζ −a∗)e3ζ2/2−ζa∗= φ(a∗−ζ). The
second part comes from φ(x+) ≥φ(x) for all x. Since 1 + (a∗−ζ)+ = o((2ζ −a∗)+), we
obtain from (E.20) that, in case (ii),
B1 = o(B2).
(E.21)
Combining (E.19) and (E.21) with (E.17), we prove the lemma for cases (ib) and (ii).
The proof concludes.
Lemma E2. Suppose a real-valued function sequence hN : R →R, a sequnce aN, and
a positive sequence ∆N satisfy ∆−1/2
N
(1AN −hN) →0 in L2 with AN := (aN, aN + ∆N).
Then there exists a set sequence ¯AN such that
Z
AN−¯
AN
da = o(∆N)
and
sup
a∈A′
N
|hN(a) −1| = o(1).
Proof. We deﬁne h∗
N(a) = hN(a∆−1
N ) and A∗
N = (aN∆−1
N , aN∆−1
N + 1).
Then clearly
(1A∗
N −h∗
N) →0 in L2. This further leads to h∗
N →1A∗
N in measure (see, e.g., Theorem
2.15.a of Folland (2009)), i.e., for every ϵ > 0,
R
A∗
N 1{|1−h∗
N(a)|≥ϵ}da →0. This is equivalent
to that, for every ϵ > 0,
∆−1
N
Z
AN
1{|1−hN(a)|≥ϵ}da →0.
(E.22)
We hence prove the lemma.
Lemma E3. Suppose the same assumptions as in Lemma E1 and let a∗be as deﬁned
therein. Then there exists a deterministic sequence λ ≥0 such that Corr(ψi, eψq,i(λ)) →1
if and only if, for some cN →0,
(
(µ, ρ) ∈

(µ, ρ) : ζ ≤cNor ζ −a∗≥c−1
N
	
for q = 1,
(µ, ρ) ∈

(µ, ρ) : ζ ≤cNor ζ −a∗≥−cN
√log N
	
for q = 2.
(E.23)
Moreover, if sequence λ ≥0 is determnistic, Corr(ψi, eψq,i(λ)) →1 if and only if
(
λ →0,
when ζ →0and q ∈{1, 2},
ζ −λ →∞and
φ(λ)
ρ(1+λ2)(ζ−λ)2 →0,
when ζ −a∗→∞and q = 1.
(E.24)
Further, when ζ −a∗≥−cN
√log N, it holds that
46

Corr(ψi, eψq,i(λ)) ≥1 + o(1) + O

Φ(−λ)
ρΦ(ζ −a∗)

.
(E.25)
Proof. Step 1. As a result of (E.2) and (E.3), it holds that, by the symmetry of ψ(a),
eψq(a, λ), and p(a),
Z
ψ(a)2p(a)da
=
(1 + o(1))µ2ρ
Z ∞
0
(1 −exp(−2aζ))2
χ(a)
1 + χ(a)φ(a −ζ)da,
(E.26)
Z
eψq(a, λ)2p(a)da
=
(1 + o(1))ρ
Z ∞
0
eψq(a, λ)21 + χ(a)
χ(a)
φ(a −ζ)da,
(E.27)
Z
ψ(a)eψq(a, λ)p(a)da
=
(1 + o(1))µρ
Z ∞
0
eψq(a, λ)(1 −exp(−2aζ))φ(a −ζ)da. (E.28)
To facilitate the exposition, we introduce short-hand notation
f(a) :=
s
χ(a)
1 + χ(a)φ(a −ζ)1{a≥0},
g(a) = (1−e−2aζ)f(a),
egq(a) = eψq(a, λ)1 + χ(a)
χ(a)
f(a).
Comparing the deﬁnitions of f and g with the right-hand sides of (E.26), (E.27), and
(E.28), we obtain, for q ∈{1, 2},
Corr(ψi, eψq,i(λ)) = (1 + o(1))θq(λ),
θq(λ) := ⟨g, egq⟩
∥g∥∥egq∥,
(E.29)
where ⟨g, egq⟩:=
R
g(a)egq(a)da and ∥g∥:=
p
⟨g, g⟩stand for the L2-inner product and
L2-norm. Moreover, we note that 1 −θq(λ) = 1
2
1
∥g∥2
g −∥g∥
∥egq∥× egq

2
. Let d∗be the scalar
that minimizes ∥g −d × egq∥. It obviously holds that, for q ∈{1, 2},
1 −θq(λ) ≥
1
2∥g∥2∥g −d∗× egq∥2.
(E.30)
Moreover, we have that, if θq(λ) ≥0 and for q ∈{1, 2},
1 −θq(λ) ≤1 −θq(λ)2 =
1
∥g∥2∥g −d∗× egq∥2.
(E.31)
Given (E.29), (E.30), and (E.31), the proof will focus on evaluating ∥g −d∗× egq∥. In
addition, given the deﬁnition of eψ(a, λ), we can write, for q ∈{1, 2},
∥g −d∗×egq∥=
Z
(1−e−2aζ −d∗×hq(a))2f(a)2da,
with
hq(a) = (e(a∗−a)ζ +1)eψq(a, λ).
(E.32)
Further, to characterize the magnitude of ∥g∥, we consider, resepectively, case (ia) where
ζ →0 (under which ζ −ζ∗≲−√log N always holds, as ζ∗≳√log N by the assumption
ρ ≤N −d with ﬁxed d > 0), case (ib) where ζ ≳1 and ζ −ζ∗≲−√log N, and case (ii)
47

where ζ −ζ∗≥−cN
√log N. Here and below we adopt the notation introduced in the
statement of Lemma E1. Since B∗is simply ∥g∥2 here, it follows from Lemma E1 that
∥g∥2 ≂
(
(1 ∧ζ2)ιΦ(a∗−2ζ),
cases (ia) and (ib);
Φ(ζ −a∗),
case (ii).
(E.33)
By the classic subsequence argument, we can establish the lemma as long as we prove it
under each of cases (ia), (ib), and (ii).
Step 2. We start with demonstrating that, for each q ∈{0, 1}, θq(λ) →1 holds in
case (ia) if and only if we choose λ →0. Suppose λ →0 and let ¯d∗= 2ζe−a∗ζ. We obtain
that, for each q ∈{1, 2} and for all a ≥0,
|1 −e−2aζ −¯d∗× hq(a)|
=
|1 −e−2aζ −2ζψq(a, λ)(e−aζ + e−a∗ζ)|
≤
|1 −e−2aζ −2ζa| + 2ζλ + 2ζa(|1 −e−aζ| + e−a∗ζ)
≤
4ζ2a2 + 2ζλ + 2e−a∗ζζa.
(E.34)
The second inequality comes from that |ψq(a, λ)| ≤a and |ψq(a, λ) −a| ≤λ for all a ≥0.
The last inequality comes from that −1
2x2 ≤1 −e−x −x ≤0 and 0 ≤1 −e−x ≤x for all
x ≥0. As a result, we have, for each q ∈{1, 2},
∥g −d∗× egq∥2
≤
∥g −¯d∗× egq∥2 ≲ι
Z ∞
0
(ζ4a4 + ζ2λ2 + e−2a∗ζζ2a2)φ(a −2ζ)da
≲
ι(ζ4 + ζ2λ2 + e−2a∗ζζ2) = o(ιζ2).
(E.35)
Here the ﬁrst inequality holds by the deﬁnition of d∗. The second inequality comes from
(E.32), (E.34), and f(a)2 ≤χ(a)φ(a −ζ) = ιφ(a −2ζ). The third inequality comes from
that
R
ajφ(a −2ζ)da =
R
(a + 2ζ)jφ(a)da ≲
R
(aj + ζj)φ(a)da ≲1 for j ∈{2, 4} as ζ →0.
The last inequality comes from ζ →0, a∗ζ →∞, and λ →0.
Now suppose λ ≳1. Then it holds that, for each q ∈{1, 2},
∥g −d∗× egq∥2 ≥
Z λ∧1
0
(1 −e−2aζ)2f(a)2da ≳ιζ2
Z λ∧1
0
a2φ(a −2ζ) ≳ιζ2.
(E.36)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from egq(a) = 0 for all a ∈(0, λ).
The second inequality
comes from infa≤1 f(a)2 ≥1
2χ(a)φ(a −ζ). According to (E.33), we have ∥g∥2 ≂ιζ2 as
Φ(a∗−2ζ) ≂1 (by the ﬁrst part of (E.1)) when ζ →0. Given (E.29), we prove that for
each q ∈{1, 2}, Corr(ψi, eψq,i(λ)) →1 if (by (E.31) and (E.35)) and only if (by (E.30) and
(E.36)) λ →0 when we are in case (ia), i.e., when we have ζ →0. We hence establish
the ﬁrst part of (E.24).
Step 3. Next, we show that, for each q ∈{1, 2}, θq(λ) →1 does not hold for any
λ sequence in case (ib).
Note that we always have ζ ≳1 and ζ −a∗≲1 in case
48

(ib), due to ζ −a∗≤ζ −ζ∗by the ﬁrst part of (E.1). We introduce a set sequence
A := ((2ζ) ∧a∗−4∆, (2ζ) ∧a∗), with ∆:=
1
1+(2ζ−a∗)+ ∧(ζ/2). Because φ(x)′ = −xφ(x),
it holds that, for any real sequence x and any ﬁxed positive constant C,
φ(x) ≲
inf
a:|a−x|≤
C
1+|x|
φ(a) ≤
sup
a:|a−x|≤
C
1+|x|
φ(a) ≲φ(x).
(E.37)
As a result, we have infa∈A f(a)2 ≳ιφ((2ζ) ∧a∗−2ζ) (by (E.37), the relation right after
(E.6), the deﬁnition of f, and A ⊂(0, ∞)), we have from (E.32) that, for q ∈{1, 2},
∥g −d∗× egq∥2 ≳ιφ((2ζ) ∧a∗−2ζ)
Z
A
(1 −e−2aζ −d∗× hq(a))2da.
(E.38)
According to (E.33) and (E.15), ∥g∥2 ≂ιφ((2ζ)∧a∗−2ζ)∆in case (ib). Then, combining
(E.30) and (E.38), we obtain that, if θ(λ) →1, then, for q ∈{1, 2},
Z
A
(1 −e−2aζ −d∗× hq(a))2da = o(∆).
(E.39)
It follows from Lemma E2 and (E.39) that, for each q ∈{1, 2}, if θq(λ) →1, there exists
a set sequence ¯A such that,
Z
A−¯
A
da = o(∆)
and
sup
a∈¯
A
|d∗× hq(a) −(1 −e−2aζ)| = o(1).
(E.40)
It is almost obvious that (E.40) can not hold for any q ∈{1, 2} and for any λ, given the
drastic diﬀerence between the deﬁnition of hq(a) and 1 −e−2aζ. To see this more clearly,
we ﬁrst consider the situation where ζ ≂1. We note that, under ζ ≂1 and uniformly over
a ∈A (which becomes (2ζ −4∆, 2ζ) for large N), hq(a) = (1 + o(1))ea∗ζeψq(a, λ). Apply
the triangular inequality to (E.40) leads to supa∈¯
A |d∗ea∗ζ × eψq(a, λ)−(1−e−2aζ)| = o(1),
which can not hold for any q ∈{1, 2} and for any λ sequence, because of the nonlinearity
of 1 −e−2aζ in a as ζ ≂1.
Then we consider the situation where ζ →∞. It is trivial from (E.39) and that
eψq(a, λ) = 0 for a ≤λ that λ ≤(2ζ) ∧a∗−7∆/2 for large N if θq(λ) →1, for each
q ∈{1, 2}. As a direct result, we have, by the deﬁnition of hq(a), that, for each q ∈{1, 2},
if θq(λ) →1 and ζ →∞,
infa∈A+ hq(a)
supa∈A−hq(a) ≳exp(ζ∆) →∞,
(E.41)
where A+ := ((2ζ) ∧a∗−3∆, (2ζ) ∧a∗−2∆) and A−:= ((2ζ) ∧a∗−∆, (2ζ) ∧a∗). (E.41)
and (E.40) clearly contradict as, for large N, any ¯A satisfying the ﬁrst part of (E.40)
would overlap with both A+ and A−, and hence would violate the second part of (E.40)
49

according to (E.41). In other words, θq(λ) →1 does not hold under any λ sequence and
for any q ∈{1, 2} if we are in case (ib).
Step 4. Now we demonstrate that, for each q ∈{1, 2}, θq(λ) →1 does not hold for
any λ sequence if we are in case (ii) and ∆−1(a∗−λ) →∞. We introduce a set sequences
A∗:= (a∗∨ζ + ∆, a∗∨ζ + 2∆) with ∆:=
1
1+(a∗−ζ)+. We note that infa∈A φ(a −ζ) ≳
φ((a∗−ζ)+) by (E.37). Then, from (E.32) it follows that, for q ∈{1, 2},
∥g −d∗× egq∥2 ≳φ((a∗−ζ)+)
Z
A∗(1 −e−2aζ −d∗× hq(a))2da.
(E.42)
According to (E.33) and (E.15), ∥g∥2 ≂φ((a∗−ζ)+)∆. Then, combining (E.30) and
(E.42), we obtain that, for q ∈{1, 2}, if θq(λ) →1,
Z
A∗(1 −e−2aζ −d∗× h1(a))2da = o(∆).
(E.43)
Moreover, it follows from Lemma E2 and (E.43) that, for q ∈{1, 2}, if θq(λ) →1, there
exists a set sequence ¯A such that
Z
A∗−¯
A
da = o(∆)
and
sup
a∈¯
A
|d∗× hq(a) −1| = o(1).
(E.44)
Here we also use e−a∗ζ →0 (by the ﬁrst part of (E.1) and ζ∗≂√log N →∞due
to the assumption on ρ).
Now we prove by contradiction that, for each q ∈{1, 2},
θq(λ) →1 can not hold if ∆−1(a∗−λ) →∞. For this purpose, we introduce a set
sequence A′ := (a∗−2∆, a∗−∆). Suppose ∆−1(a∗−λ) →∞holds. Then we obtain
that, for q ∈{1, 2}, if θq(λ) →1 and for all a ∈A∗and a′ ∈A′,
hq(a′) = (1 + o(1))exp((a∗−a′)ζ) + 1
exp((a∗−a)ζ) + 1 × hq(a) = (1 + o(1))χ(a′)−1 × hq(a).
(E.45)
The ﬁrst equality comes from ∆−1(a∗−λ) →∞and the deﬁnition of eψq. The last equality
comes from the deﬁnitions of A∗and A′ and that exp(ζ∆) →∞, which in turn is a result
of that in case (ii) we have (a) ζ ≥ζ∗−cN
√log N ≳√log N and (b) ∆−1 ≲cN
√log N
due to a∗−ζ ≂ζ∗−ζ ≥−cN
√log N. Combining the second part of (E.44) and (E.45),
we obtain that, for q ∈{1, 2}, if θq(λ) →1 and for all a ∈A′,
d∗× hq(a) = (1 + o(1))χ(a)−1.
(E.46)
Since infa∈A′ χ(a)−1 →∞due to exp(ζ∆) →∞, it follows from (E.46) that, for q ∈{1, 2},
∥g −d∗× egq∥2
≥
Z
A′(1 −e−2aζ −d∗× hq(a))2f(a)2da
50

≳
Z
A′ χ(a)−1φ(a −ζ)da ≳∆inf
a∈A′ φ(a −ζ) ≳∥g∥2,
where we note that infa∈A′ χ(a)−1 →∞( by χ(a∗) = 1 and exp(ζ∆) →∞) and
infa∈A′ φ(a −ζ) ≳φ((a∗−ζ)+), and we recall ∥g∥2 ≂φ((a∗−ζ)+)∆.
This contradicts (E.30) and proves that, for q ∈{1, 2}, θq(λ) →1 can not hold if we are in case (ii)
and ∆−1(a∗−λ) →∞.
Step 5. This step completes the proof regarding condition (E.23) for q = 1, and prove
the second part of (E.24). Given (E.29) and the privious analysis for cases (ia) and (ib),
to show condition (E.23) for q = 1 we only need to demonstrate that, in case (ii), there
exists some sequence λ such that θ1(λ) →1 if and only if ζ −a∗→∞.
We ﬁrst show the “only if”. By deﬁnition of A∗(see above (E.42)), it holds that
supa∈A∗exp((a∗−a)ζ) ≤exp(−ζ∆) →0. Substituting this result into the deﬁnition of
h1 given in (E.32) and that ψ1(a, λ) = (a −λ)+ for a ≥0, we obtain from the second
part of (E.44) that supa∈¯
A(a −λ)+ = (1 + o(1)) infa∈¯
A(a −λ)+.
This results, given
the ﬁrst part of (E.44) and the deﬁnition of A∗, translates into (a∗∨ζ + 2∆−λ)+ =
(1 + o(1))(a∗∨ζ + ∆−λ)+. Also, it is trivial from (E.43) that λ ≤a∗∨ζ + 3∆/2 for
large N. Therefore, we have that, if θ1(λ) →1,
∆−1(a∗∨ζ −λ) →∞.
(E.47)
However, according to Step 4 and the subsequence argument, θ1(λ) →1 also leads to
∆−1(a∗−λ) ≲1. This bound and (E.47) can simultaneously hold only if ζ −a∗→∞.
Now we show the “if” part. We note
∥f −g∥2 ≤
Z ∞
0
e−2aζφ(a −ζ)da = Φ(−ζ) →0,
(E.48)
where the ﬁrst inequality comes from f(a)2 ≤φ(a−ζ). Moreover, letting ¯d∗= (ζ −λ)−1,
we obtain
∥f −¯d∗× eg1∥2
=
Z λ
0
f(a)2da +
Z ∞
λ

1 −(e(a∗−a)ζ + 1) × a −λ
ζ −λ
2
f(a)2da
≤
Z λ
0
f(a)2da + 2
Z ∞
λ
ζ −a
ζ −λ
2
f(a)2da + 2
Z ∞
λ
e2(a∗−a)ζ
a −λ
ζ −λ
2
f(a)2da
≤
Φ(λ −ζ) +
2
(ζ −a∗)2 +
4
(ζ −λ)2ρ
Z ∞
λ
φ(a)(a −λ)2da.
(E.49)
Here the equality comes from (E.32) and the ﬁrst inequality is obvious. For the second
inequality we use f(a)2 ≤φ(a−ζ),
R
(x−ζ)2φ(x−ζ) = 1, and e2(a∗−a)ζf(a)2 ≤χ(a)−1φ(a−
ζ) = 2
ρφ(a). We also note Φ(λ −ζ) →0 if λ ≤a∗, as ζ −a∗→∞. Hence, given (E.49),
51

and noting
R ∞
λ φ(a)(a −λ)2da ≂
1
1+λ2φ(λ), we have that ∥f −¯d∗× eg1∥→0, when λ
satisﬁes the second part of (E.24). (Such λ always exists, because λ = a∗satisfy the
condition as ζ −a∗→∞and ρ−1φ(a∗) = φ(a∗−ζ)/2 →0.) Given (E.48), and noting
∥g∥2 ≂1 from (E.33) (note ζ −a∗→∞can only occur in case (ii) by the ﬁrst part of
(E.1)), we obtain ∥g −¯d∗×eg1∥= o(∥g∥). Since ∥g −d∗×eg1∥≤∥g −¯d∗×eg1∥by deﬁnition
of d∗, the “if” part follows from (E.31). We hence establish condition (E.23) for q = 1.
Now we prove the second part of (E.24). The paragraph after (E.49) already proves
the “if” part of the second part of (E.24).
We now demonstrate the “only if” part. When ζ −λ ≲1, it holds that, for all d,
∥f −d × eg1∥2 ≥
Z λ
a∗f(a)2da ≥1
2(Φ(λ −ζ) −Φ(a∗−ζ)) ≳1.
(E.50)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from λ ≥a∗as ζ −a∗→∞, the second inequality comes from
that f(a)2 ≥1
2φ(a −ζ) for all a ≥a∗, and the last inequality comes from ζ −λ ≲1 and
ζ −a∗→∞. Combining (E.48) and (E.50), and recalling (E.31) and that ∥g∥2 ≂1 from
(E.33) under ζ −a∗→∞, we obtain that the condition ζ −λ →∞is necessary.
Now suppose ζ −λ →∞holds but ρ−1φ(λ) ≳(1 + λ2)(ζ −λ)2.
This indicates
ρ−1φ(λ) →∞. Since ρ−1φ(a∗) →0 (see after (E.49)), we have (a∗−λ)/(1 + λ) →∞.
Therefore, letting l(a) = 1{λ≤a≤a∗}, we have, for all d,
∥eg1×l∥2 =
Z a∗
λ
(e(a∗−a)ζ+1)2(a−λ)2f(a)2da ≥2
ρ
Z a∗
λ
(a−λ)2φ(a)da ≳
φ(λ)
ρ(1 + λ2) ≳(ζ−λ)2.
(E.51)
The second inequality comes from (e(a∗−a)ζ +1)2f(a)2 = (1+χ(a)−1)φ(a−ζ) and χ(a) =
ρ
2φ(a −ζ)/φ(a) by deﬁnition. The third inequality comes from (a∗−λ)/(1 + λ) →∞.
The last inequality comes from ρ−1φ(λ) ≳(1 + λ2)(ζ −λ)2 that we suppose.
Since
∥f × l∥2 =
R a∗
λ f(a)2da ≤Φ(a∗−ζ) →0, given (E.48) and (E.51), we obtain that, for all
d,
∥g −d×eg1∥= ∥f −d×eg1∥+o(1) ≥∥(f −d×eg1)×l∥+o(1) ≳d×(ζ −λ)+o(1). (E.52)
Given (E.52), and recalling ∥g∥2 ≂1 from (E.33), ∥g −d × eg1∥= o(1) can hold only if
d = o((ζ −λ)−1). However, for all d ≤1
4(ζ −λ)−1, it holds that
∥f−d×eg1∥2 ≥
Z ζ
a∗(1−d×(e(a∗−a)ζ+1)(a−λ))2f(a)2da ≥1
4
Z ζ
a∗f(a)2da ≳1
2−Φ(a∗−ζ) ≳1.
(E.53)
The second inequality comes from that e(a∗−a)ζ+1 ≤2 and a−λ ≤ζ−λ for all a ∈(a∗, ζ),
the third inequality comes from that f(a)2 ≥
1
2φ(a −ζ) for all a ≥a∗, and the last
inequality comes from ζ −a∗→∞. Given (E.48), (E.53) contradicts ∥g −d × eg1∥= o(1).
52

Therefore, recalling (E.31), we conclude that ρ−1φ(λ) = o((1 + λ2)(ζ −λ)2) is indeed
necessary. The second part of (E.24) has been proved.
Step 6. In this step we ﬁnish the proof regarding condition (E.23) for q = 2. Given
(E.29) and the privious analysis for cases (ia) and (ib), we only need to show that, in
case (ii), θ2(λ) →1 for some sequence λ. Under λ = a∗and ¯d∗= ζ−1, we obtain
∥f −¯d∗× eg2∥2
=
Z a∗
0
f(a)2da +
Z ∞
a∗

1 −(e(a∗−a)ζ + 1) × a
ζ
2
f(a)2da
≤
Z a∗
0
f(a)2da + 2
Z ∞
a∗
a −ζ
ζ
2
f(a)2da + 2
Z ∞
a∗e2(a∗−a)ζ a2
ζ2f(a)2da
≤
ιΦ(2ζ −a∗) + 2
ζ2
Z ∞
a∗−ζ
a2φ(a)da + 2
ζ2e2a∗ζ
Z ∞
a∗(a + ζ)2φ(a + ζ)da
≲
ιΦ(2ζ −a∗) + 2
ζ2(1 + (a∗−ζ)+)2Φ(ζ −a∗)
+ 2
ζ2(1 + (a∗+ ζ))2e2a∗ζΦ(−a∗−ζ).
(E.54)
Here the equality comes from (E.32) and the ﬁrst inequality is obvious. For the second
inequality we use f(a)2 ≤χ(a)φ(a−ζ) = ιφ(a−2ζ), f(a)2 ≤φ(a−ζ), and e−2aζφ(a−ζ) =
φ(a + ζ). The last inequality comes from that
R ∞
x a2φ(a)da ≂(1 + x+)2Φ(−x) uniformly
over x. Moreover, we note (1 + (a∗+ ζ))e2a∗ζΦ(−a∗−ζ) ≂e2a∗ζφ(a∗+ ζ) = φ(a∗−ζ) ≂
(1+(a∗−ζ)+)Φ(ζ −a∗) using (E.15). Furthermore, since we are in case (ii), it holds that
ιΦ(2ζ −a∗) = o(Φ(ζ −a∗)) according to (E.17) and (E.21), and that 1 + (a∗−ζ)+ = o(ζ)
(by the ﬁrst part of (E.1) and ζ∗≂√log N due to the assumption on ρ). Substituting
these results into (E.54), we have that, under λ = a∗and ¯d∗= ζ−1,
∥f −¯d∗× eg2∥2 = o(Φ(ζ −a∗)).
(E.55)
On the other hand, we note ∥f−g∥2 ≤Φ(−ζ) (see below (E.49)) and Φ(−ζ) = o(Φ(ζ−a∗))
due to 1 + (a∗−ζ)+ = o(ζ) (see above (E.55)). Combining these results with (E.55), and
noting ∥g∥2 ≂Φ(ζ −a∗) in case (ii) according to (E.33), we ﬁnally obtain that, under
λ = a∗and ¯d∗= ζ−1,
∥g −¯d∗× eg2∥= o(∥g∥).
(E.56)
Since ∥g −d∗× eg1∥≤∥g −¯d∗× eg1∥by deﬁnition of d∗, we prove θ2(λ) →1 in case (ii)
for some sequence λ. (E.23) is completely established.
Next, it follows that, under λ ≤a∗and letting ¯d∗= ζ−1,
∥g −d∗× eg2∥2
(E.57)
≤
∥g −¯d∗× eg2∥2 ≤o(∥g∥2) + 2ζ−2
Z a∗
λ
a21 + χ(a)
χ(a)
φ(a −ζ)da
53

≤
o(∥g∥2) + 8
ζ2ρ
Z a∗
λ
a2φ(a)da ≤o(∥g∥2) + 8a∗2
ζ2ρ Φ(−λ) ≤o(∥g∥2) + O(ρ−1Φ(−λ)). (E.58)
The second inequality comes from (E.56), the triangle inequality, the deﬁnition of eg2(a)
given after (E.28), and that eψ2(a, λ) −eψ2(a, a∗) = a1{λ≤a≤a∗} for all a ≥0. The third
inequality comes from 1+χ(a)
χ(a) φ(a −ζ) ≤
2
χ(a)φ(a −ζ) = 4
ρφ(a) for a ≤a∗. The fourth
inequality is obvious and the last comes from a∗≲ζ as we are in case (ii). (E.58), (E.29),
and (E.31) together proves (E.25).
Lemma E4. Suppose the same assumptions as in Lemma E1. Then, for any deterministic positive λ sequence satisfying ρNΦ(ζ −λ) →∞, it holds that, for q ∈{1, 2},
∥eψq(λ)∥2 = (1 + oP(1))NE(eψq,i(λ)2).
Here eψq(λ) stands for the N-dimensional vector whose components are eψq,i(λ).
Proof. Throughout the proof λ is an arbitrary sequence as described in the statement of
the lemma. The strategy is to calculate the magnitude of E(eψq,i(λ)2) and E(eψq,i(λ)4),
and then establish the probability limit using Chebyshev’s inequality. It holds by the
deﬁnition of eψq,i and (E.2) (the condition ρ →0 it relies on is assumed here too) that,
for q ∈{1, 2},
E(eψq,i(λ)2q) = 2(1 + o(1))
Z ∞
0
eψq(a, λ)2q 
φ(a) + ρ
2φ(a −ζ)

da.
(E.59)
On the other hand, we can calculate, for j ∈{2, 4},
Z ∞
0
eψ1(a, λ)jφ(a)da
=
Z ∞
0
ajφ(λ + a)da ≂ιj
1,1Φ(−λ),
(E.60)
Z ∞
0
eψ1(a, λ)jφ(a −ζ)da
=
Z ∞
0
ajφ(λ −ζ + a)da ≂ιj
1,2Φ(ζ −λ),
(E.61)
where we use short-hand notation ι1,1 := (1 + λ)−1 and ι1,2 := 1+(ζ−λ)+
1+(λ−ζ)+. Similarly, we
have, for j ∈{2, 4},
Z ∞
λ
eψ2(a, λ)jφ(a)da
=
Z ∞
0
(λ + a)jφ(λ + a)da ≂ιj
2,1Φ(−λ),
(E.62)
Z ∞
λ
eψ2(a, λ)jφ(a −ζ)da
=
Z ∞
0
(λ + a)jφ(λ −ζ + a)da ≂ιj
2,2Φ(ζ −λ). (E.63)
where ι2,1 = λ + (1 + λ)−1 and ι2,2 = λ + 1+(ζ−λ)+
1+(λ−ζ)+. Then it holds that, for q ∈{1, 2},
E(eψq,i(λ)4)
E(eψq,i(λ)2)2
≲
ι4
q,1Φ(−λ) + ι4
q,2ρΦ(ζ −λ)
ι4
q,1Φ(−λ)2 + ι4
q,2ρ2Φ(ζ −λ)2 ≤ι2
q,2
ι2
q,1Φ(−λ) + ι2
q,2ρΦ(ζ −λ)
ι4
q,1Φ(−λ)2 + ι4
q,2ρ2Φ(ζ −λ)2
54

≤
ι2
q,2
2
ι2
q,1Φ(−λ) + ι2
q,2ρΦ(ζ −λ) ≤
2
ρΦ(ζ −λ).
Here we obtain the ﬁrst inequality by substituting (E.60), (E.61), (E.62), and (E.63)
into (E.59). The second inequality comes from that ιq,1 ≤ιq,2 for q ∈{1, 2}. Since
ρNΦ(ζ −λ) →∞by assumption, we have, for q ∈{1, 2},
Var(∥eψq∥2)
(E(∥eψq∥2))2 ≤
E(eψ
4
q,i)
NE(eψ
2
q,i)2 ≲
1
NρΦ(ζ −λ) →0.
(E.64)
Here we suppress the argument λ of eψq,i for simplicity and the ﬁrst inequality comes
from that eψq,i is i.i.d. across i. The current lemma directly follows from (E.64) and
Chebyshev’s inequality.
Lemma E5. Suppose the same assumptions as in Lemma E1.
Let ψ∆,1(a, λ, b) :=
b1{|a|−λ≥−b} and ψ∆,2(a, λ, b) := λ1{||a|−λ|≤b}. Also suppose that λN and bN are two deterministic positive sequences satisfying ρNΦ(ζ −λN) →∞and bN = o
 1/√log N

. Then
it holds that, for q ∈{1, 2},
E(|ψ∆,q(ˇzi, λN, bN)|2) = o(E(eψq(ˇzi, λN)2)).
Proof. Throughout the proof λN and bN are two arbitrary sequences as described in the
statement of the lemma. For simplicity, we omit the subscript N of λN and bN and also
omit the last two arguments of ψ∆,q. Using (E.2) (the condition ρ →0 it relies on is
assumed here too), we have, for q ∈{1, 2},
E(ψ∆,q(ˇzi)2) = 2(1 + o(1))
Z ∞
0
ψ∆,q(a)2 
φ(a) + ρ
2φ(a −ζ)

da.
(E.65)
To evaluate the right-hand side of (E.65), we write
Z
ψ∆,1(a)2φ(a)da
=
b2
Z ∞
λ−b
φ(a)da = b2Φ(b −λ),
(E.66)
Z
ψ∆,1(a)2φ(a −ζ)da
=
b2
Z ∞
λ−b
φ(a −ζ)da = b2Φ(ζ + b −λ),
(E.67)
Z
ψ∆,2(a)2φ(a)da
=
λ2
Z λ+b
λ−b
φ(a)da ≤2bλ2φ((λ −b)+),
(E.68)
Z
ψ∆,2(a)2φ(a −ζ)da
=
λ2
Z λ+b
λ−b
φ(a −ζ)da ≤2bλ2φ((λ −b −ζ)+).
(E.69)
On the other hand, it holds that, for all sequence (a, ¯a) satisfying |¯a −a| ≤b,
b2Φ(−¯a)
≤
cN
(1 + a+) log N φ(¯a+) ≤cN(1 + a+)−3(φ(a+) + cNN −1)
55

≤
cN(1 + a+)−2(Φ(−a) + cNN −1).
(E.70)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from b = o
 1/√log N

and (E.15). The second comes from
(D.18) of Lemma D4. For the last inequality we use (E.15), too. Further, we note that
(1+λ+)−1 ≤ι1,1 ≤ι1,2 and (1+(λ−ζ)+)−1 ≤ι1,2 (introduced after (E.61)). Then, using
(E.70) (choose (a, ¯a) = (λ, λ −b) and (a, ¯a) = (λ −ζ, λ −ζ −b) respectively), and noting
ρ →0, ι1,1 ≤ι1,2, and ρΦ(ζ −λ) ≳N −1 by assumption, we obtain
b2Φ(b −λ) + b2ρΦ(ζ + b −λ) = o(ι2
1,1Φ(−λ) + ι2
1,2ρΦ(ζ −λ)).
(E.71)
Given (E.65), (E.66), (E.67), (E.59), (E.60), and (E.61), we obtain from (E.71) that
E(ψ∆,1(ˇzi)2) = o(E(eψ1,i(λ)2)), which proves the lemma for q = 1.
Next, it holds that, for all sequence (a, ¯a) satisfying |¯a −a| ≤b,
bφ(¯a+) ≤
cN
√log N φ(¯a+) ≤cN(1 + a+)−1φ(a+) + cNN −1 ≤cNΦ(−a) + cNN −1.
(E.72)
We recall x+ = max{x, 0}. The ﬁrst inequality comes from b = o
 1/√log N

.
The
second comes from
(D.18) of Lemma D4. For the last inequality we use (E.15), too.
Further, we note that λ ≤ι2,1 and λ ≤ι2,2 (introduced after (E.61)). Then, using (E.72)
(choose (a, ¯a) = (λ, λ −b) and (a, ¯a) = (λ −ζ, λ −ζ −b) respectively), and noting ρ →0,
ι2,1 ≤ι2,2, and ρΦ(ζ −λ) ≳N −1 by assumption, we obtain
bλ2Φ(b −λ) + bλ2ρΦ(ζ + b −λ) = o(ι2
1,1Φ(−λ) + ι2
1,2ρΦ(ζ −λ)).
(E.73)
Given (E.65), (E.68), (E.69), (E.59), (E.62), and (E.63), we obtain from (E.73) that
E(ψ∆,2(ˇzi)2) = o(E(eψ2,i(λ)2)), which proves the lemma for q = 2.
Lemma E6. Suppose the same assumptions as in Proposition B2. Suppose λ is a positive
deterministic sequence satisfying ρNΦ(µ −λ) →∞. Also suppose λ′ is a G-measurable
sequence λ′ that satisﬁes |λ′ −λ| = oP
 1/√log N

. Then it holds that bS′
q(λ′) = Sq(λ) +
oP(SOPT + 1) for q = {1, 2}.
Proof. Throughout the proof λ and λ′ are arbitrary sequences as described in the statement of the lemma. Every result holds for q ∈{1, 2}.
We ﬁrst provide a bound on ∥bψq(λ′) −eψq(λ)∥2. Since ˇzi =
√
T(si + ¯εi) and we have
maxi |¯εi| ≲P
p
(log N)/T by uniform bound on i.i.d. normal variables and |si| ≲N −d
by assumption, we obtain
p
(log N)/T maxi |ˇzi| = oP
 1/√log N

as (log N)3/T →0 by
assumption. Combining this result with the ﬁrst part of (D.12) of Lemma D2, and noting
T = o(N) by assumption, we obtain
sup
i≤N
|bzi −ˇzi| = oP

1/
p
log N

.
(E.74)
56

Further, by deﬁnition it holds that, for all a, b ≥0, and λ ≥0,
sup
(a′,λ′):|a′−a|+|λ′−λ|≤b
|eψq(a′, λ′) −eψq(a, λ)| ≤ψ∆,q(a, λ, b) + 1{q=2}ψ∆,1(a, λ, b),
(E.75)
where ψ∆,q is introduced in the statement of Lemma E5. Substituting (E.74) and |λ′−λ| =
oP
 1/√log N

(by assumption) into (E.75) (choose (a′, a) = (bzi, ˇzi)), applying Lemma
E5, noting |eψ1(a, λ)| ≤|eψ2(a, λ)| by deﬁnition, and using Chebyshev’s inequality, we
obtain
∥bψq(λ′) −eψq(λ)∥2 = o(NE(eψq,i(λ)2)).
(E.76)
Using maxi≤N |bσi/σi −1| ≲P cN by (D.1) of Lemma D1 and the triangular inequality, we
further have
∥σ bw′
q(λ′) −eψq(λ)∥2 = o(NE(eψq,i(λ)2)).
(E.77)
Next, we write
|σ bw′
q(λ′)⊺ψ −eψq(λ)⊺ψ| ≤∥σ bw′
q(λ′)⊺−eψq(λ)∥∥ψ∥= oP
q
NE(eψq,i(λ)2)(1 + SOPT)

.
(E.78)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
For the last equality we
utilize ∥ψ∥≲P 1 + SOPT by Corollary 1 and (E.77). On the other hand, we have
Var(eψq(λ)⊺ψ) ≤NE(eψq,i(λ)2ψ2
i ) ≤NE(eψq,i(λ)2α2
i ) = o(NE(eψq,i(λ)2)).
(E.79)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from that both eψq,i(λ) and ψi are i.i.d. across i. The second
inequality comes from ψi = E(αi|G) and that eψq,i(λ) is G-measurable. The last equality
comes from |αi| ≤µ = o(1). As a result of (E.79) and Chebyshev’s inequality, we have
eψq(λ)⊺ψ = NE(eψq,i(λ)ψi) + oP
q
NE(eψq,i(λ)2)

.
(E.80)
Combining (E.78) and (E.80), we obtain
σ bw′
q(λ′)⊺ψ = NE(eψq,i(λ)ψi) + oP
q
NE(eψq,i(λ)2)(1 + SOPT)

.
(E.81)
Moreover, it holds that
σ2∥bw′
q(λ′)∥2
=
∥eψq(λ)∥2 + O(∥σ bw′
q(λ′) −eψq(λ)∥2 + ∥eψq(λ)∥∥σ bw′
q(λ′) −eψq(λ)∥)
=
(1 + oP(1))NE(eψq,i(λ)2).
(E.82)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. The second equality is a
direct result of Lemma E4 and (E.77).
57

Next, we note that E(eψq,i(λ)) = 0 by symmetry of eψ(a, λ) in a. Because eψq,i(λ) is
i.i.d. across i and independent of β, it follows
E(∥β⊺eψq(λ)∥2|β) ≲E(eψq,i(λ)2)N∥β∥2
MAX ≲P NE(eψq,i(λ)2).
(E.83)
Then we have
σ∥β⊺bw′
q(λ′)∥≤∥β⊺eψq(λ)∥+∥β⊺(σ bw′
q(λ′)−eψq(λ))∥≲P
q
NE(eψq,i(λ)2)+cNN
q
E(eψq,i(λ)2).
(E.84)
where the last inequality comes from (E.83) and (E.77). Therefore, we obtain
∥Mβ bw′
q(λ′)∥2
=
∥bw′
q(λ′)∥2 −bw′
q(λ′)⊺Pβ bw′
q(λ′) = σ2∥bw′
q(λ′)∥2 + oP(NE(eψq,i(λ)2)),(E.85)
bw′
q(λ′)⊺Mβψ
=
bw′
q(λ′)⊺ψ + bw′
q(λ′)⊺Pβψ = bw′
q(λ′)⊺ψ + oP
q
NE(eψq,i(λ)2)

.
(E.86)
The last equalities of both results come from (E.84) and λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N. For the last
equality of (E.86), we also use ∥β⊺ψ∥≲P N 1/2E(α2
i )1/2 ≲P cNN 1/2. We now conclude
that
bw′
q(λ′)⊺Mβψ
∥Mβ bw′
q(λ′)∥
=
(1 + oP(1)) bw′
q(λ′)⊺ψ
q
NE(eψq,i(λ)2)
+ oP(1)
=
(1 + oP(1))Sq(λ) + oP(1 + SOPT) = Sq(λ) + oP(SOPT + 1).(E.87)
The ﬁrst equality comes from (E.85), (E.86), and (E.82). The second comes from (E.81).
The last equality comes from Sq(λ) ≤N 1/2E(ψ2
i )1/2 = SOPT, in which the inequality is
just Cauchy-Schwarz and the equality holds by deﬁnition.
Finally, (C.5) and (C.6) establishes that, under Assumption 1 and for all G-measurable
w, w⊺(α −E(α|G))/∥w∥= oP(1). Choosing w = bw′
q(λ′)⊺Mβ, and noting ψ = σ−1E(α|G),
we obtain
bS′
q(λ′) =
bw′
q(λ′)⊺Mβα
σ∥Mβ bw′
q(λ′)∥= bw′
q(λ′)⊺Mβψ
∥Mβ bw′
q(λ′)∥+ oP(1).
(E.88)
Given (E.87) and (E.88), we prove the lemma.
Lemma E7. Suppose the same assumptions as in Proposition B2. Then it holds that
bS′
q(λ) = oP(1), for all G-measurable positive sequence λ satisfying µ2ρNΦ(ζ −λ) = oP(1)
and for q ∈{1, 2}.
Proof. Throughout the proof λ is an arbitrary sequence as described in the statement of
the lemma. Every result holds for q ∈{1, 2}. We let λ∗be a deterministic sequence such
that λ ≥λ∗in probability and µ2ρNΦ(ζ −λ∗) →0, which is apparently always feasible.
When Φ(ζ −λ∗) ≳1, we have µ2ρN →0 and thereby (SOPT)2 = NE(ψ2
i ) ≤NE(s2
i ) ≤
ρNµ2 →0. Since bS′
q(λ) is the Sharpe ratio generated by bw′
q(λ)⊺Mβ, which is G-measurable
58

and satisfy bw′
q(λ)⊺Mββ = 0. Then we obtain bS′
q(λ) ≤SOPT + oP(1) = oP(1) from the
second part of Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 (the assumptions of the lemma obviously
guarantee the prerequisites of both).
Since −bS′
q(λ) is the Sharpe ratio generated by
−bw′
q(λ)⊺Mβ, we obtain −bS′
q(λ) ≤oP(1), too.
When Φ(ζ −λ∗) →0, we have Φ(−λ∗) ≤Φ(ζ −λ∗) →0. Moreover, it holds that, for
all sequence (a, ¯a) satisfying |¯a −a| = o
 1/√log N

,
Φ(−¯a) ≲
1
1 + a+
φ(¯a+) ≲
1
1 + a+
(φ(a+) + cNN −2) ≲Φ(−a) + cNN −2.
(E.89)
The ﬁrst inequality comes from |¯a −a| = o
 1/√log N

and (E.15). The second comes
from (D.18) of Lemma D4. For the last inequality we use (E.15), too. Then, using (E.89)
(choose a = λ∗and a = λ∗−ζ respectively), we have that, for all bN = o
 1/√log N

,
(
NΦ(bN −λ∗) ≲NΦ(−λ∗) + cNN −1 = o(N),
ρNΦ(ζ + bN −λ∗) ≲ρNΦ(ζ −λ∗) + cNρN −1 ≲o(µ−2).
(E.90)
Here the last inequality comes from µ2ρNΦ(ζ −λ∗) = o(1) and µ = o(1) by assumption.
Hence, it holds that, for some bN = o
 1/√log N

,
X
i≤N
1{ bw′
q,i(λ)̸=0}
≲P
X
i≤N
1{|ˇzi|≥λ∗−bN}
≲P
NΦ(bN −λ∗) + ρNΦ(ζ + bN −λ∗) = o(N),
(E.91)
X
i≤N
1{ bw′
q,i(λ)̸=0,αi̸=0}
≲P
X
i≤N
1{|ˇzi|≥λ∗−bN,αi̸=0} ≲P ρNΦ(ζ + bN −λ∗) ≲o(µ−2).(E.92)
For both results, the ﬁrst inequality comes from (E.74), the second inequality comes from
the density of ˇzi and Chebyshev’s inequality, the last inequality comes from (E.90). As a
result, we have
∥β⊺bw′
q(λ)∥≲∥β∥MAX∥bw′
q(λ)∥
sX
i≤N
1{ bw′
q,i(λ)̸=0} = oP
√
N∥bw′
q(λ)∥

.
(E.93)
Here the ﬁrst inequality comes from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, and the last equality
comes from (E.91). Then we obtain
∥Mβ bw′
q(λ)∥2 = ∥bw′
q(λ)∥2 −bw′
q(λ)⊺Pβ bw′
q(λ) = (1 + oP(1))∥bw′
q(λ)∥2.
(E.94)
For the last equality, we use (E.93) and λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N.
Similarly, using (E.93),
λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N and ∥β⊺α∥≲P N 1/2E(α2
i )1/2 ≲P cNN 1/2, we obtain
bw′
q(λ)⊺Mβα = bw′
q(λ)⊺α + bw′
q(λ)⊺Pβα = bw′
q(λ)⊺α + oP(∥bw′
q(λ)∥).
(E.95)
59

Combining (E.85) and (E.86), we now conclude that
bS′
q(λ) = bw′
q(λ)⊺Mβα
∥Mβ bw′
q(λ)∥= (1 + oP(1)) bw′
q(λ)⊺α
∥bw′
q(λ)∥+ oP(1).
(E.96)
On the other hand, it holds that
| bw′
q(λ)⊺α|
∥bw′
q(λ)∥≤µ
P
i≤N | bw′
q,i(λ)|1{ ewq,i(λ)̸=0,αi̸=0}
∥bw′
q(λ)∥
≤µ
sX
i≤N
1{ bw′
q,i(λ)̸=0,αi̸=0} = oP(1).
(E.97)
The ﬁrst inequality holds by |si| = µ
σ1{αi̸=0}, the second by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
and the last equality holds by (E.92). The lemma follows from (E.96) and (E.97).
References
Andrews, D. W. and X. Cheng (2012). Estimation and inference with weak, semi-strong,
and strong identiﬁcation. Econometrica 80(5), 2153–2211.
Brown, L. D. and E. Greenshtein (2009). Nonparametric empirical Bayes and compound
decision approaches to estimation of a high-dimensional vector of normal means. The
Annals of Statistics 37(4), 1685 – 1704.
Efron, B. (2011). Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 106(496), 1602–1614.
Folland, G. (2009). A Guide to Advanced Real Analysis. Number 37. MAA.
Horn, R. A. and C. R. Johnson (2012). Matrix analysis. Cambridge university press.
Liu, W. and Q.-M. Shao (2014). Phase transition and regularized bootstrap in large-scale
t-tests with false discovery rate control. The Annals of Statistics 42(5), 2003–2025.
Robbins, H. (1956). An empirical bayes approach to statistics. Berkeley Symposium on
Mathematical Statistics and Probability 3, 157–163.
60
