Sharks in the Dark:
Quantifying HFT Dark Pool Latency Arbitrage
July 4, 2022
Abstract
We investigate stale reference pricing and liquidity provision in dark pools
using proprietary, participant-level regulatory data. We show a substantial
amount of stale trading occurs, imposing large adverse selection costs on passive dark pool participants. Consistent with these costs, HFTs almost never
provide liquidity in the dark, instead frequently consuming liquidity, in particular in order to take advantage of stale reference prices. Finally, we examine
market design interventions aimed at countering dark pool latency arbitrage
and show that only mechanisms that protect passive dark liquidity are eﬀective
in achieving this goal.
Keywords: high-frequency trading, dark pools, latency arbitrage, stale quotes,
reference prices
1
Introduction
A deﬁning feature of modern ﬁnancial markets is the ﬁerce competition on speed,
which determines liquidity providers’ proﬁtability (Baron, Brogaard, Hagstr¨omer,
and Kirilenko, 2019) and investors’ trading costs.
In such a world, fast traders
impose adverse selection costs on slower ones by acting on information signals faster
than their competitors (Foucault, Hombert, and Ro¸su, 2016). New information can
1
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

be complex, i.e. its impact on prices may not be clear, resulting in competition in
both the interpretation of, and reaction to, new information (Budish, Cramton, and
Shim, 2015). However, when the consequence of the signal for prices is certain, a
race occurs based on reaction times alone. These situations, variously labeled ‘toxic
arbitrage’ (Foucault, Kozhan, and Tham, 2016) or ‘latency arbitrage’ (Bartlett and
McCrary, 2019), are harmful to liquidity in ﬁnancial markets when they increase
adverse selection for liquidity providers (Shkilko and Sokolov, 2020).
Dark pools are uniquely susceptible to this latency arbitrage for two reasons:
they rely on outside prices from a reference market in order to determine execution
prices, and dark liquidity is often pegged to this reference price. Changes in reference
prices creates an ‘old’ current price and a ‘new’ price once the update is propagated
to the dark venue, a situation which does not exist on lit venues (Duong, Kalev, and
Tian, 2022). While prices may vary between lit venues, some uncertainty remains
whether a new ’best price’ in market A will be followed by convergence in market
B or reversal in market A. By contrast, in situations where the dark pool reference
price (and its pegged dark limit orders) are stale, fast traders aware of the new price
can engage in near risk-free latency arbitrage and cause immediate adverse selection
by trading at these (now stale) prices.
In this study, we quantify the extent of stale trading in dark pools and the costs it
imposes on investors. Furthermore, our unique regulatory data set contains complete
order book information (user-level trade and quote entry) for multiple dark pools,
which allows us to identify the market participants most often responsible for latency
arbitrage, allowing us to make inferences about the liquidity provision strategies of
diﬀerent groups of participants in dark pools. Lastly, we examine the eﬀectiveness
of several existing market design solutions aimed at addressing the negative consequences of the speed race. This study contributes to the literature on the design
of modern markets that operate at high frequency (with persistent race conditions)
and sheds light on the merits of mechanisms to ‘slow down’ markets, such as ‘speed
bumps’, batch auctions, and minimum resting times.
Due to data availability, there has been limited research into stale trading in the
dark. A study by the Canadian securities regulator IIROC (Anderson, Devani, and
2
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Zhang, 2016) ﬁnds that 4 percent of all dark pool trades in Canada occur at stale
prices. The Tabb Group consultancy analyzed ten months of trading data for a large
buy-side ﬁrm, ﬁnding that midpoint trades were priced at the far touch or worse
(i.e. at or behind the best bid or ask) 11 percent of the time (Alexander, Giordano,
and Brooks, 2015). In a related strand of literature, Ding, Hanna, and Hendershott
(2014) ﬁnd frequent deviations between the US NBBO reference feed (the SIP) and
the NBBO constructed from proprietary feeds, proxying for the diﬀering ’views’ of
the market that slow and fast traders experience.
Using a conservative identiﬁcation, we document that at least 4 percent of dark
trading in our UK-based sample occurs at stale reference prices, in line with the
results of Anderson, Devani, and Zhang (2016). We ﬁnd an average cost of about 2.4
basis points for executions at stale prices in the dark and estimate the total annual
cost to the passive side across all UK dark pools from this type of latency arbitrage
to be GBP4.2 million for the year 2014. To provide a point of reference, Hasbrouck
(2018) estimates the loss of slow to fast traders in lit markets at up to 2.2 basis
points.
Speed diﬀerentials between fast and slow participants in lit trading venues have
been a hotly debated topic for some time.
Some studies disagree whether these
diﬀerences beneﬁt or harm market liquidity as there are two opposing eﬀects: On
the one hand, speed allows fast liquidity providers to quickly update their stale
quotes and thus reduces their adverse selection risk, which in turn lowers transaction
costs for other market participants (Brogaard, Hagstr¨omer, Nord´en, and Riordan,
2015). On the other hand, fast liquidity takers, called latency arbitrageurs or ’highfrequency bandits’ (Menkveld and Zoican, 2017), will try to beat liquidity providers
in this race and execute against their stale quotes before they can update them
(Aquilina, Budish, and O’Neill, 2022). A number of studies (Foucault, Kozhan, and
Tham, 2016; Shkilko and Sokolov, 2020) have documented reduced liquidity and
increased transactions costs as a consequence. Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015)
argue that arbitrage bandits in aggregate have the advantage because the (single)
liquidity provider has to beat all bandits to avoid adverse selection. Menkveld and
Zoican (2017) ﬁnd that the net beneﬁt to liquidity depends on the relative proportion
3
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

of bandits vs.
uninformed liquidity traders present in the market at any point.
Foucault, Kozhan, and Tham (2016) add the relative speed of bandits over liquidity
providers as a crucial determinant of this adverse selection cost.
How do these insights transfer to the dark? While recent studies have shown
that dark pool activity may in fact encourage information production (Brogaard and
Pan, 2022), the opacity of dark marketplaces prevents much being known about the
identity of traders in dark pools. Our results provide some insights into who is active
in dark pools and who provides and consumes liquidity. We show that it is almost
exclusively high frequency trading ﬁrms that are on the beneﬁting side of dark pool
executions at stale prices (between 96 and 99 percent of the time). Furthermore,
stale trading does not happen at random; rather, in the vast majority of cases (83
percent), it is driven by aggressive dark orders from HFTs. This is even more notable
given another of our ﬁndings: HFTs as a group almost never provide marketable
liquidity in the dark (although they do post non-marketable limit orders in some
stocks). These data points, taken together, imply very strategic order submissions
by HFTs that are mostly liquidity consuming, including those instances where they
take advantage of stale reference prices. We are aware of one comparable empirical
study by the Australian securities regulator (ASIC), which ﬁnds that HFTs were on
the ‘winning side’ of trades in dark pools that referenced stale prices 85% of the time
compared with 31–32% for other users, (ASIC, 2015, p. 54).
Regulators have also paid close attention to the negative consequences of the
speed race, in particular with regard to reduced liquidity or the public perception
that ’markets are rigged’ (Bartlett and McCrary, 2019; Lewis, 2014). In the case of
dark pools, regulators have ﬁned dark pools operators for systematic mispricings1
and for misleading investors about the nature of the reference pricing.2 Spurred by
the highly competitive equity market landscape, and with support from regulators,
some venue operators have proactively implemented market design changes to address
latency arbitrage and stale trading in the dark. The two most commonly discussed
1Goldman Sachs’s U.S. dark pool Sigma-X brieﬂy used incorrect references prices (Hope, 2014).
2Barclay’s was ﬁned by the SEC for claiming it was using faster direct feeds to price dark pool
trades despite actually using slower ‘SIP’ feeds (SEC, 2016).
4
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

proposals are speed bumps and batch auctions.
Speed bump mechanisms typically slow down incoming orders but may allow
amendments to existing limit orders to pass through without delay, thereby providing
liquidity providers with a head start over potential arbitrageurs. Currently, speed
bumps are used by, among others, U.S. exchange and dark pool IEX (Hu, 2019), the
Chicago Stock Exchange, the Alpha Exchange in Canada (Chen, Foley, Goldstein,
and Ruf, 2016) and NYSE. In the case of IEX’s speed-bump, for instance, inbound
orders are delayed by 350 microseconds (IEX, 2015) but the repricing of certain type
of pegged dark limit orders is not. Consequently, as long as the reference price feed
is not stale by more than 350 microseconds, reference price latency arbitrage can be
prevented.3
Batch auctions (Baldauf and Mollner, 2020; Budish, Cramton, and Shim, 2015)
do away with the conventional design of continuous, sequential trading, which by
its very design creates conditions for speed races, and replaces it with the principle
of frequent auctions (often sub-second) that mitigate the speed advantages of faster
traders, with slower traders granted suﬃcient time to observe the outcome of the last
auction and submit their orders for the next, with no disadvantage to trade priority.
No public exchange venue has implemented this mechanism to date, but at least one
dark pool operator has: UK based Turquoise introduced a ‘random uncross’ feature,
which it says is beneﬁcial for ‘latency sensitive ﬂow’ (LSEG, 2017).
This design
matches eligible resting orders in the dark pool at random points in time, preventing
fast traders from exploiting their speed advantage.
A third category of design changes focus on order characteristics. For example,
Deutsche Bank’s Super X dark pool stops matching any orders that are stale by
more than a second (Deutsche Bank, 2016). In addition, many dark pool operators
disclose information on latency and how it is managed.4
3This is acknowledged in competing exchange BATS’ submission to the SEC regarding IEX’s
application to become an exchange: ‘this 350 microsecond delay provides IEX the ability to update
the prices of resting orders that are pegged . . . before market participants with faster access to
market data can access those now stale prices on IEX’ (Swanson, 2015, p. 1).
4For example, Goldman Sach’s compares the timestamps in market data feeds ‘to the time that a
quote is received by SIGMA X (based on GSEC’s internal clock). If this process identiﬁes a latency
greater than a deﬁned threshold, SIGMA X will automatically suspend crossing functionality in the
5
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

In the ﬁnal part of this study, we investigate 3 market design interventions aimed
at curbing latency arbitrage in general, and to the extent that the design changes
are applied to dark venues, stale trading in particular. We ﬁnd that merely speeding
up the reference price feed is not suﬃcient to fundamentally change the outcome of
the speed race, but both batch auctions as well as random uncrossings are eﬀective
tools in reducing adverse selection costs and negative eﬀects on market liquidity.
Our results provide empirical support for the predictions of theoretical models of
high frequency arms races (Foucault, Kozhan, and Tham, 2016) as well as those
proposing design changes to counter speed races and latency arbitrage (Baldauf and
Mollner, 2020).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Institutional details of dark
pools and the data sources are discussed in Sections 2 and 3, respectively. Section
4 examines the prevalence of dark pool trades at stale reference prices, the cost
to investors, and what causes stale reference prices. The impact of stale reference
prices on adverse selection and the nature of dark liquidity are covered in Section 5.
Section 6 investigates several market design interventions aimed at combating adverse
selection from stale reference prices and Section 7 concludes.
2
Institutional Details
A dark pool is a trading venue which lacks both pre-trade transparency and
a traditional limit-order-book structure.
While in lit venues market participants
can observe the orders submitted by other participants, in dark pools all orders are
hidden. The main advantage of submitting an order to a dark pool is that the trader’s
intention is not revealed to the entire market, helping to reduce their price impact.5
Dark pools also oﬀer better prices than are available on the lit market (so called ’price
improvement’), typically trading at prices between the best bid and oﬀer (BBO). The
relevant security’ (GSEC, 2016, p. 3).
5Absent dark pools, orders would typically be split into smaller pieces to achieve similar results,
as documented by(Pham, Anderson, Duong, and Lajbcygier, 2020).
6
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

main disadvantage of dark pools is execution uncertainty;6 as it is impossible to know
whether there is a willing counterparty, one cannot know beforehand whether a trade
will actually take place. Indeed, (Zhu, 2014) argues that information events result
in correlated liquidity demands, reducing dark pool execution probabilities at times
of heightened information asymmetry.
Orders sent to dark pools usually include a price limit – the maximum price at
which a participant is willing to buy (or the minimum price at which a participant is
willing to sell).7 However, within the boundaries of these price constraints, the dark
pool operator is responsible for determining the price at which trades take place as
a direct consequence of the absence of pre-trade transparency. To determine trade
prices, dark pools rely on reference prices drawn from lit markets.8
Dark pool operators typically have two options to determine which venues to use
to calculate a reference price. The ﬁrst option is to rely on a single venue, usually
the ‘primary’ market (which for the purposes of this analysis is the London Stock
Exchange (LSE)). The second option is to consider multiple (lit) venues. In the
ﬁrst case, dark pools use the Best Bid/Oﬀer (BBO) prices available on the LSE. In
the second case, operators construct what is known as the European BBO (EBBO),
which includes orders from all other venues.9
Having chosen a source of reference prices (the BBO or the EBBO), dark pools
then choose to match prices at either the quoted midpoint, the BBO, or both.10 Many
jurisdictions have recently prohibited these non-price improving trades,11 including
6This is because there may not be liquidity available at the desired time to trade, or the liquidity
could be ‘one-sided’, i.e. (Zhu, 2014). For example, at the midpoint there may be a resting sell
order rather than buy orders to facilitate sells. In this paper, we examine whether there is also
‘price uncertainty’ for dark pool executions arising from latency in reference prices.
7Similar to lit markets, dark pool participants may submit orders without a price using a ‘market
order’ that executes at the prevailing BBO (or midpoint). In practice, these are rarely used.
8For more evidence of the manipulation of lit-market quotes to alter reference prices, see Chau,
Aspris, Foley, and Malloch (2021) and Frino, Ibikunle, Mollica, and Steﬀen (2018).
9The EBBO diﬀers from the National Best Bid or Oﬀer used in the US as it often excludes
smaller lit markets, such as Equiduct and Aquis.
10The dark pools currently operated by BATS/Chi-X and Turquoise use only the midpoint price.
Other dark MTFs, such as ITG Posit, UBS MTF and Goldman Sachs Sigma X, also use the best
bid or ask price (depending on the direction of the trade).
11See Foley and Putni¸nˇs (2016) for an examination of these regulations in Canada and Australia.
7
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Europe with the enactment of MiFID II.12
Dark pools in the UK and Europe are, from a regulatory perspective, classiﬁed
as either multilateral trading facilities (MTFs) or broker crossing networks (BCNs).
MTFs fall within the scope of MiFID, require regulatory approval, and are in practice
independent venues. This makes them subject to requirements of non-discriminatory
access, with transparent rulebooks, and usually central clearing (CCPs). BCNs are
not regulated under MiFID and are non-independent crossing networks under a broker’s direct control.
They are thus allowed to discriminate by participant types,
with rules disclosed in bilateral contracts.
MiFID II prohibits BCN venues forcing operators to register as MTFs or Systematic Internalizers (SIs).13 In the US,
the ‘Alternative Trading System’ (ATS) framework would apply to MTFs, but also
BCNs.
For our analysis, we separate dark pools into three categories.
First, MTFs
that are operated by lit exchanges, including Turquoise and BATS Europe,14 which
are integrated with their respective lit exchanges infrastructure, and match trades
exclusively at the midpoint. Data for these venues contain orders and trades with
participant identiﬁers. Secondly, MTFs (such as Posit, SigmaX and UBS) that are
operated by investment banks and other brokers, who match trades at the BBO as
well as the midpoint. Available data for these contain less information (only trade
level data, not order data). Third, BCNs (such as ‘Crossﬁnder’ and ‘SuperX’) for
which speciﬁc venues cannot be determined15 are excluded from the sample used in
this study.
12MiFID II Article 4(1)(a) and (2). These bans exist despite evidence from Brogaard and Pan
(2022) that dark trading increases information acquisition.
13Neumeier, Gozluklu, Hoﬀmann, O’Neill, and Suntheim (2021) provide further details on the
regulatory changes applicable to dark pools in Europe.
14Turquoise is operated by an investment ﬁrm, Turquoise Global Holdings, but is is majority
owned by London Stock Exchange Group (LSEG).
15MiFID allows reporting of these as simply OTC (Over the Counter) trades.
8
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

3
Data and Methodology
3.1
Data
We rely on two data sources in this study. First, we use the FCA’s proprietary
order book and transaction-level data, which are being collected for market monitoring and research purposes. The transaction data contain both lit and dark trades
for the four UK trading venues LSE, BATS, Chi-X16 and Turquoise, timestamped at
the millisecond to the clock of each exchange’s matching engine.
These venues account for 99.6%17 of all FTSE 350 on-exchange lit traded volume
in the UK, and all exchange-operated dark MTFs, providing us with a representative
sample of lit and dark trading activity for UK-listed stocks.
Each transaction record includes buyer or seller initiated ﬂags, price, quantity
and information on the order type along with the identity of the market participants. The corresponding order book data contain all order messages (submissions,
amendments, and cancellations) and allows us to compute reference prices at the
millisecond granularity.
Second, we complement the above exchange-based transactions with millisecond time-stamped dark pool trade data from Thomson Reuters Tick History, which
includes the broker-operated dark MTFs by UBS, Sigma X (Goldman Sachs), ITG
Posit and Instinet Blockmatch. We exclude Liquidnet as their reference prices are determined through bilateral negotiation rather than the MiFID reference price waiver,
and Smartpool and Blink MTF as they have negligible volumes. The remaining sample covers 94%18 of dark MTF (exchange and broker operated) trading.19
16BATS and Chi-X are part of the same legal entity, having merged in 2012, but they maintain
separate order books.
17Estimates were calculated for the period 1/1/14 to 30/06/15 for the FTSE 100 and FTSE 250
Index using information from Fidessa (2017).
18Liquidnet accounts for 5.42% of dark trading in the FTSE 100 and 8.65% in the FTSE 250.
Estimates from Fidessa. Note that Fidessa does not include Goldman Sach’s MTF, Sigma X in its
estimates (Rosenblatt, 2014).
19As BCNs are unregulated venues under MiFID I, post-trade reporting does not require these
venues to be named so they are reported as ‘OTC’ trades. These venues are excluded from the
analysis due to the inability to separate OTC trades organized on a BCN from other OTC trades.
9
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Our analysis uses a randomly selected sample of 57 stocks from the FTSE 100
and 57 from the FTSE 250. Together, these two indices make up the FTSE 350, and
provide us with a diversiﬁed and representative sample of stocks with both relatively
high and low levels of liquidity.20 The opening and closing auction periods in both
samples are excluded, as they speciﬁcally prohibit dark trading. Although the full
order book data spans 2014 and 2015, the analysis is restricted to ﬁve separate weeks,
spaced approximately two-and-a-half months apart, for computational reasons.21
3.2
HFT and Participant Identiﬁcation
The de-anonymized nature of the data allows for the identiﬁcation of participants
at the ﬁrm level, but not at the trading desk or client level. We group participants
into HFTs and non-HFTs, and further divide non-HFTs based on whether they
use co-location at the primary exchange to investigate the role that the resulting
diﬀerences in speed have on trading outcomes.22
The vast majority of HFTs in
the sample are co-located, and 99.84% of all dark trades by HFTs emanate from
co-located servers. Many participants that are not HFTs are also co-located.
We follow the approach of Aquilina and Ysusi (2016) for identifying HFT participants from FCA regulatory data, resulting in an almost identical list, diﬀering only
because of the presence of additional participants in our more recent sample. The
criterion used for deﬁning HFTs is that they are a subset of algorithmic trading participants that use proprietary capital to generate returns using computer algorithms
and low-latency infrastructure.
Objective measures of HFTs have been proposed by Hagstr¨omer and Nord´en
(2013) and Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2017), such as high order-to-trade
ratios and inventory mean reversion. These measures aim to proxy for characteris20(Cebiro˘glu and Horst, 2015) show that dark trading is more likely to exist in more than less
liquid securities.
21Speciﬁcally, these weeks are the continuous ﬁve-day trading weeks starting: 13th of January,
31st of March, 16th of June, and 1st of September in 2014, and the 22nd of June in 2015.
22Co-location refers to the placement of a market participant’s servers in close physical proximity
to an exchange to reduce transmission latency. Information on who uses co-location is obtained
from FCA supervisors.
10
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

tics that latency sensitive participants may demonstrate, but do not guarantee these
participants are truly latency sensitive, nor that others do not exhibit these characteristics.
For example, an HFT engaged in predominantly liquidity consuming
(aggressive) trading strategies, will have a lower order-to-trade ratio than an HFT
engaged in liquidity providing (passive) market-making strategies.
Therefore, the use of the FCA’s internal supervisory knowledge, and the knowledge of the platforms from which the original list was obtained, is recognized as the
most accurate means of identiﬁcation. Many of these ﬁrms now identify publicly as
HFTs and together established a lobby group, ‘The Modern Markets Initiative’, in
2013. Baron, Brogaard, Hagstr¨omer, and Kirilenko (2019) list a subset of those that
can be identiﬁed by name, as Sweden provides non-anonymized exchange trading.
In our sample, 30 participants are classiﬁed as HFTs. The overlap with the publicly
disclosed names from the Modern Markets Initiative is very high.
4
Extent and Nature of Stale Trading
In this section, we discuss the prevalence of dark pool trades at stale reference
prices in exchange operated dark pools, investigate possible causes and quantify their
costs to market participants.
4.1
Extent of Stale Trades
Our approach to identifying stale reference prices is similar to the methodologies
of Anderson, Devani, and Zhang (2016) and ASIC (2015). First, we identify quotes
on the primary market whose midpoint matches the price of the dark pool trade. We
look for a matching quote up to one millisecond after the trade time and back as far
as necessary to observe a match.23 If this process returns multiple matches, we use
the most recent quote match from the EBBO to be conservative. For a trade to be
considered stale, there has to be at least one quote update after the matching quote
23This is because one millisecond reﬂects the upper bound of clock synchronization accuracy
provided by the exchanges, and the minimum granularity of timestamps provided to us.
11
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

but before the time of the trade, the intervening non-match. It is the ending time
stamp of the matching quote, i.e. the start of the intervening non-matching quote,
that signiﬁes the existence of staleness. Latency, our measure of staleness, measures
this time diﬀerence for trade i:
Latencyi = (TradeTimei −EndofMatchTimei)
(1)
Should the matching quote still be active at the time of the trade (i.e. no intervening quote), Latency is zero. In addition, only trades that occur with a Latency
of at least two milliseconds are classiﬁed as stale, recognizing that a one millisecond
threshold would not allow for clock synchronicity and timestamp rounding eﬀects.24
Our methodology eliminates the risk of mis-classifying stale trades, but is likely to
signiﬁcantly understate the extent of stale reference prices if some market participants
can react to a quote update in well under 2 milliseconds. If e.g. the shortest possible
time for a market participant to receive a quote update from the LSE, process it
and send an order to the dark pool is 350 microseconds, participants may be able
to successfully race the quote update to the dark venue if prices are stale by more
than this amount. Indeed, estimates (Standard and Poors Capital IQ, 2015) put
the minimum transmission time for the dark venues in our sample at the time of
our sample period at less than 500 microseconds. Section 5.2 uses an alternative
approach that measures average costs to other market participants across all trades
and is not limited to positively identifying stale trades.
[Figure 1 about here.]
Figure 1 supports the notion that our identiﬁcation is likely conservative.
It
displays the distribution of Latency, our measure of staleness, which required at least
a 2 millisecond lag between reference quote and time of trade in order to classify a
trade as stale. We ﬁnd that over 70 % of all trades thus classiﬁed as stale occur
24Compared to Anderson, Devani, and Zhang (2016), we require latency to be at least two
milliseconds rather than one’ and restrict our analysis to dark pools referencing only the primary
exchange, making identifying matches more certain and diminishing clock synchronization issues
inherent in timestamps from diﬀerent markets.
12
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

at the millisecond timestamp exactly 2 milliseconds after the reference quote was
superseded by an update. A lag of 3 millisecond occurs in only 10% of cases and
larger lags are rarer still. This would indicate that we are likely missing a signiﬁcant
amount of stale trades below the 2 millisecond lag due to our timestamp granularity.
[Figure 2 about here.]
The upper panel of Figure 2 reports the proportion of stale dark trades against
the market capitalization (in logs) of individual securities averaged across the entire
sample period; the lower panel reports this proportion against the average nominal
share price (in logs). We can make two observations: First, the average proportion
of stale dark trades varies signiﬁcantly by security, between 0% and 7.8%. Second,
we observe a strong positive correlation of stale trading with market capitalization
and a relatively weak correlation with nominal stock price.
Given that, based on our analysis reported later on, almost all stale trading
involves HFTs, this observation is potentially explained by the fact that HFTs have
a known preference for highly liquid, high volume stocks which allows them to quickly
unwind in the lit market any position they assume in a dark pool (Duong, Kalev,
and Tian, 2022)
Table 1 contains a number of sample characteristics of our trade-by-trade data.
Overall, we identify 3.94% of all trades as stale over the sample period, almost identical to IIROC’s ﬁgure of 4% for Canada (Anderson, Devani, and Zhang, 2016). This
value appears to be trending upwards over time, averaging 3.36% in 2014 and 4.05%
in 2015. This upward trend in latency might seem at odds with the overall trend in
the marketplace of lower exchange latency and increasing participant speed. However, as we will demonstrate in Figure 3 and Table 2, there is a positive relationship
between message traﬃc and latency. Therefore, if exchange upgrades do not keep
pace with message traﬃc, an increase in latency will be observed.
[Table 1 about here.]
13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

4.2
Cause of Stale Trades
Having established a signiﬁcant proportion of dark trades execute at stale reference prices, we next seek to identify the factors responsible for the occurrence of
stale trades. Issues of message delays and latency have been shown to contribute
to market fragility and as such have become a point of interest among regulators
and academics in the wake of several major market malfunctions such as the 2010
Flash Crash. For example, Menkveld and Yueshen (2018) demonstrate that delays in
market data feeds during the 2010 Flash Crash may have contributed to the massive
deterioration in liquidity at the heart of the episode via a rare breakdown in the crucial arbitrage relationship between the E-mini S&P 500 Futures and the SPY S&P
500 ETF. The importance of processing latency in markets is also established by Kirilenko and Lamacie (2015) who ﬁnd that processing latency predicts the volatility of
asset prices. Exchanges have also been increasingly forthcoming about this relationship. The Eurex exchange states that large bursts of incoming messages can delay
the dissemination of quote updates by many milliseconds, for periods lasting over
3 milliseconds (Eurex, 2016, p. 28). The CME has introduced ‘First in First Out’
priority at the exchange gateway to ensure equitable outcomes amongst participants
due to variances in processing time CME (2014).
Motivated by these concerns among academics and exchange operators, we investigate whether message volume plays a role in the prevalence of stale dark trades.
Because all sample stocks share the same infrastructure, it is not the message trafﬁc in a single stock that matters, but rather message traﬃc across all stocks. We
estimate several speciﬁcations of the following form:
PercStales,d,v = Messagesd + Controlss,d,v + ϵs,d,v
(2)
Table 2 shows those results. We ﬁnd that the general level of messages has a
signiﬁcant impact on the proportion of stale trading. This points to large volumes of
quotes slowing down the matching engine, consistent with the examination of ‘quote
stuﬃng’ by Egginton, Van Ness, and Van Ness (2016). We also ﬁnd evidence that
increased volatility within the FTSE 100 increases stale dark trades, consistent with
14
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

the notion that rapidly moving prices create more opportunities for predatory dark
trading. Finally, wider quoted spreads are associated with fewer stale dark trades.
This reﬂects the slim margins associated with latency arbitrage - a movement in the
midpoint of a tick-constrained stock necessarily represents an arbitrage opportunity
of at least half the spread. However, a quote update in a multi-tick spread may not
move the midpoint suﬃciently to result in an arbitrage opportunity.
[Table 2 about here.]
The previous test uses daily totals and thus does not take advantage of the fact
that potential delays in message transmission play out at the millisecond granularity.
To establish a tighter temporal link between stale trading and message traﬃc, we
run a probit regression at the individual transaction level as follows:
StaleTradei,s,d,v =
+5
X
τ=−14
TotMktMessagesd,s,t(i)+2∗τ + FEd + FEv + ϵi,s,d,v
(3)
StaleTradei,s,d,v is a dummy variable which takes a value of one for a dark trade
which is stale, and zero otherwise, for trade i in stock s on date d and venue v.
TotMktMessagesd,s,t(i)+2∗τ is total number of order messages within a speciﬁc 2millisecond window up to 28 milliseconds prior or 8 milliseconds after the time of the
trade t(i). Two millisecond intervals are used to harmonize any timestamp diﬀerences
between venues at the millisecond level. All messages pertaining to the stock the
trade occurs in are removed in order to mitigate potential endogeneity. Venue and
date ﬁxed eﬀects are also included and standard errors are clustered at the date level.
For brevity we only report the Z-statistics of TotMktMessages in each interval in
graphical form in Figure 3.
[Figure 3 about here.]
We ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant positive eﬀects of total market messages up to 28
milliseconds before stale trades on the likelihood of stale trades, but no signiﬁcance
in the periods afterward. The strongest statistical signiﬁcance occurs in the periods
15
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

two milliseconds before, and in the same period as the stale trade. This provides
evidence that stale trades may be caused, at least in part, by exchange or participant
infrastructure not having suﬃcient capacity to process large inﬂuxes in messages
without inducing latency.
4.3
The Cost of Stale Trades
For every stale dark trade, where the trade price does not equal the true midpoint
at the time of the trade, one party loses while another gains on the transaction. To
measure the cost of stale reference prices to the disadvantaged party, the absolute
value of the diﬀerence between the trade price and the LSE midpoint price at the
time of trade i is multiplied by the volume of the dark trade:
Costi = |(TradePricei −LSEMidTradeTimei)| ∗V olumei
This reﬂects the cost relative to the counter factual of the reference price not being
stale, assuming that the dark trade would have otherwise occurred.
[Table 3 about here.]
Table 3 presents the costs of stale reference prices for the exchange operated
dark pools in the sample, ﬁnding a total measured cost of £44,793 for the 5-week
sample period for our 114 stocks, which scales to approximately £1.4m for the entire
FTSE350 for the year 2014. Assuming the prevalence of stale prices was similar
in broker operated dark pools, the total yearly cost would be £4.2m across all dark
venues for 2014. For comparison, consider the trading revenues of some of the largest
HFTs operating in the UK. Knight Capital Group Europe’s trading revenue for 2014
was $83.18m and Jump Trading’s gross revenue for 2014 was $97.1m.25
This, however, relies on the assumption of a constant level of reference price
latency across all of the exchanges in the calculations. This is unlikely to be the
case across all dark pools as there is considerable variation even within the sample
25International (2015) and Europe (2015) — two of the largest HFTs operating in the UK.
16
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

used. In particular, some broker dark pools allow stale reference prices of up to a
second in duration.26 Thus, this estimate represents a lower bound on the total cost
of reference price latency. These costs include trades inside and outside the BBO.
Only trades outside the BBO reﬂect ‘pure’ arbitrage opportunities - where the losing
counterparty could almost certainly have obtained a better price on the lit market
due to the resting liquidity. This is not the case with stale trades inside the BBO,
for which it is assumed the dark trade would still have occurred had the reference
price not been stale.
If measured in basis points per trade, costs are also relatively modest at 2.36 bps.
A similar to ﬁgure is Hasbrouck (2018)’s calculation of 1.83 bps lost to fast traders
by slower traders in the broader lit market setting of high-frequency quote volatility.
Aside from the direct transaction cost, there may indirect costs as well. First,
if activities like latency arbitrage contribute to the perception of a deterioration in
‘fairness’ in modern markets, this could cause investors to reduce their participation
in such markets (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2008). Second, the results are only
based on UK stocks and UK venues. Latency arbitrage for stocks traded in UK-based
dark venues and other European lit markets could be considerably higher, given the
physical distance between the venues producing lit prices. Costs may also be more
economically signiﬁcant if liquidity providers are dissuaded from providing liquidity
in dark venues in response to the adverse selection costs of stale reference prices.
This is empirically examined in Section 5.3.
4.4
Are Costs Borne Equally?
A buyer (seller) to the trade beneﬁts from the reference price latency if the trade
price is less (greater) than the prevailing mid price. For each of our three categories
of participants (HFT, Colocated, Non-Colocated), we compute the proportion of
stale dark trades in which they beneﬁt separately (based on number of trades). If all
market participants were subject to similar amounts of latency and in the absence
of strategic order submission in the dark, we would expect all market participants to
26Deutsche Bank Europe’s Super X broker crossing network (Deutsche Bank, 2016).
17
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

beneﬁt and lose from staleness in the dark to a similar degree. Given the large diﬀerences in ‘proximity to the market, trader sophistication (retail vs. institutional, or
subscriber/member vs. public customer), and technology access (Hasbrouck, 2018),
it seems unlikely that this is the case.
[Table 4 about here.]
Table 4 reports how often each of our three trader categories a) participate in
stale vs. non-stale dark trading (tab ’Any Side’); b) how often they beneﬁt from
staleness and how often each group is on the c) aggressive side or d) passive side.
The ﬁrst set of results provide evidence against the idea that stale trades randomly
’happen’ to market participants. On the contrary, HFT participation in stale trades
seems to increase substantially from their participation in non-stale trades from about
a quarter to almost half. This implies that they are able to identify latency-aﬀected
periods and act on them to their advantage, remaining unaﬀected by the latency
associated with the reference price calculation. This could be because they are using
a diﬀerent (faster) feed from the primary market than the dark pool utilizes.
Can HFTs inﬂuence which side they are on? The second tab of Table 4 shows that
HFTs beneﬁt in 96% of trades with stale prices inside the BBO (losing only 3.6% of
the time due to negligible HFT-on-HFT trading) increasing to 99% for stale trades
outside the BBO. These ﬁndings are consistent with Baron, Brogaard, Hagstr¨omer,
and Kirilenko (2019) who ﬁnd that HFTs proﬁt in lit markets by using aggressive
market orders at the expense of other participants.
This result may also be explained by HFT willingness to subscribe to faster market data feeds in addition
to faster processing and order submission capabilities. It is worth considering why
non-HFTs would purchase colocation to become faster, without a realistic prospect
of becoming faster than HFTs? Table 4 shows that HFTs are on the winning side
of stale trades 99% of the time, versus 8% of the time (for outside BBO trades) for
non-colocated non-HFTs, implying that they struggle to compete with HFTs despite
using colocation. However, an improvement in speed is still rational if the marginal
beneﬁt of the upgrade exceeds its marginal cost (Brogaard, Hagstr¨omer, Nord´en, and
18
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Riordan, 2015, p. 3413), there is still a net beneﬁt – colocated non-HFTs perform
better than non-colocated ones (8% beneﬁt versus 1% in Table 4).
Additional results in Table 4 round out this picture. For non-stale trades, HFTs
and colocated non-HFTs are about equally likely to be on the aggressive side (44%
vs. 45%). However, for stale trades, HFTs aggressively trade in 83% of the cases,
while colocated non-HFTs only manage to do so in 13% of cases, suggesting that
HFTs displace out other participant classes due to their superior speed (Aquilina,
Budish, and O’Neill, 2022).
Finally, the ﬁgures for the passive side show that most dark pool trades execute
with non-HFT participants on the passive side. When HFTs do execute passively,
they predominantly do so when the reference price is stale.
Passive stale trade
execution strategies are further discussed in Section 5.
Our ﬁndings align well with those in Bartlett and McCrary (2019), which examine
how HFTs exploit stale prices in a U.S. setting. They estimate the cost to nonexchange (which are analogous to dark MTFs in the UK) trades that reference these
stale feeds as $3.2million USD, in a sample of Dow 30 stocks from August 2015 to
June 2016. On $22.17bn traded, this amounts to 1.33 basis points, the same order
of magnitude as this study’s estimate of 2.36 basis points. They also estimate that
the gains to liquidity takers is $3.19m versus $0.24m for gains to liquidity providers,
which means 93.1% of all proﬁts can be attributed to aggressive trading participants.
These estimates only capture the subset of total latency arbitrage activity in dark
pools, and in one country. Aquilina, Budish, and O’Neill (2022) estimate the total
scale of latency arbitrage activity on a lit exchange, the London Stock Exchange, in
2015. They extrapolate their estimates to global equities trading, estimating around
$4.8bn total proﬁts in 2018 and that the latency arbitrage activity has a meaningful
impact on liquidity, accounting for around a third of the eﬀective spread on UK
equities markets.
19
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

5
Execution Quality and Dark Liquidity
5.1
Measures of Adverse Selection
Traditionally, price impact represents the extent to which prices respond to buying or selling pressure; with lower price impact being desirable for liquidity demanders. In the context of stale reference prices, the mechanism is not a response to
orders, but a response to stale prices. If the primary midpoint moves down by £1
and a participant has a resting buy order in the dark pool that is still referencing
the old price, a stale reference price arbitrageur may submit an aggressive sell order
at the old price, resulting in a virtually instantaneous £1 positive price impact, milliseconds later. However, if one could observe data feeds with zero delay, this is not
price impact, but a trade which has paid an eﬀective spread despite being executed
at the midpoint. From the perspective of both market participants and academics
(who observe market data with non-zero latency), this is price impact, while from
the participant’s perspective it represents adverse selection. Although our data does
not have the timestamp granularity to separate the two to the fullest extent possible,
we treat such price movements as price impact. Price impact is calculated as,
PriceImpactit = qit(mi,t+m −mi,t)/mi,t
(4)
where qit is the trade direction identiﬁer. Results are reported for the time period
of 100 milliseconds, which is viewed as a time period which captures ‘instantaneous
adverse selection’ eﬀects, which result from latency arbitrage activity. Recently there
has been appreciation of the immediacy at which adverse selection can occur in microstructure research. For example, Chen, Foley, Goldstein, and Ruf (2016) examines
adverse selection over a 20 millisecond horizon; Conrad and Wahal (2020) examines
the decreasing time horizons of price impact, down to 100 milliseconds; and Menkveld
(2018) examines within millisecond trading interactions.
Section 6 examines interventions to reduce reference price latency arbitrage using
price impact (adverse selection) calculated as the absolute value of the price change,
(removing q), because the data consists of public trade reports which do not carry
20
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

initiator ﬂags. Such a measure of immediate adverse selection is well accepted by
both academics and practitioners working at high frequency, with industry examples
including ITG (Saraiya and Mittal, 2009) and IEX (Aisen, 2015), and academic
research including, Boni, Brown, and Leach (2013) who examine volatility ahead of
dark pool trades, and Nimalendran and Ray (2014) who use changes in the spread.
5.2
Price impact
Stale reference prices will also increase price impact, which is taken as a measure
of adverse selection costs. The approach in Malinova and Park (2016) of trade by
trade regressions is used, utilizing similar controls. The following OLS regression
models are used with standard errors clustered by both security and date:
PriceImpactistd+m = α + β1Staleistd + β2considerationistd + β3momentumistd
+β4aggrHFTistd + β5aggrColoistd + β6passHFTistd + β7passColoistd
+β8takebookistd + β9V FTSEistd + β10spreadistd + β11FEsd + ϵistd
(5)
Where PriceImpactisdt+m measures the price impact for trade i at for stock
s at time t on day d, for m = 100 milliseconds after the trade, in basis points.
This is calculated as the diﬀerence between the trade price and the LSE mid-price27
multiplied by the trade direction (+1 for buyer initiated trades and -1 for sells).
staleistd refers to a dummy variable with the value of one if the dark trade is deemed
to be stale. Various controls to proxy for information, liquidity shocks, participant
and stock speciﬁc factors: considerationistd is the natural log of the value of the trade
in British Pound Sterling; momentumi is the midpoint return in the second prior
to the trade, multiplied by the trade direction; aggrHFTistd and aggrColoistd are
dummy variables capturing whether the aggressive side of the trade is initiated by
an HFT or a co-located participant, respectively; passHFTistd and passColoistd are
dummy variables representing situations in which an HFT or a co-located participant,
27Results are also run with the EBBO mid-price, remaining both qualitatively and quantitatively
unchanged.
21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

respectively, is on the passive side of the trade;28 takebookistd is a dummy variable
with a value of one for cases in which the aggressor counterparty of the dark trade
also aggressively executes more than the available liquidity on the LSE within a
2 millisecond period before and after the dark trade — this aims to capture price
impact relating to liquidity shocks from participants accessing multiple markets at
the same time. V FTSEi is the natural log of the value of the FTSE 100 volatility
index in the 15 seconds prior to the trade29; and spreadistd is the quoted spread of
the EBBO at the time of the trade in basis points. Stock and date ﬁxed eﬀects are
also included.30
[Figure 4 about here.]
When an aggressor beneﬁts from a trade referencing a stale price, it is expected
that the trade will have a positive eﬀect on price impact. If, however, the passive
counterparty beneﬁts from the stale price, the price impact is expected to be negative.
This is illustrated in Figure 4 with a buyer initiated dark trade at a stale reference
price. As the stale midpoint price is much lower than the new midpoint price, the
buyer (the aggressive side) beneﬁts. When calculating price impact relative to the
midpoint at the time of the trade, it is immediate and positive.
[Table 5 about here.]
To isolate and test these opposing eﬀects on price impact, separate regressions
are performed which include only stale trades where the beneﬁt side is aggressive,
and stale trades where the beneﬁt side is passive. Table 5 reports the results of the
estimated model on three diﬀerent samples for 100 millisecond price impact.31 The
ﬁrst column reports estimates from the full sample of trades, both stale and nonstale. The second reports all non-stale trades, as well as stale trades in which the
28The rationale here is that HFT or co-located participants may be expected to infer information
from the dark trade and cause price impact on the lit market in proﬁting from it.
29This index is similar to the VIX in the US. The closing price of 15 second intraday intervals is
used.
30Price impact is winsorized at 1% and 99% but the results are qualitatively unchanged from
non-winsorization.
31Results are qualitatively the same at 5 seconds and 1 minute
22
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

aggressive counterparty beneﬁts, while the third reports all non-stale trades together
with those stale trades in which the passive counterparty beneﬁts. The ﬁrst column
shows a highly statistically signiﬁcant and positive relationship between stale trades
and price impact: aggressive beneﬁt stale trades are more numerous than passive,
and therefore overall their eﬀect dominates. The model estimates positive overall
price impacts for midpoint dark pool trades, of 2.4 basis points (the value of the
constant in the ﬁrst column).
Stale trades increase this by 0.88 basis points for
aggressive beneﬁt stale trades (the coeﬃcient on the variable stale in the second
column). This eﬀect is larger in size than the eﬀect on price impact if the aggressor
to a dark pool trade also executes against the full LSE best bid or ask (0.50 basis
points, the coeﬃcient on the variable takebook in the ﬁrst column). Therefore, stale
price eﬀects seem to be larger than short term liquidity eﬀects.
The variables in this model that control for participants involved in the trade,
aggrHFT and aggrColo, the indicator variables for HFT and co-located participant presence as aggressive counterparties to the trade, demonstrate a statistically
signiﬁcant positive relationship with price impact. There are two potential explanations for these ﬁndings. First, HFT and co-located participants can react faster
to information than non co-located participants. Second, they react faster to stale
reference prices than non co-located participants, where the aggrHFT variable acts
as a proxy for stale trades that cannot be observed due to timestamp limitations.
passHFT is strongly related with lower price impact. This may imply that HFT are
adept at avoiding adverse selection, as Brogaard, Hagstr¨omer, Nord´en, and Riordan
(2015) ﬁnd for participants that choose co-location. Spread is positively related to
PriceImpact, as it magniﬁes the eﬀect of bid-ask bounce. We also observe that
takebook is strongly correlated with higher price impact, as would be expected for
trades that consume all BBO liquidity on the LSE at the same time as the dark
trade. When the stale trades are split by whether the aggressive or passive counterparty beneﬁts from it, the stale indicator variable has a stronger positive relationship
in the aggressive only column, than in the full sample (ﬁrst column), which pools
aggressive and passive together. This implies that the opposing eﬀects are masked
in the aggregate. It also demonstrates participants with resting limit orders (passive
23
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

participants) to stale trades face higher adverse selection costs, measured as positive
price impact. Conversely, stale trades can also allow aggressive trade initiators to
face adverse selection costs, through negative realized spreads.32 The passive beneﬁt
sample in column three shows a negative relationship between price impact and stale
trades, demonstrating that aggressive initiators of stale trades face adverse selection
costs.
5.3
Dark Liquidity Provision Eﬀects
Our results thus far indicate that HFTs seem able to avoid adverse selection in
dark pools. To ascertain how they achieve this, we examine their liquidity provision
in dark venues with full orderbook data. We ﬁnd that HFTs almost never provide
resting marketable liquidity in dark pools. This is quite remarkable given that they
are signiﬁcant providers of liquidity on lit venues (Menkveld, 2016).
This study is amongst the ﬁrst to characterize liquidity provision in modern dark
pools. In lit limit order book markets, measures of liquidity are widely accepted
— these include quoted spreads, eﬀective spreads, and market depth. As the dark
pools in our sample only execute trades at the midpoint of the primary market BBO
only depth related measures of liquidity are relevant. Unlike lit limit order markets,
dark pools appear to experience signiﬁcant periods of time where liquidity is ‘one
sided’ (liquidity is only available at the bid or the ask, but not both) as well as
‘no sided’ (liquidity unavailable in the dark). ‘No sided’ liquidity can occur when
there are no dark orders in the order book, but more often occurs when dark orders
exist, but only at non-marketable prices. That is, there are buy orders with limit
prices below the prevailing midpoint or sell orders with limit prices higher than
the prevailing midpoint. In such cases, standard market depth measures are not
32Traditional market microstructure theoretical models such as Glosten and Milgrom (1985)
model adverse selection as a cost that liquidity providers, or marketmakers, face. For midpoint dark
pools, both counterparties are arguably providing liquidity, as they must forgo/pay half the spread
to execute. Therefore, the initiator of a trade faces adverse selection costs despite the initiators to
trades being viewed as liquidity demanders, rather than providers in traditional markets. It can be
argued that the systematic component of adverse selection occurs from selective liquidity provision
from the passive beneﬁt counterparty.
24
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

particularly informative.
A new measure of liquidity is proposed, deﬁned as the
percentage of time there is a bid or ask order available at a marketable price. In
practice, this means that the measure of liquidity indicates periods in which people
could trade in a dark pool if they were aware of the order’s presence.
Our measure of liquidity is calculated in two scenarios: dark orders with quantities
greater than those available at the lit market bid or ask, and dark orders with
quantities below those in the lit market. This deﬁnition of liquidity supply is generous
in the context of midpoint dark pools since a participant with a marketable midpoint
order may also be interpreted as a consumer of liquidity. Nonetheless, they are a
provider of passive dark liquidity: by resting passively on the order book, they
facilitate dark executions. Without resting liquidity, participants with aggressive
orders merely ‘ping’ dark pools without executing, like ‘ships passing in the night.’33
Figures 5 and 6 present cumulative frequency histograms of the dark liquidity metrics
calculated for a given stock-day and venue with each chart illustrating a distribution
of 8550 observations (114 stocks x 25 days x 3 dark pools) measuring the % of time
for a given a stock-venue-day that a class of trader is providing resting liquidity. This
ﬁgure shows that there are many stocks and/or dates, for which it is not possible for
participants to access any dark liquidity. These charts are presented separately by
marketable and non-marketable orders.
[Figure 5 about here.]
[Figure 6 about here.]
The largest providers of marketable orders in midpoint dark pools appear to be colocated participants that are not HFTs. Figure 5 shows that Co-located participants
(the unbroken line) are the largest suppliers of dark liquidity which is larger than
the respective lit Bid or Ask (‘Above BBO Size’).
This is followed by Non-Colocated participants, (the dashed line). But liquidity is still relatively infrequent,
33This is a common analogy used in midpoint dark pools, crossing networks and dark aggregators.
(Banks, 2014) To mitigate this eﬀect, BATS Europe’s dark pools both provide lower execution fees
for orders which rest on the order book (Non-IOC orders). See BATS Europe (2017).
25
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

with only a few percent of stock-venue-dates ever having marketable orders larger
than those at the BBO for 10% or more of the trading day. Co-located participants
provide even more liquidity at sizes below the respective BBO size, but the NonColocated participant proportion remains mostly unchanged. HFTs provide very
few marketable orders and for very small proportions of the day.
Figure 6 presents the same analysis for non-marketable liquidity, orders in the
dark pool which are not priced to execute at the current primary midpoint. These
orders can be interpreted as ‘stop’ orders, wherein they only become executable at
a given price.
At sizes greater than that available at the BBO, the distribution
looks similar to Figure 5, except that HFTs (the broken line) now provide a similar
amount of liquidity as co-located participants. And in the below BBO size panel,
HFTs provide signiﬁcantly more liquidity than others at sizes smaller than the BBO
relatively frequently, mostly between 50-75% of the day. The diﬀerence in liquidity
provided by HFT at marketable prices versus non-marketable prices is dramatic. This
disparity could result from a strategy of persistently repricing resting orders to be
non-marketable, in response to primary market movements. A potential rationale for
this behavior is to take advantage of stale reference prices through passive executions,
as described earlier in Section 5, while also minimizing their adverse selection risks.
6
Market Design Solutions — Event Studies
There are a number of market design changes that could solve the problems characterized above: reference price latency which results in increased adverse selection
for dark pool users and decreased dark liquidity from a reluctance to expose passive
orders to adverse selection. A number of market design changes have been implemented in recent years, and these are examined to determine which interventions reduce adverse selection. The following diﬀerence in diﬀerences model is implemented
for each event study:
PriceImpactsdv = α + β1eventd + β2treatedsv + β3eventTreatedsdv
+β4Spreadsd + β5V IXd + β6considerationsdv + β7FEsd + ϵsdv
(6)
26
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Where PriceImpactsdv measures the natural log of the consideration-weighted average adverse selection for stock s on date d, for exchange venue v. It is calculated as
the absolute value of the diﬀerence between the NBBO midpoint 100 milliseconds
before and after the trade, in basis points. We also estimate the same regression
with PriceMovesdv as the dependent, calculated as the proportion of trades in stock
s, date d, venue v for which a change in the midpoint occurs over the time period
m before and after the trade. This is a useful measure of adverse selection, as a
signiﬁcant proportion of dark trades occur with no price movement. Eventd is a
dummy variable which takes the value of one on and after the event in question, and
zero otherwise.34 Treatedsv is a dummy variable which takes the value of one for
stocks traded on venues which are subject to the market design change, and zero
otherwise. EventTreatedsdv is the interaction term for venues which are subject to
the treatment, after the event occurs. Spreadsd is the stock’s time weighted average
quoted spread. Considerationsdv is the natural log of the sum of trading consideration in British Pounds or US dollars. Stock and date ﬁxed eﬀects are also included.
V IXd is the natural log of the mean value of the VIX volatility index, or the VFTSE
(for UK event studies), measured at 15 seconds intervals throughout the day. All
regressions use data from the Thompson Reuters Tick History service.
6.1
NASDAQ SIP Upgrade
The ﬁrst event study concerns the infrastructure upgrade that occurred on October 24th, 2016 when NASDAQ, which manages one of the two largest Security
Information Processors (SIPs) in the US, increased the speed at which it processes
trades and quotes, reducing the processing time from 500 microseconds to around
40. This event is used to examine the impact of speed upgrades to reference price
feeds on adverse selection.
A number of dark pools utilize the SIP to price dark trades, including those run
by Barclays (SEC, 2016), and Citadel (SEC, 2017).
The reduced latency of the
34This takes the value of one of the dark venues in the UK event studies, or NASDAQ versus
NYSE listed trades reported to FINRA.
27
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

NASDAQ SIP should decrease the extent of reference price latency for dark pools
relying on the NASDAQ SIP feed.
This SIP upgrade is used as a case study of one possible solution to reference
price latency — speeding up reference price feeds. Ex ante, one would not expect
this to diminish reference price latency arbitrage, and as such, would not expect a
decrease in the adverse selection measure. This is because, while reference price feed
latency is reduced, it should not be enough to allow dark pools to ‘win the speed
race’ with HFT and other fast participants using direct exchange feeds and high
speed infrastructure such as microwaves. As such, many participants are expected
to be be faster than both the old and the new SIP.
A diﬀerence in diﬀerences regression model is implemented for this event, with
the untreated sample being dark pool trades reported to the NYSE SIP. As SIP usage
is almost entirely a function of the stock’s primary listing (NASDAQ v NYSE), it is
expected that NYSE listed stocks will be unaﬀected by this change, and represent
the ‘untreated’ sample group.
SIP quotes and trades are taken from TRTH (Thomson Reuters Tick History).
Speciﬁcally, the population of dark trades comes from FINRA reported trades, which,
as noted in Menkveld, Yueshen, and Zhu (2017) comprises the majority of dark
trading. Only normal trades are included, speciﬁcally excluding trades identiﬁed as
sweep, average, basket, burst, odd lots, next day and bunched trades. The 15 minutes
after open and before close are also excluded. Adverse selection is calculated as the
movement in the NBBO mid around the trade using the NBBO TAQ ﬁle, ignoring
ﬂags with any slow quotes and any crossed markets. Despite allegations of slow SIP
reporting of dark trades, the majority (more than 99%) of FINRA trades occur within
the NBBO at the time of reporting, implying that these are insigniﬁcant. Regardless,
a 100 millisecond window before and after the trade is allowed for, and no change in
this ratio is either expected nor observed in response to a 450microsecond reduction
in SIP processing times. The sample period is the 52 trading days before and after the
event date, starting from the 2nd of September 2016, to 15th of December 2016. The
sample of stocks is the S&P500, with a random selection of NYSE stocks removed
in order to balance the panel, as there is a higher proportion of NYSE stocks in the
28
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

index. This leaves a total of 246 stocks.
Unlike previous DID models, rather than examining the same sample of stocks
across diﬀerent venues, a diﬀerent sample of stocks is examined across diﬀerent
venues. This means that if NASDAQ stocks experience a period of volatility in the
post-treatment period, (after October 24th) this may confound the results. As the
2016 US presidential election occurs after the SIP upgrade, and the election impacted
technology stocks more signiﬁcantly than industrial stocks, this is a potential confounding event. To address this, the dependent variables are expressed as a proportion of their averages across all non-dark venues. For example, for each stock the dependent variables are: AdverseSelectionDarkFinra/mean(AdverseSelectionlit) ∗100.
This controls for idiosyncratic factors that are stock speciﬁc.
[Table 6 about here.]
Table 6 presents the results of this diﬀerence in diﬀerences regression for the
two measures of adverse selection. The results show that the event variable has
no statistically signiﬁcant association, perhaps implying that the denominator is
eﬀectively controlling for information. As treated is associated with higher adverse
selection, this implies that NASDAQ listed stocks are more volatile than NYSE
ones, which is to be expected. As predicted, the event does not decrease adverse
selection, treated ∗Event has no statistical signiﬁcance for price impact, though for
the percentage of trades that do experience price movements, the eﬀect is positive,
indicating more frequent stale trades. However, the coeﬃcient for this is only 1.6%,
presenting an increase in dark trades experiencing adverse selection versus the lit
of only 1.6%, this is not an economically signiﬁcant change. Such a result may be
driven by an increased reliance on the upgraded SIP feed, in favour of expensive
dedicated data feeds from the exchanges. Given direct data feeds are always likely to
’win’ the race with a public feed, such a shift could result in more frequent adverse
selection.
29
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

6.2
Turquoise Random Uncross - Event Study
The second event study concerns the UK MTF ‘Turquoise’, which contains a
dark order book and introduced an order type called ‘random uncross.’ This order type works by matching dark orders at random periods of between 5 and 45
seconds throughout the day, depending on the stock’s underlying level of liquidity
(Turquoise, 2016).
As the uncrossing period is unknown, aggressive participants
cannot race reference price update messages. This feature was intended to reduce
or eliminate adverse selection arising from such races. We use the ‘relaunch’ of this
facility in September 2013 as our event. Turquoise’s CEO stated that volumes in
uncross were ‘up more than three times since the start of September 2013’, (Times,
2013). Therefore, this event can be used to determine if adverse selection decreases
in relation to other comparable dark venues, using the same sample of stocks in a
diﬀerence in diﬀerences model. The untreated sample are dark trades on the BATS
and Chi-X dark pools. The sample is the same 57 FTSE 100 and 57 FTSE 250
stocks in our primary analysis. Data is taken from the 1st of June 2013 to the 31st
of August 2013 for the pre-event window, and from the 1st of October 2013 to the
30th of December 2013 for the post-event window. Table 6 sets out the results which
show a statistically signiﬁcant reduction in adverse selection after the relaunch of
the random uncross. This is roughly a 12% reduction in adverse selection in basis
points, and a 4.1% reduction in the proportion of dark trades which experience adverse movements in prices after the trade. These results indicate that this market
design intervention is eﬀective at reducing adverse selection driven by reference price
latency.
6.3
Uncross and Batch Auctions: Trade Level Evidence
The ﬁnal event study exploits the existence of trade-by-trade level data, allowing
us to estimate the impact on the execution quality of individual trades. For this
experiment, we examine BATS Europe’s introduction of a new order type on the
19th of October 2015. This new order type consists of a separate orderbook that
performs intra-day auctions with randomized uncross periods throughout the day.
30
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

These auctions have price, time and size priority, but are only partially pre-trade
transparent. There is an indicative uncrossing price and executable volume published
in the call period prior to the uncross, but this is only published if the full minimum
acceptable quantity of orders is fully met, (BATS Europe, 2017).
Trades in this auction are ﬂagged in the data from TRTH, and so the random
uncross feature can be examined to see whether it is eﬀective at reducing adverse
selection in comparison to other dark orders. The unpredictability of the uncross
prevents race conditions against lit market updates, one would expect lower adverse
selection for both Turquoise uncross and BATS batch auctions.
A three month period in 2017 (May to July inclusive) is used for this study, over
a period where the Turquoise uncross ﬂag is revealed in Bloomberg trade data, as
well as the BATS Periodic Batch auctions ﬂag in TRTH data. Turquoise trades from
Bloomberg to TRTH are matched to obtain millisecond timestamps. Using trade
identiﬁers, adverse selection is compared for batch trades against dark non-batch
trades. The dummy variables batchsdv and uncrosssdv take the value of one for the
consideration weighted mean of adverse selection for the stock, date, venue observation for batch and uncross trades respectively. This sample includes the FTSE 350
stocks for dark trades in Chi-X and batch and dark trades in BATS, as well as dark
trades and uncross trades in Turquoise.35 The results of this analysis are reported
in Table 6. There are statistically signiﬁcant negative relationships between batchsdv
and the adverse selection measures. The model estimates a signiﬁcant reduction for
adverse selection when using Turquoise uncross of 1.135 basis points, and a 37.9%
reduction in the proportion of midpoint changes 100 milliseconds before and after
the trade for batch auction trades in comparison to dark trades on other UK dark
venues.
There is a similar reduction for BATS periodic batch auctions, but this
is less signiﬁcant at 0.09 basis points and a 16.3% reduction in midpoint changes.
These results are consistent with the prediction that the randomized uncross feature
renders latency arbitrate strategies ineﬀective, reducing adverse selection.
35The results are qualitatively unchanged when the sample includes just BATS and Turquoise
dark and batch/uncross trades alone.
31
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

7
Conclusion
As the automation and speed of markets has increased, so too has the importance
of latency in markets, and in particular, latency in reference prices.
This study
examines the prevalence of stale reference prices, their eﬀect on adverse selection and
participant strategies with respect to stale dark trades for a representative sample of
UK exchange operated midpoint dark pools. Trades are frequently observed at stale
reference prices, resulting in asymmetric outcomes across participant types, where
faster (HFT) participants impose adverse selection costs on slower participants. Stale
reference prices are shown to play a signiﬁcant role in increasing adverse selection
costs for passive dark orders by 2.4 basis points.
Using a new measure of liquidity in dark pools, we characterize dark liquidity
provision in the UK by diﬀerent participant classes, ﬁnding that HFTs virtually never
provide resting (marketable) liquidity. Furthermore, We examine the eﬀectiveness of
market design innovations to resolve the problem of adverse selection from reference
price latency with the help of event studies and show that removing the ability
for aggressive participants to race the market data feed by making the timing of
dark executions unpredictable (through random uncross mechanisms) is eﬀective
in reducing adverse selection. In contrast, we ﬁnd interventions that decrease the
latency of reference price feeds to be ineﬀective at removing adverse selection.
Our evidence has signiﬁcant policy implications. Reference price determination
is important to the fairness of dark pool pricing. Regulators should focus on the
adaptation of alternative market designs like random uncross features and batch
auctions, rather than faster reference price feeds alone. Indeed, it may be the desire
to avoid these HFT ’sharks’ in the dark pools which has led to the endogenous
adoption of speed bumps and batch auctions by many exchange venues across the
world.
32
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

References
Aisen, Daniel, 2015, The Genesis of an Order Type, Blog.
Alexander, Jeﬀ, Linda Giordano, and David Brooks, 2015, Dark Pool Execution
Quality: A Quantitative View, .
Anderson, Lisa, Baiju Devani, and Yifan Zhang, 2016, The Hidden Cost: Reference
Price Latencies, Trading Review And Analysis Investment Industry Regulatory
Organization of Canada.
Aquilina, Matteo, Eric Budish, and Peter O’Neill, 2022, Quantifying the HighFrequency Trading “Arms Race”*, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 137, 493–
564.
Aquilina, Matteo, and Carla Ysusi, 2016, Are high-frequency traders anticipating the
order ﬂow? Cross-venue evidence from the UK market., FCA Occasional Papers
16.
ASIC, 2015, Review of high-frequency trading and dark liquidity, Discussion Paper
452 Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
Baldauf, Markus, and Joshua Mollner, 2020, High-frequency trading and market
performance, The Journal of Finance 75, 1495–1526.
Banks, E., 2014, Dark Pools: Oﬀ-Exchange Liquidity in an Era of High Frequency,
Program, and Algorithmic Trading (Springer).
Baron, Matthew, Jonathan Brogaard, Bj¨orn Hagstr¨omer, and Andrei Kirilenko, 2019,
Risk and return in high-frequency trading, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 54, 993–1024.
Bartlett, Robert P., and Justin McCrary, 2019, How rigged are stock markets? Evidence from microsecond timestamps, Journal of Financial Markets.
BATS Europe, 2017, BATS Europe Guidance Note: Periodic Auctions Book, .
33
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

BATS Europe, 2017, Trading Price List, Discussion paper BATS Europe.
Boni, Leslie, David C. Brown, and J. Chris Leach, 2013, Dark pool exclusivity matters, Available at SSRN 2055808.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Bj¨orn Hagstr¨omer, Lars Nord´en, and Ryan Riordan, 2015,
Trading Fast and Slow: Colocation and Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies
p. hhv045.
Brogaard, Jonathan, and Jing Pan, 2022, Dark Pool Trading and Information Acquisition, The Review of Financial Studies 35, 2625–2666.
Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim, 2015, The High-Frequency Trading
Arms Race: Frequent Batch Auctions as a Market Design Response, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 130, 1547–1621.
Cebiro˘glu, G¨okhan, and Ulrich Horst, 2015, Optimal order display in limit order
markets with liquidity competition, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
58, 81–100.
Chau, Ching, Angelo Aspris, Sean Foley, and Hamish Malloch, 2021, Quote-Based
manipulation of illiquid securities, Finance Research Letters 39 Publisher: Elsevier.
Chen, Haoming, Sean Foley, Michael A. Goldstein, and Thomas Ruf, 2016, The
Value of a Millisecond: Harnessing Information in Fast, Fragmented Markets,
SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2860359 Social Science Research Network Rochester,
NY.
CME, 2014, CME Group Customer Forum Q2 2014, .
Conrad, Jennifer, and Sunil Wahal, 2020, The term structure of liquidity provision,
Journal of Financial Economics 136, 239–259.
Deutsche Bank, 2016, SuperX EMEA: Order type, matching logic and operational
summary, Quick Guide.
34
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Ding, Shengwei, John Hanna, and Terrence Hendershott, 2014, How Slow Is the
NBBO? A Comparison with Direct Exchange Feeds, Financial Review 49, 313–
332.
Duong, Huu Nhan, Petko S. Kalev, and Xiao Jason Tian, 2022, Does the bid–ask
spread aﬀect trading in exchange operated dark pools? Evidence from a natural
experiment, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 139, 104436.
Egginton, Jared F., Bonnie F. Van Ness, and Robert A. Van Ness, 2016, Quote
stuﬃng, Financial Management 45, 583–608 Publisher: Wiley Online Library.
Eurex, 2016, Insights into trading system dynamics: Eurex Exchange’s T7, .
Europe, KCG, 2015, KCG Europe Limited 2015 Financial Statements, Financial
Statements KCG Europe.
Fidessa, 2017, Fidessa Fragmentation Index, .
Foley, Sean, and T¯alis J. Putni¸nˇs, 2016, Should we be afraid of the dark? Dark
trading and market quality, Journal of Financial Economics 122, 456–481.
Foucault, Thierry, Johan Hombert, and Ioanid Ro¸su, 2016, News Trading and Speed,
The Journal of Finance 71, 335–382.
Foucault, Thierry, Roman Kozhan, and Wing Wah Tham, 2016, Toxic Arbitrage,
The Review of Financial Studies 30, 1053–1094.
Frino, Alex, Gbenga Ibikunle, Vito Mollica, and Tom Steﬀen, 2018, The impact
of commodity benchmarks on derivatives markets: The case of the dated Brent
assessment and Brent futures, Journal of Banking & Finance 95, 27–43.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices
in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial
Economics 14, 71–100.
35
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

GSEC, 2016, SIGMA X FAQ, Discussion Paper Version 8 Goldman Sachs Execution
& Clearing, L.P. (“GSEC”).
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2008, Trusting In Stock Markets,
The Journal of Finance 63, 2557–2600.
Hagstr¨omer, Bj¨orn, and Lars Nord´en, 2013, The diversity of high-frequency traders,
Journal of Financial Markets 16, 741–770.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2018, High-frequency quoting: Short-term volatility in bids and offers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53, 613–641 Publisher: Cambridge University Press.
Hope, Bradley, 2014, Goldman Agrees to $800,000 Fine Over Dark Pool, Wall Street
Journal.
Hu, Edwin, 2019, Intentional access delays, market quality, and price discovery:
Evidence from iex becoming an exchange, Discussion paper New York University
School of Law.
IEX, 2015, Investors Exchange Form 1 Submission, Filing to Register as Exchange
3235-0017 Investors’ Exchange LLC.
International, Jump Trading, 2015, Jump Trading International 2015 Financial
Statements, Financial Statements Jump Trading International.
Kirilenko, Andrei, Albert S. Kyle, Mehrdad Samadi, and Tugkan Tuzun, 2017, The
ﬂash crash: High-frequency trading in an electronic market, The Journal of Finance 72, 967–998.
Kirilenko, Andrei A., and Gui Lamacie, 2015, Latency and Asset Prices, SSRN
Scholarly Paper ID 2546567 Social Science Research Network Rochester, NY.
Lewis, Michael, 2014, Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt. (W. W. Norton and Company).
36
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

LSEG, 2017, Dark Midpoint Order book, .
Malinova, Katya, and Andreas Park, 2016, “Modern” Market Makers, Working Paper.
Menkveld, Albert J., 2016, The economics of high-frequency trading: Taking stock,
Annual Review of Financial Economics 8, 1–24 Publisher: Annual Reviews.
, 2018, High-frequency trading as viewed through an electron microscope,
Financial Analysts Journal 74, 24–31 Publisher: Taylor & Francis.
, and Bart Zhou Yueshen, 2018, The Flash Crash: A cautionary tale about
highly fragmented markets, Management Science.
, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2017, Shades of darkness: A pecking order of trading
venues, Journal of Financial Economics 124, 503–534 Publisher: Elsevier.
Menkveld, Albert J., and Marius A. Zoican, 2017, Need for Speed? Exchange Latency
and Liquidity, The Review of Financial Studies 30, 1188–1228.
Neumeier, Christian, Arie Gozluklu, Peter Hoﬀmann, Peter O’Neill, and Felix Suntheim, 2021, Occasional Paper No. 60: Banning Dark Pools: Venue Selection and
Investor Trading Costs, .
Nimalendran, Mahendrarajah, and Sugata Ray, 2014, Informational linkages between
dark and lit trading venues, Journal of Financial Markets 17, 230–261.
Pham, Manh Cuong, Heather Margot Anderson, Huu Nhan Duong, and Paul Lajbcygier, 2020, The eﬀects of trade size and market depth on immediate price impact
in a limit order book market, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 120,
103992.
Rosenblatt, 2014, Monthly Dark Liquidity Tracker European Edition, Discussion
Paper September 2014 Rosenblatt Securities Limited.
37
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Saraiya, Nigam, and Hitesh Mittal, 2009, Understanding and Avoiding Adverse Selection in Dark Pools, .
SEC, 2016, ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDING File No. 3-17079, .
, 2017, Citadel Securities LLC - Order Instituting Administrative Cease and
Desist Proceedings, Administrative Proceeding File No. 3-17772.
Shkilko, Andriy, and Konstantin Sokolov, 2020, Every cloud has a silver lining: Fast
trading, microwave connectivity, and trading costs, The Journal of Finance 75,
2899–2927 Publisher: Wiley Online Library.
Standard and Poors Capital IQ, 2015, Real Time Solutions Global Network Map, .
Swanson, Eric, 2015, Investors’ Exchange, LLC (“IEX”); Notice of Filing of Application, as Amended, for Registration as a National Securities Exchange under
Section 6 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; Release No. 34-75925, SEC Filing
10- 222. BATS.
Times, Asset Servicing, 2013, Trading Platforms: Azure waters ahead, Asset Servicing Times.
Turquoise, 2016, Turquoise Plato Uncross Factsheet, .
Zhu, Haoxiang, 2014, Do dark pools harm price discovery?, Review of Financial
Studies 27, 747–789.
38
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 1: Histogram of Stale Reference Price Age
39
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 2:
Proportion of Stale Dark Trades by Stock (%) Observations are calculated
as sample means per stock and presented against the natural log of the sample mean market
capitalization in pound sterling and the natural log of the stock’s sample mean share price on the
x-axis in Panel A and B respectively.
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0
2
4
6
8
20
22
24
Log of Market Cap (£)
% of Stale Dark Trades
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
Log of Share Price (£)
% of Stale Dark Trades
40
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 3: Z-Statistics of Probit Regression of Stale Trades Against Market Messages
This chart reports robust z-statistics of a probit regressions of dark trades in the sample. The
dependent variable StaleTrade takes the value one stale dark trades, and zero otherwise. This is
regressed against TotMktMessages, which is the change in the total number of messages in the 2
millisecond period around the trade time (14 intervals prior to 4 intervals after), excluding messages
in the stock in which the trade occurs. The 95% critical value is annotated in a dashed horizontal
line. Robust z-statistics in parentheses. The pseudo Rˆ2 is 0.1012 and the number of observations
is 1,041,340.
41
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 4: Stale Dark Trade Example (Aggressive Beneﬁt)
This ﬁgure illustrates a lit market order book over time.
The upper edge of the green shaded
section represents the Best Bid over time, the lower edge of the red shaded section represents
the Best Ask, and the unshaded section in the middle represents ‘the spread’, in which market
participants are unwilling to place resting limit orders to buy or sell, or unable to place prices due
to minimum spread requirements. The circle represents an example stale trade on a dark pool. On
the lit market, trades would generally execute at best bid or best ask. Because midpoint dark pools
reference the midpoint of the lit market, they should execute in the middle of the unshaded area.
Because the trade is referencing the old midpoint, the transaction price falls into the newly green
shaded area below the new best bid at the time of the trade.
42
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 5: Histograms of Marketable Orders in Midpoint Dark Pools
43
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 6: Histograms of Non-Marketable Orders in Midpoint Dark Pools
44
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics:
This table presents descriptive statistics of the trade-by-trade data used in price impact regressions.
The data originates from the matching engines four UK trading venues from ﬁve one week periods
over January 2014 to June 2015. The venues include LSE, BATS, Chi-X and Turquoise. The total
number of observations is 723,979 for each variable. StaleTrade is a dummy variable taking the
value of 1 if a trade is deemed to be stale, we multiply by 100 to express as a percentage in this
table. PriceImpactBps is the price impact of a trade, calculated using orderbook aggressor ﬂags
as at the midpoint 100 milliseconds after the trade. Quantity is the trade quantity in 100s of
shares and Consideration is the trade value in GBP. Staleness is the age in milliseconds of the
stale quote being referenced. QuotedSpread is calculated from the EBBO at the time of the trade
in basis points. V FTSE is the volatility index of the FTSE100 which is taken from options on
FTSE100 stocks.
Variable
Mean
Std. Dev
p5
p95
Stale Trade (%)
3.94
19.50
0.00
0.00
PriceImpactBps (100 ms)
0.91
2.69
-1.59
4.87
Quantity (Shares 100s)
1.49
5.40
0.04
6.06
Consideration (£1000s)
6.90
14.15
0.43
19.93
Staleness (ms)
5.98
106
1.00
3.00
Quoted Spread
6.89
8.07
1.50
18.20
VFTSE
12.39
0.99
11.08
14.31
45
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 2: Regression of Stale Trades over Time
This table reports coeﬃcient estimates for the percentage of stale trades across all venues for each
stock date in the sample using the following speciﬁcations:
(1) StaleTrades,d = Messagesd + FEs,v + ϵs,d
(2) StaleTrades,d = Messagesd + V FTSEd + FEs,v + ϵs,d
(3) StaleTrades,d = Messagesd + V FTSEd + Spreads,d + FEs,v + ϵs,d
(4) StaleTrades,d = Messagesd + V FTSEd + Spreads,d + PriceV ols,d + FEs,v + ϵs,d
(5) Percstales,d = Messagesd + V FTSEd + Spreads,d + PriceV ols,d + TimeTrend + FEs,v + ϵs,d
where Percstales,d,v is the percentage of stale trades in stock s on day d and venue v. Stockday-venue tuples with less than 40 trades are dropped from the analysis to reduce noise from
unrepresentative observations. Messagesd is the average number of messages across two millisecond
time intervals on date d across the top 400 stocks on all venues. V FTSEd is the natural log of the
average FTSE Volatility Index. Spreads,d is the time weighted quoted spread for stock s and day d
in pence. Returns,d is the % change in a stock’s opening and closing price. Trendd is a time trend
variable which increments one for each calendar date in the sample. FEs and FEv are stock and
venue ﬁxed eﬀects, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the stock level.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
VARIABLES
% Stale
% Stale
% Stale
% Stale
% Stale
Messages
0.004***
0.002**
0.002**
0.002**
0.002**
(4.883)
(2.171)
(2.064)
(2.055)
(2.086)
VFTSE
0.032***
0.030***
0.030***
0.030***
(2.936)
(2.818)
(2.785)
(2.772)
Spread
-0.583***
-0.581***
-0.581***
(-4.831)
(-4.752)
(-4.856)
Return
0.000
0.000
(0.250)
(0.270)
Trend
-0.000
(-0.211)
Venue Fixed Eﬀects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Stock Fixed Eﬀects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Constant
0.011**
-0.059**
-0.048**
-0.048**
-0.049**
(2.060)
(-2.539)
(-2.102)
(-2.091)
(-2.067)
Observations
4,144
4,144
4,144
4,144
4,144
R-squared
0.442
0.443
0.445
0.445
0.445
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
46
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 3: Costs of Stale Reference Prices
The following table presents estimates of the cost of dark pool latency arbitrage to users of dark
pools in the UK. This is presented separately for two subsets of stale trades. Stale reference prices
that are inside the Primary BBO, and those that are outside, which sum to the total column.
Outside BBO costs represents real opportunity costs, whilst inside BBO trades represent assumed
opportunity costs. The ﬁrst row expresses the average cost of a dark pool trade at a stale price in
basis points (bps) = basis points. This is calculated as, for trade i, Costi/Considerationi ∗10000.
The following assumptions are made: 253 trading days in the year when scaling the 25 days in the
sample; constant proportionality of rates across stocks when scaling 114 stocks to the FTSE 350;
constant proportionality when scaling the subset of dark venues to the full population. This subset
is estimated in the same to be 32.41% of total dark trading using Rosenblatt’s Dark Liquidity report
for 2014.
Calculation
Total
Inside BBO
Outside BBO
Average bps per Trade
2.36
1.97
4.31
Total Measured Cost
£44,793
£30,915
£13,878
Scaled Per Year
£453,000
£313,000
£140,000
Scaled to FTSE 350
£1.4m
£928,000
£417,000
Scaled to all UK Dark Venues
£4.2m
£2.9m
£1.3m
47
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 4: Table: Participation in Dark Trades by Participant - % of All Dark Trades
in Respective Category
For the categories, ‘any side’, ‘aggressive side’, ‘passive side’, the proportion of trading by each
participant is calculated for ‘stale’ and ‘not-stale’ such that they sum to 100%. For the category
‘beneﬁt side’, for the subset of stale trades, the proportion of the time the participant class is on
the ‘beneﬁt side’ is calculated, such that these do not add to 100%.
Stale
Not Stale
Inside BBO
Outside BBO
Any Side
Non-Colocated
0.19
0.18
0.23
Colocated
0.36
0.34
0.54
HFT
0.45
0.48
0.23
Beneﬁt Side
Non-Colocated
0.09
0.01
Colocated
0.12
0.08
HFT
0.96
0.99
Aggressive Side
Non-Colocated
0.05
0.11
Colocated
0.13
0.45
HFT
0.83
0.44
Passive Side
Non-Colocated
0.33
0.34
Colocated
0.58
0.63
HFT
0.09
0.03
48
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 5: Regression of Price Impact and Stale Trades
This table reports coeﬃcient estimates of trade by trade regressions of the price impact of dark
trades in the sample using the speciﬁcation in Formula 5. This model is estimated for three samples,
the full sample of dark trades (non-stale and stale), only stale trades which beneﬁt the aggressor
counterparty along with non-stale and only stale dark trades that beneﬁt the passive counterparty
along with non-stale trades. PriceImpactistd+m is the price impact in basis points for trade i in
stock s at time t on date d over the 100 millisecond period m. Staleistd takes the value of one if the
dark trade is stale. aggrHFTistd and aggrColoistd take the value of one if the aggressive side of
the trade is an HFT or a co-located participant, respectively. passHFTistd and passColoistd is the
same for passive, respectively. takebookistd takes the value of of one if the aggressor counterparty
consumes the LSE best bid or ask in the same direction.
Price Impact (100 Millisecond)
VARIABLES
Full Sample
Aggressive Beneﬁt
Passive Beneﬁt
Stale
0.649***
0.883***
-1.095***
(24.806)
(30.042)
(-15.603)
AggressiveHFT
1.511***
1.492***
1.499***
(53.381)
(53.101)
(53.563)
AggressiveColo
0.466***
0.466***
0.462***
(24.989)
(24.993)
(25.362)
PassiveHFT
-1.444***
-1.264***
-1.266***
(-31.638)
(-27.414)
(-28.727)
PassiveColo
0.058***
0.057***
0.063***
(4.132)
(4.059)
(4.460)
Consideration
-0.039***
-0.039***
-0.039***
(-9.150)
(-9.068)
(-8.920)
Spread
0.016***
0.016***
0.015***
(7.754)
(7.766)
(7.347)
VFTSE
-0.783***
-0.775***
-0.755**
(-2.668)
(-2.645)
(-2.570)
Takebook
0.503***
0.515***
0.484***
(5.631)
(5.801)
(5.361)
Constant
2.425***
2.402***
2.357***
(3.288)
(3.257)
(3.189)
Observations
723,979
720,570
698,862
R-squared
0.135
0.134
0.126
Robust t-statistics in parentheses, clustered by date and stock.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
49
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 6: Event Studies — Impact on Adverse Selection
This table reports coeﬃcient estimates for the two event studies in the ﬁrst four columns, and
estimates from trade-level identiﬁers in the last two columns. The regression uses the speciﬁcation
in Formula 6. The dependent variable, PriceImpactsdv is the trade value weighted price impact in
basis points for stock s on date d for venue v over the time interval m which is the 100 millisecond
period before to after the trade and PriceMovesdv is the % of dark trades for which there is a
change in the midpoint over the 100 millisecond period before and after the trade, for stock s on
date d for venue v over the time interval m. Eventd is a variable which takes the value of one on
and after the event in question, and zero otherwise. Treatedsv is a dummy variable which takes the
value of one for stocks traded on venues which are subject to the market design change, and zero
otherwise. EventTreatedsdv is the interaction term for venues which are subject to the treatment,
after the event occurs. uncrosssv takes the value of one for trades that are ﬂagged as Turquoise
dark uncross trades for stock s date d and venue v. batchsv takes the value of one for trades that
are ﬂagged as BATS periodic batch auction trades for stock s date d and venue v.
NASDAQ SIP
Uncross
Turq. and BATS
VARIABLES
PriceImpact
% PriceMove
PriceImpact
% PriceMove
PriceImpact
% PriceMove
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Event
-0.743
-5.507
1.105
0.103
(-1.249)
(-0.440)
(1.628)
(1.289)
Treated
0.113*
3.337***
-0.248***
-0.091***
(1.846)
(2.668)
(-14.471)
(-31.660)
Treated event
0.012
1.695***
-0.126***
-0.041***
(1.044)
(6.895)
(-5.631)
(-10.440)
Uncross
-1.135***
-0.379***
(-31.793)
(-105.816)
Batch
-0.090**
-0.163***
(-2.078)
(-16.269)
Consideration
-0.015***
0.952***
-0.053***
-0.022***
-0.048***
-0.014***
(-6.252)
(-15.553)
(-2.577)
(5.118)
(-6.989)
(-13.702
Spread
-0.000***
0.000
0.000*
-0.000**
0.016***
0.000
(-3.473)
(1.291)
(1.820)
(-2.224)
(9.501)
(1.022)
VIX
4.758
46.288
5.181*
0.584*
-1.564**
-0.400***
(1.160)
(0.537)
(1.754)
(1.930)
(-2.454)
(-2.718)
Constant
-16.995
-183.971
-12.510
-0.593
4.827***
1.444***
(-0.942)
(-0.485)
(-1.529)
(-0.712)
(3.121)
(4.038)
Fixed Eﬀects
Stock
Stock
Stock
Stock
Stock
Stock
Date
Date
Date
Date
Date
Date
Observations
196,689
196,689
37,921
39,684
48,079
54,496
Adj. R-squared
0.463
0.644
0.143
0.246
0.288
0.324
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
Standard errors adjusted for clustering in stock and date
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
50
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4157168
Preprint not peer reviewed
