 
 
 
 
Accounting Information Usage and Trading by Retail Investors: 
Evidence from Integrated Trading Platform 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jacky Chau† 
SZTU Business School 
Shenzhen Technology University 
Shenzhen, China, 518118 
jchau.hkcn@gmail.com  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: retail investor, online brokerage, information usage, accounting; trading  
 
JEL codes: G11, G12, M40, M41 
 
Accepted by Rodrigo Verdi. This paper is the final Registered Report resulting from the Registration-based Editorial 
Process (REP) implemented by JAR for its special 2021 Registered Reports Conference; details of the process are 
available 
here: 
https://www.chicagobooth.edu/research/chookaszian/journal-of-accounting-research/registeredreports. 
The 
accepted 
proposal 
and 
an 
online 
appendix 
for 
this 
report 
are 
available 
here: 
https://research.chicagobooth.edu/arc/journal-of-accounting-research/online-supplements. The author would like to 
extend his sincere gratitude to the anonymous reviewer for his/her insightful comments and constructive suggestions, 
which have significantly improved the quality of this report. The author gratefully acknowledges financial support 
from the Chinese University of Hong Kong and Shenzhen Technology University as well as grant funding support 
from Hong Kong Research Grants Council (#14505021) and SZTU Research Startup Grant (GDRC202428). The idea 
of this proposal was partially inspired by an anonymous reviewer report on the author’s grant application to Hong 
Kong Research Grants Council, titled “Temporarily Lost in Comparability? - Accounting Changes, Data 
Intermediaries, and Retail Investors”.  
† Corresponding author. 

 
 
1 
 
 
Accounting Information Usage and Trading by Retail Investors: 
Evidence from Integrated Trading Platform 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This registered report investigates self-directed retail investors' information choices and trading 
decisions on an integrated trading platform that provides timely and convenient access to 
accounting information. The analyses reveal that these investors access a mosaic of information, 
with a high proportion not firm-specific. In accessing accounting disclosures, retail investors are 
more interested in media articles providing summaries or expert analyses than original filings. 
Retail trades on this integrated trading platform are more informed than another retail trading 
platform providing little information services while exhibiting no significant differences in 
informativeness compared with institutional trades using Bulge Bracket platforms. In particular, 
trade informativeness is more pronounced when there are accounting disclosures. The evidence 
suggests that self-directed retail investors can benefit from a trading environment that provides 
rich and convenient access to a mosaic of information, particularly timely accounting disclosures. 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
Retail investors can be significant market participants in emerging markets. Recent press 
articles suggest that retail investors are on the rise and may no longer be a sideshow to the market 
even in developed markets such as the United States (US).1 The proliferation of low-cost digital 
trading platforms has enabled retailer investors to directly trade stocks with less friction – lower 
trading and information processing costs. It is unclear how investors’ information choice manifests 
with new information technologies that reduce certain information processing costs (e.g., 
Blankespoor et al. [2020]). As such, this registered report examines the emerging class of selfdirected online retail investors2 and seeks to understand how they utilize information, particularly 
accounting information, in their stock trading decisions.  
Prior literature finds that retail investors appear to neglect value-relevant accounting 
information (e.g., Hirshleifer et al. [2008]; Blankespoor et al. [2019]). Early evidence often 
suggests that retail investors are likely unsophisticated noise traders who underperform relative to 
the market (e.g., Kumar and Lee [2006]; Hvidkjaer [2008]; Barber et al. [2009]). Other research 
suggests that retail investor trades could be informative and predictive of stock returns (e.g., Kaniel 
et al. [2012]; Kelley and Tetlock [2013, 2016]; Boehmer et al. [2020]). It is not clear if the mixed 
evidence is due to the non-homogenous nature of retail investors or noisy measurements of retail 
investors’ activities, e.g., using trade size to infer investor types. 
 This registered report takes advantage of a unique setting in which the researchers can observe 
both the aggregate information usage and trades of retail investors at the firm level in an integrated 
trading platform. Besides offering trading services, an integrated trading platform serves as an 
 
1 See Martin and Wigglesworth [2021].  
2 Regulators and financial institutions have shown increasing interests on self-directed retail investors since 2021. 
For example, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the United Kingdom and Ontario Securities Commission 
(OSC) in Canada has either commissioned or conducted studies on this emerging class of retail investors in 2021.  

 
 
3 
 
information platform for investors. The study utilizes data from an integrated platform named 
FutuBull. As an emerging low-cost online and mobile stockbroker headquartered in Hong Kong 
(HK), FutuBull has grown rapidly and become the leading retail broker in terms of trading volume 
in 2021, with its clients holding a total of 170 billion HKD worth of stocks. With rich financial 
information integrated, the platform has the potential to dramatically lower the information 
processing costs for retail investors.  
Two features make the setting special for the study. First, the FutuBull platform provides 
timely news feeds on filings and information intermediaries, with views tracked for each document. 
This enables researchers to trace the cumulative views on each filing or media article. While prior 
research examines specific channels of information (e.g., robo-journalism, analyst information, 
Edgar filings), the setting allows for a holistic evaluation of their relative importance under the 
same platform.3 Second, the daily broker-level holdings are publicly available for the HK stock 
markets, providing a unique opportunity to simultaneously observe both the information usage 
patterns and the aggregate holdings of all FutuBull traders by firms on each trading day. 4 
The study begins by examining the information access patterns of over one million documents 
that appear in the corporate news feeds of 2,579 HK-listed firms on the FubuBull platform from 
July 2014 to June 2021. Regulatory filings represent 37.3% of all documents, while media articles 
represent the rest 62.7%. However, filings contribute to only 2.8% of total cumulative views 
 
3 Prior studies tend to focus only on one specific channel of information. However, it is difficult to assess the relative 
importance of each channel for retail investors because the studies are often conducted in different contexts and 
measurements often cannot be standardized across studies. For example, it is not clear the extent to which investors 
rely on Robo-journalism articles used in Blankespoor et al. [2019] relative to those that search for SEC Edgar filings 
in Drake et al. [2015]) or those that views Yahoo Finance analyst information in Lawrence et al. [2017].  
4 Prior studies typically cannot directly observe both the information usage and trades of retail investors and instead 
mostly rely on proxies to infer the other construct of interests.  Recent studies that utilize Robinhood data (e.g., Welch 
[2020]; Ozik et al. [2020]; Moss et al. [2020]; Barber et al. [2021]; Michels [2021]) can only infer the trading patterns 
of retail investors based on stock popularity, but cannot observe the information usage patterns of users. 

 
 
4 
 
among these documents, suggesting that self-directed investors generally display a lower interest 
in accessing regulatory filings relative to media articles.  
Firm-specific articles contribute to only 21.6% of total cumulative views despite its 62.3% 
dominance in quantity among media articles. While only 1.4% of articles are tagged under thematic 
topics, they contribute to 22.7% of total cumulative views. These statistics suggest that selfdirected retail investors rely on a mosaic of information other than firm-specific information. 
Investor attention appears to be the key determinant for information access on the platform. 3.3% 
of articles promoted in the headline contribute to 62.4% of total cumulative views of media articles. 
This suggests that trading platforms may exert strong influences on users’ information access. 
Among firm-specific articles, retail investors display a higher interest in accessing those covering 
accounting information, suggesting that retail investors regard accounting information as an 
important source of firm-specific information. The results also find that retail investors display a 
higher interest in accessing articles providing summary reports or expert analyses over the 
disclosures in original filings during earnings announcements.  
Next, the study examines whether and how self-directed retail investors integrate accounting 
information into trading decisions. When access to Results Announcements filings is low, their 
aggregate retail trades are generally in the opposite direction of earnings news. But if the access is 
high, their trades are more in line with earnings news. In the broader sample of accounting 
disclosures, the aggregate trading decisions by these retail investors at the time of disclosures are 
significantly negatively associated with disclosure news, resembling the behavior of contrarian 
traders. The aggregate trades before disclosures appear to exhibit consistent direction with 
upcoming news, albeit statistically insignificant. This suggests that some retail investors may 
attempt to profit from anticipating the news contained in upcoming disclosures. Along with the 

 
 
5 
 
evidence on information access, the findings support the presence of diverse trading strategies 
among self-directed retail investors. 
Finally, the study investigates the informativeness of retail investor trades at FutuBull. 
Following Kelly and Tetlock [2016], the study uses the daily Fama and MacBeth [1973] regression 
and finds that the aggregate retail trades at FutuBull are generally predictive of future abnormal 
returns over the next twenty days. The informativeness is even more pronounced in the short 
window after accounting disclosures, consistent with the prevalence of informed retail trading 
based on processing accounting information at FutuBull. The informativeness of retail trades at 
FutuBull, is significantly higher than I-Access, a no-frills trading platform that provides virtually 
no information services, and exhibits no significant differences compared to institutional trades at 
Bulge Bracket brokers. Similar findings are obtained when the study calculates the trading 
profitability around accounting disclosures among those that exhibit clear trading directions by 
different brokerage users assuming a three-month or six-month horizon. These findings suggest 
that self-directed retail investors significantly benefit from having convenient access to timely 
accounting information in their trading platforms. 
This registered report contributes to the literature on information acquisition activities of selfdirected retail investors. Technological advancements that drastically lower trading and 
information processing costs have the potential to empower a growing class of self-directed retail 
investors. Prior literature has examined information acquisition through different channels largely 
in isolation, such as SEC Edgar filings (e.g., Drake et al. [2015]), and robo-journalism (e.g., 
Blankespoor et al. [2018]). However, the relative contribution by different channels is not clear. 
Using the setting of an integrated trading platform, this registered report provides a more holistic 
assessment of retail investors’ information preference over various information sources and types 

 
 
6 
 
under a unified viewership scale. In particular, the study shows that self-directed retail investors 
access a mosaic of information, with a significant portion devoted to articles covering information 
that is not firm-specific. In this setting, retail investors generally display a higher interest in 
accessing crowdsourced content over traditional sell-side research information as well as a lower 
interest in viewing robo-journalism articles.  
The study also contributes to the literature on retail investors’ use of accounting information. 
While Blankespoor et al. [2019] find that the retail investors in their sample neglect value-relevant 
accounting information presented in articles in trading decisions, other studies (e.g., Kaniel et al. 
[2012]) find some evidence of informed trading by retail investors around earnings announcements. 
The mixed prior evidence may suggest that retail investors are likely not a homogenous group of 
investors. The study utilizes a setting with low acquisition cost on accounting information to elicit 
how self-directed retail investors access timely accounting information. The results show that retail 
investors are more interested in media summaries or expert analyses relative to original filings in 
accessing timely accounting disclosures. Thus, the study helps elucidate the presence of significant 
friction in using accounting information from regulatory filings by self-directed retail investors.  
Further, the study provides additional insights regarding whether self-directed retail investors 
properly integrate accounting information in trading decisions. Consistent with some recent 
literature suggesting that retail trades can be information-driven (e.g., Kelley and Tetlock [2013, 
2016]; Boehmer et al. [2021]), the study finds that the aggregate trading decisions by self-directed 
retail investors at FutuBull are generally positively predictive of future returns. The 
informativeness is more pronounced after accounting disclosures, consistent with these investors 
being able to properly integrate accounting information in trading decisions. The study also finds 
that the trading decisions by these retail investors vary depending on the level of information 

 
 
7 
 
access to Results Announcement filings during earnings announcements. On the other hand, the 
aggregate retail trades at I-Access are generally negatively predictive of future returns. The 
evidence suggests that self-directed retail investors can be quite heterogeneous in their trade 
informativeness and strategies, which vary by their trading environment or information access.  
Last but not least, this registered report should be first in documenting the information role of 
trading platforms for retail investors. The results show that retail investors at FutuBull are 
significantly more informed than those at I-Access, suggesting that retail investors using an 
integrated trading platform with much lower information processing costs can better incorporate 
accounting information in their trading decisions. The results also find that aggregate retail trades 
at FutuBull are as informed as aggregate institutional trades at Bugle Bracket brokers, suggesting 
that an integrated trading environment with convenient access to a rich set of information can 
significantly narrow the information gap between self-directed retail investors and institutional 
investors. The findings should be relevant to regulators who are showing more interest in 
understanding self-directed retail investors, especially the role of brokers in their trading behaviors.  
2. Background and Hypotheses  
2.1 Information Usage by Retail Investors 
Prior archival studies mostly rely on either small trades or proprietary brokerage trading data 
to identify retail investors. However, it is difficult to get a complete picture of retail investors’ 
information usage patterns on a large scale as they may obtain information from a variety of 
sources and the entire process is often not observable. While recent studies (e.g., Ben-Rephael et 
al. [2017]) have utilized the data from Bloomberg terminals to examine investors’ information 
usage, the vast majority of Bloomberg terminal users are likely institutional investors. Other 
studies have focused on specific information sources, e.g., analysts' information (e.g., Lawrence 

 
 
8 
 
et al. [2017]), Edgar filings (e.g., Drake et al. [2015]), newsflashes (e.g., Twedt [2015]), robojournalisms (e.g., Blankespoor et al. [2019]). However, the relative importance of different types 
of information to retail investors is still unknown. In particular, the evidence is somewhat mixed 
regarding what extent retail investors utilize accounting information, which is shown by the 
literature to be value-relevant and useful in predicting future returns (e.g., Ball and Brown [1968]; 
Bernard and Thomas [1989]; Sloan [1996]; Lewellen [2004]).  
On one hand, retail investors are sometimes regarded as “naïve” investors who are prone to 
behavioral biases such as overconfidence (e.g., Barber and Odean [2000]; Staman et al. [2006]), 
the disposition effect (e.g., Shefrin and Statman [1986]; Odean [1998]) and attention-driven 
purchase (e.g., Barber and Odean [2007]). They also appear to be naïve about analyst incentives 
(Malmendier and Shanthikumar [2007]). Early evidence mostly suggests that retail investors are 
likely unsophisticated noise traders who may underperform relative to the market (e.g., Kumar and 
Lee [2006]; Hvidkjaer [2008]; Barber, Odean, and Zhu [2008]). They tend to rely on technical 
analysis in trading decisions (Grinblatt and Keloharju [2000], Barber and Odean [2008], Kaniel, 
et al. [2008]) but appear to ignore value-relevant earnings information (e.g., Blankespoor et al. 
[2019]). Blankespoor et al. [2019] formulate a sequential framework breaking down information 
usage costs into awareness cost, acquisition cost, and integration cost. Information usage costs 
could impede retail investors from acquiring and utilizing accounting information.  
On the other hand, an increasing proportion of the world’s population has received business 
education and developed exposure to basic accounting knowledge over time. 5 Technological 
advancements also greatly reduce the cost of information usage and knowledge acquisition.6 These 
 
5 For example, 19.5% of Bachelor's degrees conferred in 2017/2018 in the U.S. were in business and 25.3% of 
undergraduates who graduated in 2020 in China majored in either economics or management.  
6 For instance, when information dissemination changes from a paper-based system to an electronic system, retail 
investors nowadays could easily use their mobile devices to gain access to accounting disclosures. 

 
 
9 
 
developments could lower all three components of information usage costs for retail investors. 
Recent research presents some evidence that retail investor trades could be informative. For 
example, Kaniel et al. [2012] present the first evidence of informed trading by retail investors 
around earnings announcements. They show that pre-announcement trades by retail investors are 
predictive of returns on and after earnings announcement dates. Kelley and Tetlock [2013, 2016] 
find that the trades by retail investors are predictive of stock returns. Boehmer et al. [2020] suggest 
that retail marketable orders contain firm-level information that is not yet incorporated into prices.  
Recent advances in digital technologies may empower a new class of self-directed retail 
investors. These investors may choose to forego the assistance of an investment dealer or adviser 
and conduct their own research and analysis in investment decisions. Since 2021, regulators and 
financial institutions have displayed rising interest in this emerging class of self-directed retail 
investors (e.g., Britainthinks [2021]; Deloitte [2021]; Dure [2021]). Through direct surveys, the 
Ontario Securities Commission [2021] finds that self-directed investors have diverse demographic 
backgrounds and trading experiences.7  
2.2 Integrated Trading Platform 
Self-directed retail investors are empowered by the rapid growth of low-cost self-directed 
digital trading platforms developed by new fintech startups or in the digital transformation of 
traditional brokerage houses. Several online brokers that serve the US or HK stock markets have 
switched to low-cost or even zero-commission operating models. The most famous example in the 
 
7 Nearly half choose self-directed investing because they enjoy managing their own investments while one-third find 
the cost of using an advisor too expensive. 41% of them believe that their overall financial knowledge is high. The 
most important sources for these investors are their own experiences or impressions of a company’s products and 
services (score: 5.3/7) and EBITDA (score: 5.3/7). Out of a list of 13 information sources, annual reports rank the 
fourth in importance (score: 5.1/7). The survey suggests that self-directed retail investors appear to care about 
accounting information. 

 
 
10 
 
US setting is Robinhood which provides a simple and commission-free mobile-centric platform.8 
The review article by Blankespoor et al. [2020] points out that an unresearched area is the effect 
of new trading platforms which reduce explicit trading costs of small investors to nearly zero.  
In addition to drastically lowering trading costs, these new digital self-directed trading 
platforms can potentially reduce investors’ costs of information processing. An unexplored 
research area is the role of self-directed trading platforms in facilitating information processing by 
retail investors. Not all self-directed trading platforms are created equal. Besides trading services, 
there can be large variations in the amount of financial information integrated into the platform. 
Some trading platforms offer comprehensive financial information for retail investors akin to that 
of Bloomberg while others integrate minimal accounting information.9 Other brokerages, however, 
may provide different experiences through integrating more varieties of information.10  
By providing convenient and timely access to accounting information and news feeds in the 
trading interface, integrated trading platforms likely lower the information processing cost and 
have the potential to become a primary information acquisition channel for self-directed retail 
 
8 Robinhood also introduces gamified features to make trading fun. Critics, however, are concerned with its 
gamification feature which may induce inexperienced investors to trade too frequently. Several contemporaneous 
studies utilize data from Robinhood to study the trading patterns of retail investors based on its stock popularity data 
(e.g., Welch [2020]; Ozik et al. [2020]; Moss et al. [2020]; Barber et al. [2021]; Michels [2021]). 
9 For example, Robinhood initially focused on offering a convenient trading platform without inundating users with 
information, as half of Robinhood users are first-time investors. The accounting information provided in Robinhood’s 
interface is rather limited. Its users cannot directly get access to more detailed accounting information from the app 
interface. Over time, Robinhood has ramped up the information provided on its platform and has formed several 
partnerships with data providers and newswires. Its users can now easily access price-to-earnings ratios and quarterly 
EPS actuals/estimates for firms that are well-covered by analysts. 
10 For instance, Fidelity’s online trading platform provides access to comprehensive accounting information While 
also offering zero-commission trading, Fidelity includes sections such as Fundamental Analysis from S&P Global 
Market Intelligence, Key Statistics covering over 45 accounting ratios, Financials Statements containing detailed 
financial statement items, and SEC Filings with links to SEC Edgar filings. While Robinhood had 13 million users in 
2020, Fidelity, one of the many integrated trading platforms, had 26 million retail accounts in 2020. Because retail 
investors are likely not homogenous, findings using Robinhood data may not extrapolate to other retail investors using 
the integrated trading platforms, especially with regards to their accounting information usage. Thus, it is important 
to understand more about those retail investors who are using the integrated trading platforms to get a more complete 
picture. For example, if retail investors on integrated trading platforms indeed pay attention to accounting information, 
standard setters and regulators may need to consider their needs in policymaking. 

 
 
11 
 
investors. Thus, the data in integrated trading platforms can potentially provide a more holistic 
picture of the information usage patterns of these groups of retail investors, whereas prior studies 
typically focus on one particular information channel in isolation.  
2.3 Predictions and Hypotheses 
2.3.1 Information Access 
Public firms are typically required to provide accounting disclosures in regulatory filings. 
Firms also often issue press releases providing financial highlights. Financial journalists often 
cover and summarize earnings news in press articles while some articles can be generated by bots 
(e.g., Blankespoor et al. [2018]) or bloggers. An extensive literature has documented the 
importance of the traditional media in the capital market (e.g., Bushee et al. [2010]).  
Retail investors on integrated trading platforms have convenient access to a variety of 
accounting disclosures ranging from filings to media articles. Unlike institutional investors, retail 
investors may afford only limited time and resources in investing activities and are potentially 
more sensitive to the costs of information usage. If retail investors’ information access pattern 
generally follows cost-benefit tradeoffs, the interest displayed by retail investors toward 
accounting information should increase with lower costs of information usage (e.g., Bloomfield 
[2002]; Blankespoor et al. [2019]). Therefore, their number of views on a specific document 
regarding accounting information would likely increase as the awareness costs or the expected 
acquisition/integration costs decrease. 
As filings are often long with low readability (e.g., Dyer et al. [2017]), retail investors may 
require a much longer time to extract the relevant information. Retail investors could thus perceive 
higher expected information extraction costs from filings. Press articles are typically much shorter, 
offering succinct summaries of earnings news. If information acquisition cost is an important 

 
 
12 
 
consideration, retail investors may prefer reading the summary highlights in media articles before 
deciding to delve into the more detailed disclosures in regulatory filings.  
Lacking the expertise to analyze detailed financial statements, some retail investors may face 
high integration costs when directly utilizing the vast amount of information disclosed in 
regulatory filings. Thus, they could be particularly interested in soliciting expert opinions from 
professionals (e.g., sell-side analysts) to assist their interpretation of the disclosed accounting 
information. Consistent with this, Lawrence et al. [2017] find that investors have a higher demand 
for analyst information on Yahoo Finance during guidance and earnings announcements relative 
to the average trading day. If information integration cost is an important consideration, retail 
investors may prefer to rely more on expert opinions instead of directly conducting independent 
analyses using accounting information disclosed in filings.  
Accounting information can be released through several types of disclosures, such as guidance, 
earnings announcements, and periodic financial reports. Retail investors may exhibit differential 
interest across different types of accounting disclosures depending on the cost-benefit tradeoffs, 
e.g., information extraction/integration costs, information timeliness, and information precision. 
Furthermore, whether articles providing news summaries or expert opinions can substitute or 
complement retail investors’ access to disclosures in regulatory filings is not clear. Press coverage 
may increase retail investors’ awareness of disclosures and prompt the more sophisticated ones to 
seek more detailed information from filings after reading the summary reports or expert opinions. 
However, the less sophisticated investors may directly utilize the information from press articles 
instead of delving into detailed corporate filings.  
Figure 1 provides a set of exploratory predictions regarding the information access patterns of 
self-directed retail investors based on the cost-benefit tradeoffs discussed. 

 
 
13 
 
2.3.2 Trading on Accounting Information 
Some prior studies (e.g., Blankespoor et al. [2019]) suggest that retail investors may ignore or 
fail to integrate value-relevant accounting information into their trading decisions due to high 
processing costs. Further, retail investors may not necessarily have the requisite expertise to make 
informed trading decisions based on the information, even if accounting information can be easily 
acquired. With limited processing capacity (Sims [2003, 2010], these retail investors may 
rationally ignore accounting information if they cannot properly analyze and integrate it into 
trading decisions after cost-benefit analyses (e.g., Veldkamp [2011]). Instead, these retail investors 
may rely on other sources of information in which they are less disadvantaged in processing. 
Combining these prior findings and the rational inattention argument, the first hypothesis in null 
form (H10) is stated below if self-directed retail investors in integrated trading platforms are similar 
to those documented in prior settings (e.g., Blankespoor et al. [2019]).  
H10: Self-directed retail investors using integrated trading platforms do not incorporate 
accounting information into their trading decisions around earnings news.  
The null form of H1 can be rejected if the self-directed retail investors in integrated trading 
platforms face a much lower cost of processing accounting information and there is a sufficiently 
large group of self-directed retail investors who have some expertise in processing accounting 
information. Through the incorporation of fundamental information and news feeds, integrated 
trading platforms have the potential to lower the costs of processing accounting information for 
self-directed retail investors. If high processing costs are the major impediments to retail investors’ 
usage of accounting information, integrated trading platforms may increase retail investors’ 
propensity to incorporate accounting information into trading decisions. Recent research also 
presents some evidence that retail investor trades could be informative (e.g., Kaniel et al. [2012]; 

 
 
14 
 
Kelley and Tetlock [2013, 2016]; Boehmer et al. [2020]), suggesting the presence of some 
sophisticated retail investors.  
However, it is unclear how retail investors should systematically incorporate accounting 
information in their trading decisions. One potential avenue is the post-earnings announcement 
drifts (PEADs) (e.g., Bernard and Thomas [1990]). To take advantage of PEADs, retail investors 
should trade in a direction in line with earnings surprises during earnings announcements. 
However, excess returns of PEADs generally hold at the portfolio level. Due to retail investors’ 
limited portfolio size, it is likely costly for an individual to replicate the PEAD strategies following 
academic studies.11 Alternatively, retail investors may profit from accounting information by 
predicting news in their announcements. Kaniel et al. [2012] show that pre-announcement trades 
by retail investors are predictive of returns on and after earnings announcement dates. These retail 
investors may trade stocks in anticipation of earnings news and unwind the positions as the news 
is released. With limited financial resources, they may move on to the next opportunities instead 
of waiting for PEADs to play out over time. Under this strategy, these retail investors may resemble 
“contrarian” traders just after earnings announcements.  
2.2.3 Trading Performance Using Accounting Information 
Prior research suggests that retail investors often process accounting information differently 
from professional investors who are more sophisticated.12 Thus, retail investors in aggregate can 
 
11 Prior research suggests that retail investors are often under-diversified (e.g., Goetzmann and Kumar [2008]). If 
different retail investors independently incorporate accounting information into trading decisions for different stocks, 
it remains to be tested whether the collective trades conducted by these investors in aggregate are in line with earnings 
news during earnings announcements. 
12 For example, Maines and McDaniel [2000] find that the information disclosed in a note has less effect on the 
judgment of non-professional investors than those recognized in the statement. Similarly, Frederickson and Miller 
[2004] find that non-professional investors react to pro forma earnings differently from analysts. Ernst et al. [2009] 
further find that retail investors seem to discard the notes of the financial statements almost completely. In contrast, 
survey evidence suggests that professional equity investors and analysts regard the notes to financial statements as 
important sources of information (e.g., Olbert [1989]; Ernst et al. [2009]; Gassen and Schwelder [2010]). 

 
 
15 
 
still be trading against more informed professional traders and suffer from worse trading 
profitability if they either ultimately ignore or fail to integrate value-relevant accounting 
information into their trading decisions. If most self-directed retail investors lack the knowledge 
or expertise, these retail investors may simply ignore value-relevant accounting information in 
their trading decisions even though such information is relatively much easier to acquire through 
the integrated trading platform. Following the bounded rationality argument (e.g., Sims [2003, 
2010]), the second hypothesis in null form (H20) is stated below if self-directed retail investors in 
integrated trading platforms do not significantly benefit from having more access or convenient 
access to value-relevant accounting disclosures due to their limited processing capacity vs. 
institutional investors who may integrate and react to accounting information with much better 
precision and speed.  
H20: Self-directed retail investors do not conduct more profitable trades around earnings news 
when they have more (convenient) access to value-relevant accounting disclosures.  
However, if there is a sufficiently large group of more sophisticated self-directed retail 
investors who can manage to properly integrate value-relevant accounting information into trading 
decisions, they may narrow their disadvantages against institutional investors with the use of 
integrated trading platforms that offer low costs of information access. To the extent that 
accounting information is value-relevant, these retail investors may profit from trading using 
accounting information. For example, some may find it easier to process earnings news to predict 
future performance while others may better anticipate earnings news from prior disclosures or the 
mosaic of information easily accessed through the integrated trading platforms. If accounting 
information is value-relevant and integrated trading platforms lower the information processing 
costs for retail investors, self-directed retail investors that utilize integrated trading platforms may 
conduct more profitable trades than those that do not use integrated trading platforms.  

 
 
16 
 
3. Research Setting  
3.1 Registered Report Process 
This study was conducted as a Registered Report, a format designed to enhance the 
transparency, rigor, and reproducibility of academic research. The study was preregistered prior to 
data collection and analysis. From the conference version, the study benefited from the insightful 
and constructive feedback on the hypotheses and analytical plan. Based on the review process, the 
revised registered proposal refined the hypotheses and incorporated additional analyses, e.g., 
current Table 6 and Table 10. Data collection and analysis were subsequently conducted based on 
the final revised registered proposal that received conditional acceptance. The execution was 
strictly based on what was outlined in the registered proposal, except for some minor changes due 
to technical problems (e.g., small denominator problem) as outlined in Appendix F. 
3.2 Institutional Features 
This registered report utilizes the data from an integrated trading platform named FutuBull 
from HK.13 Similar to the US, there has been an emergence of discount online brokers in HK in 
the 2010s. Founded in 2011, FutuBull is a digitized brokerage platform that provides low-cost 
trading services and rich financial information for retail investors. Its holding company is listed on 
NASDAQ with ticker FUTU and has 1.24 million paying clients as of December 31, 2021. It is 
the largest retail broker by trading volume on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX). In 2021, 
its clients collectively held 170 billion worth of stock positions in the HKEX, equivalent to about 
1.3% shares for an average firm. The median client age was 37 in 2021, with 34% working in the 
internet, information technology, or financial services industries in 2020.  
 
13 https://hk.futuhk.com/ 

 
 
17 
 
FutuBull’s integrated trading platform provides investors with ready access to a variety of 
accounting-related information. FutuBull provides detailed historical accounting items within its 
platform, along with handy visualization tools for trend and margin analyses. More importantly, 
FutuBull provides timely news feeds covering all filings and articles from a multitude of 
information intermediaries (e.g., financial news outlets, sell-side research brokers, industry 
research firms, etc.) under a unified interface for retail investors, with views tracked for each 
document. This enables researchers to trace the cumulative views on each filing or article.  
The information provided on FutuBull trading platform is highly comprehensive, aggregating 
the news from almost all free public sources available. Its users spent 38 minutes daily on average 
on the platform in 2020. As these are retail investors mostly with full-time jobs, a significant 
portion of their information acquisition activities likely happen within the platform. Therefore, 
using data from the platform is particularly useful in painting a holistic picture regarding retail 
investors’ information choices. Additionally, all relevant filings and articles appear under the same 
corporate “News” tabs and should be associated with similar information awareness/access costs 
for retail investors once they open the app interface for each company.14 This allows the study to 
keep information awareness costs largely constant in analyzing their information usage patterns.  
Another unique institutional feature in HK is the data availability on daily broker-level 
holdings. Researchers can directly observe the daily aggregate holdings by all FutuBull users for 
each listed firm. The view tracking feature of the platform, combined with the institutional feature 
that mandates the disclosure of daily brokerage-level holdings provides a unique opportunity to 
 
14 Appendix B provides more detailed illustration of the interface on corporate news feeds. In addition to the corporate 
news feeds, a small percentage of articles under corporate news feeds may also appear in another section which 
features headline news feeds (mostly market and industry news) or news feeds under featured topics. Users can also 
share the article to threads in community forums, thus increasing their exposure. The study controls for increased 
awareness due to these additional access channels. The results continue to hold after removing these articles in 
robustness analyses.  

 
 
18 
 
simultaneously observe both the information usage and trading decisions of retail investors. The 
setting of the study itself is also important economically, with the HK stock market ranked fifth 
worldwide by total market capitalization in 2020. Moreover, the HK stock market has relatively 
wide participation by retail investors, providing a powerful setting to study retail investors.15  
3.3 Sample Selection 
This registered report scrapes the number of views from a total of 1,047,124 regulatory filing 
and media articles under the corporate news feeds on FutuBull’s integrated trading platform for 
2,579 firms listed on the HKSE between July 1, 2014, and June 30, 2021. Table 1 outlines the 
sample selection process for the main tables. Data on each broker’s daily aggregate holdings for 
each firm is obtained from the Central Clearing and Settlement System (CCASS) in HK. Stock 
returns and financial variables used to construct other firm-level characteristics are calculated 
using the data from Capital IQ.  
3.4 Main Variables of Interest 
Documents Containing Accounting Information 
This registered report considers two broad types of documents available on FutuBull’s trading 
platform with view tracking features: regulatory filings and media articles. 16 Filings with 
accounting disclosures are denoted by the Accounting Filings indicator while media articles that 
cover accounting information identified using a combination of textual analyses on article titles 
and the timing of release are denoted by the Accounting News indicator. Collectively, Accounting 
 
15 According to the Retail Investor Survey 2014 conducted by HKEx, about 36.4% HK adults (around 2.3 million) are 
retail investors and 73% stock traders traded through online medium. According to the Cash Market Transaction 
Survey 2016 conducted by HKEx, retail investors contributed to 29.9% of total investor trading value in HK. 
16 This study uses the term “media articles”, “press articles”, “news articles” interchangeably to refer to all articles 
generated by information intermediaries captured by corporate news feeds on the FutuBull app.  

 
 
19 
 
Filings and Accounting News comprise Accounting Documents. Figure 2 outlines different types 
of documents in the setting.  
Accounting Filings include Annual Reports, Semi-Annual Reports, Results Announcements, 
and Results Guidance. In the HK setting, Results Announcements are filed when firms announce 
their periodic financial performance.17 Annual Reports are analogous to 10-K filings while SemiAnnual Reports are analogous to 10-Q filings in the US setting.18 Results Guidance is typically 
filed several weeks before Results Announcements when insiders possess knowledge that the 
financial performance in the current reporting period significantly deviates either positively or 
negatively from the comparable period in the previous fiscal year. Firms typically provide roughrange estimates of the upcoming reported revenue and/or earnings in Results Guidance.  
Among Accounting News, the study classifies those providing summary highlights of earnings 
news as Summary Reports based on a combination of word counts (<200 Chinese words) and 
publisher types. Summary Reports likely have low information extraction costs concerning key 
accounting items. The study classifies media articles that provide in-depth analyses by sell-side 
analysts or other information intermediaries as Expert Opinion based on a combination of word 
counts (>800 Chinese words) and publisher types.19 Expert Opinion likely has low information 
 
17 In HK, firms first announce their earnings through the “Results Announcements” filings to the stock exchange. 
Typically 10 to 70 pages in length, the level of detail in “Results Announcements” in HK is between the earnings 
announcement press releases and 10-Q filings in the US setting. In the US setting, firms first announce their earnings 
through press releases which are later filed or furnish in 8-K filings within a few days.  
18 These full periodic reports are filed in a few weeks after Results Announcements and can often reach over a hundred 
pages in length with detailed financial statement footnotes. 
19 Certain Chinese brokerage firms publish the narratives in sell-side analyst reports directly on the FutuBull platform. 
The articles published by these brokers will be directly treated as Expert Opinion regardless of word counts. Sell-side 
analyst reports from international brokerage firms are typically non-public. However, their recommendation and target 
prices are often summarized by media outlets, often with clear labels available for identification. Thus, these media 
articles are regarded as Expert Opinion regardless of word counts. Analyses by investigative journalists crowdsourced 
analysts, or industry specialists will be classified into Expert Opinion using both word counts and publisher type. 

 
 
20 
 
integration costs as retail investors could free-ride on information synthesis by these seemingly 
more professional parties.  
View Counts 
The study extracts the cumulative number of views on each document from FutuBull’s trading 
platform (#Views). To mitigate the concerns that some views are generated by internal vetting or 
other systematic procedures, the study subtracts the minimum view counts on the “monthly return 
of equity issuer on movement in securities” within the quarter from the raw view counts. These 
periodic reports summarize the changes in the company’s share capital at the end of each month 
and typically contain no new information to the market.20 As the distribution is highly rightskewed, the study takes the logarithmic transformations on view counts when used in regressions. 
Retail Trading Decisions 
The study utilizes the aggregate daily holdings by the clients of FutuBull in each listed firm 
to examine the trading decisions of retail investors. Changes in aggregate daily holdings by 
FutuBull’s investors within the first two trading days [0, +1] after Results Announcements reflect 
the trading decisions by retail investors after processing earnings news. Changes from one week 
before earnings announcements to one day before earnings announcements [-7,-1] can capture 
those self-directed retail investors who trade in anticipation of upcoming earnings announcements.  
The aggregate daily holdings of I-Access users are used as an example of no-frills trading 
platforms that provide virtually no information services. Similar to FutuBull, I-Access is an online 
stockbroker that offers a low-cost trading environment for retail investors. Unlike FutuBull, 
however, the trading platform of I-Access provides no access to any financial information.21 
 
20 In most cases, there are no monthly changes to a firm’s share capital. Significant changes in share capital are 
typically announced immediately. Investors rarely pay attention to these filings.  
21 FutuBull and I-Access were among the leading retail brokers in HK at some points during the sample period. They 
both offer extremely low-cost trading and use “zero-commission” as their customer acquisition strategies. I-Access is 

 
 
21 
 
Appendix D displays the trends in the investors’ holding on these two platforms over time. The 
pattern suggests that there has been enormous growth in online trading platforms that target retail 
investors in HK. Besides retail investors that utilize non-integrated trading platforms, the study 
also utilizes the aggregate daily holdings by selected Bulge Bracket brokers that primarily serve 
institutional investors as additional benchmarks for comparison.  
Retail Trading Informativeness 
Following Kelly and Tetlock [2016], the study examines whether the changes in aggregate 
holdings by different groups of investors are predictive of future stocks returns over a 5-day or 20day window to shed light on the informativeness of their trading decisions. Additionally, the study 
examines the aggregate holding changes by FutuBull users around accounting disclosures. Among 
those events with clear trading directions (measured by having over 3% percentage differences 
over the window) exhibited by retail investors at FutuBull, the study calculates the trading 
profitability of these trading decisions assuming a 3-month or 6-month holding period. Higher 
trading profitability represents more informed trading from processing accounting disclosures.  
Investor Attention 
Lawrence et al. [2018] find that investor attention affects the trading decisions of retail 
investors. The study examines several proxies for investor attention. In addition to common 
proxies such as firm size, returns, trading volume, stock volatility, disclosure timing, and 
 
a private company founded in 2004. I-Access once announced that it reached 17th place in terms of market turnover 
among all brokers in HK in the first quarter of 2020 while FutuBull mentioned on its corporate website that it is the 
leading retail broker by trading volume in 2021. At the beginning of the sample period, the aggregate stakes by 
FutuBull users in each firm have a mean of 0.0022% with a standard deviation of 0.0054% while the aggregate stakes 
by I-Access users in each company have a mean of 0.04% with a standard deviation of 0.15% in early July of 2013. 
In mid-July 2021, the aggregate stakes by FutuBull users in each firm have a mean of 1.08% with a standard deviation 
of 2.63%, suggesting the presence of large variations across firms. The aggregate stakes by I-Access users in each firm 
have a mean of 0.10% with a standard deviation of 0.25% in mid-July 2021. This supports substantial cross-sectional 
and time-series variations in retail holdings at both the FutuBull and I-Access trading platforms. These variations 
hopefully provide sufficient power in testing the hypothesis. 

 
 
22 
 
concurrent announcements (#Announcements) (e.g., Barber and Odean [2007]; Hirshleifer et al. 
[2009]), the study also proxies for the differences in firm-level awareness costs by the number of 
firms each article is tagged (#Firms Tagged) or the total number of views in those co-tagged 
articles in which a given firm is tagged with other firms (Co-Tagged Views) within the two days 
[0,+1] after the release for a given document. The study also uses indicator variables to represent 
increased article awareness within the platform if the article appears in the headline news feeds 
(Headlines), is categorized under featured topics on the platform (Featured Topics), or is shared 
to community discussion forums by the number of shares (Shares).  
4. Empirical Analyses 
4.1 Patterns of Information Access 
Total Cumulative Views 
Figure 3 illustrates the general information usage patterns by self-directed retail investors on 
the FutuBull platform. As shown in Panel A, while regulatory filings comprise 37.3% of all 
documents, they only represent 2.8% of total cumulative views. This suggests that these retail 
investors typically prefer accessing media articles over regulatory filings. Panel B shows that firmspecific articles represent 62.3% of the quantity of media articles but contribute to only 21.6% of 
cumulative views, indicating that FutuBull users are potentially more inclined to access articles 
that cover information that is not firm-specific.  
Panel C further shows the distribution of views and quantity by publication sources. While 
84% of the feeds are sourced from major financial news portals, they only contribute to 23% of 
total cumulative views. Surprisingly, while only 4% of the feeds are sourced from FutuBull inhouse, they contribute almost 66% of total cumulative views. Such a contrast suggests that 
integrated trading platforms may influence users’ information access. Robo-journalism also shows 

 
 
23 
 
a strong divergence in cumulative views (0.04%) and quantity (1.26%), suggesting that retail 
investors are less interested in accessing articles created by robo-journalism.  
In Panel D, media articles / regulatory filings covering accounting information contribute 
13%/13.8 of the total quantity but only 5%/8.1% of cumulative views. These differences suggest 
that retail investors likely regard certain non-accounting information as more valuable. Panel E 
further shows the breakdown of the types of filings that cover accounting information. There is a 
general match between quantity and views, with a slight increase in cumulative views (8%) vs. 
quantity (6.2%) for Results Guidance and a slight decrease in cumulative views (20.7%) vs. 
quantity (17.8%) for Semi-Annual Reports.  
Panel F shows that articles promoted in the headline news feeds (representing only 3.3% of 
the total quantity of media articles) contribute to 62.4% of total cumulative views. This may 
explain why in-house articles dominate in total cumulative views as they are more likely to be 
promoted in the headline news feeds. Articles that appear in the thematic news feeds (representing 
only 1.4% of the total quantity of media articles) contribute to 22.7% of total cumulative views. 
These patterns are consistent with these retail investors seemingly adopting mostly a top-down 
approach in their information access through browsing more general market, industry, or thematic 
information instead of being fixated on the news of specific firms in their watchlists.  
Figure 4 examines how investors allocate information acquisition efforts across firms. In Panel 
A, retail investors appear to display a disproportionately strong interest in accessing the 
information from selected firms in the middle (5th) decile and the highest (9th) decile of market 
capitalization. In Panel B, cumulative views increase monotonically as the decile of economic 
interests held by FutuBull users increases from 0 (low) to 9 (high). The evidence is consistent with 
retail investors rationally allocating their efforts based on economic interests.  

 
 
24 
 
4.1.2 Views Per Document 
Table 2 Panel A shows the information access statistics at the document level. The pattern 
indicates a preference for accessing filings with more timely accounting information, as evidenced 
by the higher mean for Results Guidance (159) and lower mean for Semi-Annual Reports (105). 
The median views over Summary Reports (148) are higher than those of Results Announcements 
(102), consistent with retail investors preferring shorter documents with lower information 
processing costs. The median views over Expert Opinion (150) are even slightly higher, consistent 
with retail investors displaying an interest in documents that help lower their information 
integration costs. Table 2 Panel B shows that the log-transformed number of view counts (Views) 
has a mean of 4.7 and median of 4.5, and the distribution is no longer severely right-skewed.  
Table 3 compares information access patterns at the document level using regression. The 
dependent variable is the log-transformed view counts (#views). Along with various indicators on 
document types, the independent variables include a variety of proxies for title characteristics, 
investor attention, and firm characteristics, with time and industry/firm fixed effects. Panel A pools 
all the documents retrieved under corporate news feeds in the sample. Consistent with Figure 3, 
the results show that retail investors display significantly less interest in regulatory filings (~36% 
less for Filings), documents covering accounting information (~10% less for Accounting 
Documents), documents covering firm-specific information (~33-35% less for Firm Specific), and 
robo-journalism articles (~43-53% less for Robo), but significantly more interest in in-house news 
articles from FutuBull platform (~94-96% higher for Platform). 
Interestingly, retail investors display significantly less interest in documents containing 
brokerage research information (~11-17% less for Broker Research) but more interest in 
crowdsourced content from financial bloggers/influencers (~23-31% higher for Crowdsourced). 

 
 
25 
 
The difference suggests that retail investors appear to prefer crowdsourced content over traditional 
equity research in which professional investors are the target audience. One potential explanation 
is that crowdsourced content may have lower information integration costs as they are likely the 
target audience. Another potential explanation is that some users not only use the platform as a 
trading venue but also as a news reading app.  
On the FutuBull platform, retail investors can observe the title of each document under 
corporate news feeds before deciding to access it through clicks. The results show that the length 
of the article title (Title Length) exhibits a strong negative association with Views, consistent with 
having long informative titles reducing the need to read the detailed content inside. Retail investors 
also display significantly less interest in titles with strong positive sentiment (Positive), but higher 
interest in titles containing numeric information (Numeric).  
Various proxies for investor attention are highly significant in the regression. Consistent with 
Figure 3, retail investors display significantly higher interest in articles that appear in thematic 
news feeds (~74-88% higher for Featured Topics) and headline news feeds (~81-88% higher for 
Highlight), suggesting that retail investor attention appear to be easily drawn to what is being 
promoted on the platform. Views also exhibit a strong positive association with the number of 
corporate news feeds the article appears in (t-statistics: >37 for #Firms Tagged) and the number 
of retail investors sharing the article within the FutuBull community platform (t-statistics: >22 for 
Shares). Views are significantly higher when there is higher stock price volatility (|Return|) and 
trading volume (Turnover) on the day the article is released, but lower if the article is released after 
the trading hour (~15-19% lower for After-Hour), providing indirect evidence that their 
information acquisition mostly happens during trading and they generally access the timeliest 
information available. Consistent with the attention dilution effect, Views are lower if the number 

 
 
26 
 
of articles available under news feeds (#Articles) or the number of results-related announcements 
made by all firms (#Announcements) increases on the same day the article is released.  
In terms of firm-level characteristics, the only significant variables are firm size (Size) and the 
percentage of stakes held by FutuBull investors (Stake) in column (2) with firm-fixed effects. The 
two variables both exhibit a strong positive association with Views and comprise the components 
in calculating economic interests displayed in Figure 4 Panel B.  
In Panel B, the study focuses on articles that cover firm-specific information as the regression 
sample. The results are largely consistent with Panel A, except that retail investors display a higher 
interest in accessing articles that cover accounting information (~5% higher for Accounting News) 
and brokerage research information (~5% higher for Broker Research) in this sample using other 
firm-specific articles as the benchmarks. Retail investors also display a higher interest in accessing 
articles with strong negative sentiment (~6% higher for Negative) and positive sentiment (~4% 
higher for Positive) than those with neutral sentiment. The coefficient on Co-Tagged Views that 
aggregates the total views of other contemporaneous articles co-tagged with other firms is 
significantly positive, consistent with the presence of spillover attention from other related firms.  
Panel C displays the regression results using a sample that contains only regulatory filings. 
The coefficient on Accounting Filings is significantly negative, suggesting that retail investors 
display approximately 13% less interest in accessing filings containing accounting information. 
Consistent with P1, the coefficient on Results Guidance (-0.055) is higher than Results 
Announcements (-0.105). However, the coefficients on Financial Reports (-0.105) and Results 
Announcements (-0.106) are similar in magnitude, which is inconsistent with P2. 
4.1.3 Accounting Disclosures 

 
 
27 
 
Table 4 focuses on the channels through which retail investors access timely accounting 
information. Panel A conducts document-level analyses of information access patterns among all 
filings and articles that cover accounting information. In this specification, the coefficients on 
Results Guidance (-0.33) are significantly lower than Results Announcements (-0.03) after 
controlling for title characteristics, suggesting that retail investors are perhaps only more reactive 
to the titles with more salient sentiments in Results Guidance. Across all three columns, the 
coefficients on Results Announcements are significantly higher than those for Financial Reports 
(consistent with P2) and Summary Reports.22 The results in column (2) suggest that retail investors 
also display a strong interest in accessing articles providing analyses by non-brokerage sources, as 
evidenced by a large positive coefficient on Expert Opinions (0.28) but a large negative coefficient 
on Brokerage Research (-0.54), where Brokerage Research is a subset of Expert Opinions. 
Column (3) further breaks down Brokerage Research into those providing the full text from 
Chinese brokerage houses that typically provide the reports for free (Broker Research Report) and 
those providing summary ratings from international brokerage houses (Broker Summary Ratings). 
The results show that retail investors exhibit much lower interest in Broker Research Report (-
0.61) vs. Broker Summary Ratings (-0.26). 
Panel B conducts event-level analyses on information access patterns over filings and media 
articles released within two days around earnings announcements. Within this short window 
around earnings announcements, different documents should have similar information awareness 
costs as they appear in chronological order under the same news feeds.23 This allows the analyses 
 
22 One should be careful in interpreting this comparison as Summary Reports may include summary reports on events 
other than Results Announcements, which may be less important information events. Panel B provides the comparison 
holding the underlying event constant.  
23 Except for a small number of articles that also appear in the headline news feeds or under featured topics. 
Summary Reports almost never appear in the headline or featured topics. In Panel B, less than 2% of Expert Opinion 
articles appear in the headline. Besides controlling for these articles, the study obtains similar results in additional 
robustness tests that remove these observations.   

 
 
28 
 
to elicit investors’ information choice after holding the underlying information event constant as 
well as the awareness costs relatively similar. As there are potentially multiple documents from 
the same type in this short window, information access metrics are aggregated by document types 
using mean, maximum, and sum for each earnings announcement. Columns (1) to (3) require the 
presence of both Results Announcements and Summary Reports in the event window while 
columns (4) to (6) require the presence of all three types Results Announcements, Summary Reports, 
Expert Opinions in the event window.  
Consistent with both P3 and P4, the results show that retail investors indeed display a higher 
interest in accessing news articles providing short summaries or in-depth analyses than Result 
Announcement filings around earnings announcements, as evidenced by the significantly positive 
Summary Reports and Expert Opinions across all columns. This finding is consistent with some 
retail investors seeking to lower their information acquisition and integration costs from these 
types of articles. 24 Using earnings surprises (Surprise) and accruals (Accrual) as proxies for 
information complexities, the results also show that retail investors are more likely to access the 
detailed filings on Results Announcement when the announcement involves a larger magnitude of 
earnings surprises or accruals in the sample of columns (1) to (3). 
Panel C examines whether information intermediaries facilitate or substitute the direct access 
of accounting disclosures from corporate filings, utilizing the plausibly exogenous introduction of 
major new information sources to FutuBull’s corporate news feeds over time. If the newly added 
information source does not uniformly cover all listed firms, there will be variations in “treated” 
 
24 However, the firm coverage of Summary Reports and Expert Opinion is highly skewed toward hot stocks. In the 
sample, Summary Reports articles are available for only 23% of all earnings announcements while Expert Opinion 
articles are available for only 4% of earnings announcements during the two-day window.  

 
 
29 
 
and “non-treated” firms for each “event”. The study includes up to two years of observations before 
and after each “event” to conduct difference-in-difference analyses as specified in Eq. (1).  
#Views (Filings) = β1Post + β3Post*Treated + βx Controls & F.E.+ ε   (1) 
The study identifies four clusters of such events, including the introduction of new financial 
news portals in column (1), new newsflash sources in column (2), new in-house information 
sources in column (3), and new brokerage research sources in column (4). The results show that 
Post*Treated are insignificant across four columns, failing to find any evidence supporting either 
a complementary (P5a) or substitutive (P5b) relationship in the information access between 
information intermediaries and regulatory filings.  
4.2 Integrating Accounting Information in Trading Decisions 
4.2.1 Trading Decision around Earnings Announcements 
In testing the hypotheses, this registered report assesses to what extent self-directed retail 
investors on integrated trading platforms manage to integrate accounting information into their 
trading decisions. Table 5 examines whether retail investors on FutuBull trade in the same 
direction as the news content during earnings announcements, similar in spirit to Hirshleifer et al. 
[2008]. The basic model setup is described in Eq. (2). The dependent variable is the change in 
aggregate holdings of FutuBull’s clients around Results Announcements.25 The major independent 
variable is the news contained in Results Announcements proxied by the firm’s market-adjusted 
returns in the announcement window (News).26  
ΔHolding t = β1News + βx Controls and F.E.+ ε   (2) 
 
25 To prevent the denominator to be zero when acquiring shares from zero position. the study uses percentage 
difference instead of percentage change in calculating the variable ΔHoldings, which is scaled by the weighted average 
of the aggregate holdings of FutuBull users before and after the time window concerned  
26 The study uses stock returns to proxy for news content instead of earnings surprises due to the lack of analyst 
coverage for public firms listed in HK compared to those listed in the US.  

 
 
30 
 
The results indicate that News is insignificant across all measurement windows of ΔHolding: 
[-7d,+1d] in column (1), [-7d,-1d] in column (2), [0,+1d] in column (3), suggesting that retail 
investors are not saliently trading in the same direction of earnings news both before and during 
earnings announcements on average using the platform. Columns (4)-(6) further examine whether 
high level of information access on different types of accounting documents is associated with 
retail trades during the earnings announcements window ΔHolding [0,+1d] as described in Eq. (3).  
ΔHolding t = β1News + β2High Viewsi + β3News*High Viewsi + βx Controls and F.E. + ε  (3) 
In column (4), News is significantly negative (-0.16), while News*High Views (Results 
Announcements) is significantly positive (+0.31). In other words, retail investors are on average 
trading in the opposite direction of news during earnings announcements when retail access to 
Results Announcements filings is low. When retail access to Results Announcements filing is high, 
retail investors are trading more in line with the news during earnings announcements and 
potentially more in line with PEAD trading strategies. These findings suggest that there are 
potentially large heterogeneities in the trading decision by retail investors depending on the level 
of information access on Results Announcements filings during announcements.  
Additionally, High Views (Results Announcements) and High Views (Summary Reports) are 
both significant and positive, with large t-statistics of 9.33 and 2.52, respectively. As most retail 
investors likely hold cash accounts with short-sale constraints, the strong positive relationship 
between holding changes and information access on Results Announcements is consistent with 
information-driven buying decisions during earnings announcements by these investors. However, 
whether retail investors can generate extra returns from accessing the information is still unclear. 
4.2.2 Informativeness of Retail Trades 

 
 
31 
 
Following Kelly and Tetlock [2016], Table 6 examines the general informativeness of selfdirected retail investors at FutuBull using daily Fama and MacBeth [1973] regression of future 
cumulative market-adjusted returns measured over either the five-day (Panel A) or twenty-day 
(Panel B) window on the daily holding changes by FutuBull clients. The model specifications are 
described in Eq. (4) and (5) below. The specification also examines the informativeness of their 
trades, particularly around accounting disclosures, and compares the informativeness of FutuBull 
clients against those of I-Access and Bulge Bracket brokers.  
Rett+1,t+d= α + β1 ∑ j ΔHoldingt,j + βx Controls + ε   (4) 
Rett+1,t+d= α + β1∑ j ΔHoldingt,j + β2 Filings(Acc)t + β3 ∑ j ΔHoldingt,j × Filings(Acc)it +  β4 
Filings(Acc)t+1,t+5 + β5 ∑ j ΔHoldingt,j× Filings(Acc)t+1,t+5 + βx Controls + ε   (5) 
Panel A examines the predictability of future five-day returns. The results show that 
ΔHolding(FutuBull) is positive (0.001) with a t-statistic of 1.57 in column (1) and becomes 
marginally significant with a t-statistic of 1.89 in column (3) when put in a horserace with 
ΔHolding(IAccess) and ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket). As a comparison, ΔHolding(IAccess) is 
significantly negative (-0.001) with a t-statistics of -3.76, suggesting that the clients of no-frills 
trading platform that provides no accounting information access are generally uninformed traders. 
These findings suggest that retail investors using integrated trading platforms FutuBull are more 
informed traders relative to those using I-Access. ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket) is also positive (0.001) 
with a t-statistic of 1.54 in column (3), displaying no significant differences from 
ΔHolding(FutuBull). This suggests that retail investors using the FutuBull platform are as 
informed as institutional investors that utilize Bulge Bracket brokers in the sample.  
When ΔHolding(FutuBull) interacts with an indicator Filings(Acc)[+1d,+5d] for having 
upcoming accounting-related disclosures in the next five days as well as an indicator Filings(Acc)[-
1d,0] for having accounting-related disclosures on day t or t-1 in Column (2), the interaction term 

 
 
32 
 
between ΔHolding(FutuBull) and Filings(Acc)[-1d,0] is significantly positive with a t-statistics of 
1.99. This result shows that FutuBull users are incrementally more informative in their equity 
trades in the [0, +1 day] window around earnings announcements, providing evidence supporting 
the notion that more convenient access to timely accounting information facilitates more informed 
trading by retail investors.  
Panel B replicates the analyses in Panel A by expanding the return predictability horizon from 
five days to twenty days. The results are largely consistent in both panels, with ΔHolding(FutuBull) 
being significant across all four columns with t-statistics of at least 3.36 in Panel B. Under this 
measurement horizon, retail investors at the FutuBull platform continue to behave significantly 
more informed than those at I-Access and stay as informed as institutional investors that utilize 
Bulge Bracket brokers. Collectively, the evidence in Table 6 supports the alternative form of H1.  
4.2.3 Trading Profitability and Information Access 
Table 7 further examines the potential trading profitability of FutuBull clients and its 
association with different channels of accounting information access. The sample is limited to 
Results Announcements that contain value-relevant information proxied by over 5% marketadjusted stock price movement during the announcement window and those with clear trading 
direction exhibited by FutuBull users (“net buy” if ΔHoldings is over +3% and “net sell” if 
ΔHoldings is below -3%).27 Trading Profitability is thus calculated depending on the trading 
direction of FutuBull clients in these events. Eq. (6) describes the regression specification. The 
dependent variable Trading Profitability represents the cumulative market-adjusted return from 
these trades in a 3-month or a 6-month horizon. Key independent variables include the information 
 
27 In the execution stage of this registered report, an additional sample selection condition is added to the model in 
Table 7 by requiring firms to have over 10,000 HKD economic interest held by FutuBull clients to prevent small 
denominators to blow up the Sum Scaled Views measures.  

 
 
33 
 
access on Results Announcements, Summary Reports, and Expert Opinion, proxied by the sum of 
views within each document type scaled by the dollar amount of economic interests held by 
FutuBull clients in these firms.28  
Trade Profitability= βx Scaled Views + βy Controls and F.E. + ε   (6) 
The results generally find positive but insignificant coefficients on the Sum Scaled Views 
(Results Announcements), with t-statistics of 1.10 in column (1) and 1.35 in column (5). Sum 
Scaled Views (Summary Reports) is insignificantly positive, while Sum Scaled Views (Expert 
Opinion) is insignificantly negative. While statistically insignificant (potentially due to 
measurement errors), the direction of the association between aggregative view counts on Results 
Announcements and trade profitability is consistent with the notion that accessing detailed 
accounting information in regulatory filings may provide benefits to retail investors.29  
4.2.4 Comparisons Across Trading Platforms 
Table 8 further compares the trading decisions and profitability of self-directed retail investors 
at FutuBull with those at I-Access and Bulge Bracket brokers when there are accounting-related 
disclosures (Results Announcements, Financial Reports, Results Guidance). Panel A utilizes Eq. 
 
28 Eq. (6) is a joint test of the informativeness or value relevance of these documents and whether the retail investors 
can properly extract and integrate the useful information into their trading decisions. One limitation of the study is 
that it can only acquire the cumulative views on each document as of the data acquisition date, not the daily historical 
views on each document. Therefore, measurement errors exist in capturing the cumulative views over the event 
window. Appendix C investigates the timing of views over time and finds that the vast majority of views accrue during 
the first two trading days after their releases. Thus, this particular type of measurement error does not appear to be 
highly significant. Another potential measurement issue is that the study can only observe the views and trades by 
FutuBull clients at the aggregate level, not at the individual level. Wealthier retail investors will have much larger 
influence on the aggregate trading positions relative to their influence on view counts. It is also possible that some app 
users may be primarily news readers, but not actively trading using the platform. Finally, it is not easy to come up 
with a precise benchmark on what the expected level of information access should be at the aggregate level. While 
the study uses economic interest based on FutuBull client holdings as the benchmark, it only captures existing 
investors while ignoring potential new investors. Such measurement errors can significantly reduce the power of tests.  
29. In untabulated analyses, the study follows a similar specification in Panel C of Table 4, except that the dependent 
variable is the trading profitability used in Table 7. The interaction terms Post*Treated are insignificant across all 
columns. 

 
 
34 
 
(7) in examining whether users at the two platforms are incorporating accounting information 
differently in their trading decisions.  
ΔHolding = β1News + β2 News*I-Access/Bulge + βx Controls and F.E.+ ε   (7) 
The results show that News is insignificantly positive (t-statistics of 1.19 and 1.31) in columns 
(1) and (3) when ΔHolding[-5,-1] is used as the dependent variables, suggesting that some FutuBull 
traders may be anticipating upcoming news in their trades despite the statistical insignificance. In 
columns (2) and (4) when ΔHolding[0,1] is used as the dependent variables, News becomes 
significantly negative (t-statistics of -2.83 and -3.00), suggesting that retail investors at FutuBull 
are on average contrarian traders when there are accounting disclosures. The results combined are 
consistent with some retail investors at FutuBull potentially trading in anticipation of upcoming 
news in accounting disclosures and unwinding their positions upon news release. However, this 
does not appear to be a salient and pervasive strategy. The findings also suggest that retail investors 
do not generally incorporate accounting information following PEAD strategies.  
Panel B compares the profitability of trades initiated in the [-5d, -1d] window before earnings 
announcements in anticipation of upcoming accounting disclosures between FutuBull and IAccess/Bulge Bracket, conditional on having a clear trading direction exhibited by platform users 
(i.e., |ΔHolding|>3%). The profitability is measured as the cumulative market-adjusted returns in 
the [0,+1d] or [0,+7d] announcement window. Eq. (8) describes the specification.  
Trade Profitabilityt = β1Futu + βx Controls and F.E. + ε   (8) 
The results show that Futu is insignificantly positive in columns (1) and (2) with t-statistics 
of 0.31 and 1.05 when compared to I-Access clients as the omitted category, but insignificantly 
negative in columns (3) and (4) with t-statistics of -0.92 and -0.17 when compared to investors 

 
 
35 
 
using Bulge Bracket brokers. Overall, there is no strong evidence suggesting that FutuBull clients 
are significantly better at anticipating future accounting disclosures than the benchmarks. 
Panel C further compares the profitability of trades conducted in the [0, +1d] window after 
accounting information release, assuming a holding period of either three or six months, 
conditional on the announcements involving a clear trading direction exhibited by platform users 
(i.e., |ΔHolding|>3%). The results reveal significant positive coefficients on Futu (t-statistics: 2.74 
and 2.78) in columns (1) and (2) when FutuBull is compared to I-Access, suggesting that the 
trading profitability from processing accounting disclosures is 1.2% higher in the 3-month window 
and 1.9% higher in the 6-month window for FutuBull users vs. I-Access users. In columns (3) and 
(4), Futu is insignificantly positive (t-statistics: 0.31 and 0.82) when FutuBull is compared against 
Bulge Bracket brokers, revealing no significant differences in the ability to process accounting 
disclosures between FutuBull and Bulge Bracket clients.  
The evidence presented in Panel B and C is consistent with the empirical evidence presented 
in Table 6 using Fama-MacBeth regression using a shorter window of five and twenty days. The 
collective evidence suggests that having more convenient access to corporate information 
facilitates more profitable trades by self-directed retail investors after processing earnings news, 
providing strong evidence supporting the alternative form of H2. 
4.3 Additional Analyses 
4.3.1 Capturing PEAD opportunities 
Table 9 compares how often investors from the three types of brokers capture the significant 
PEAD opportunities that generate 5% or 10% excess returns over a three-month or six-month 
horizon by analyzing their aggregate trading directions during earning announcements. The table 
does not show much difference between the number of times FutuBull and I-Access clients manage 

 
 
36 
 
to capture the PEAD opportunities, suggesting that retail investors at FutuBull are not 
systematically exploiting potential PEAD anomalies in their trading decisions.  
4.3.2 Price Efficiency 
Kelley and Tetlok [2016] find that retail short sellers have unique insights into small firms’ 
fundamentals. Table 10 examines whether greater access to timely accounting information by selfdirected retail investors contributes to higher intra-period price efficiency in small-cap stocks.30 
Potentially due to the small sample size, the results find an insignificant positive coefficient on 
|ΔHolding(FutuBull)| with a t-statistic of 1.53 and an insignificant positive coefficient on 
|ΔHolding(FutuBull)|*High Views(Results Announcements) with a t-statistic of 1.50, providing 
some preliminary evidence that accounting information access and trading by retail investors may 
enhance price efficiency in small-cap stocks.  
5. Concluding Remarks  
Through analyzing data from an integrated trading platform, this registered report provides a 
more holistic picture of the information access patterns of self-directed retail investors. The results 
show that these retail investors access a mosaic of information, with a significant portion being 
not firm-specific. Investor attention appears to be the most salient determinant. While only 3.3% 
of media articles are promoted in the headline, they contribute to 62.4% of total cumulative views 
of media articles, suggesting that trading platforms can potentially exert a strong influence on the 
information access pattern of users.  
 
30 The specification follows Eq. (9) below. The dependent variable is Intra-Period Efficiency (IPE), an area-underthe-curve measure of the speed of price adjustment over a [0,+5d] window following Blankespoor et al. [2020], 
conditional on having over 5% absolute return over the window to reduce noise in the measure. To make sure that 
FutuBull clients are the salient group of investors in the company, the sample is limited to firms with over 3% average 
aggregate holding by FutuBull clients and below-median aggregate holdings by investors using Bulge Bracket brokers. 
IPEt = β1High Views(channel i) + β2|ΔHolding(FutuBull)| + β3|ΔHolding(FutuBull)|* High Views(channel i) + βx 
Controls and F.E.+ ε   (9) 
 

 
 
37 
 
Among articles that provide firm-specific coverage, retail investors display a higher interest in 
accessing those covering accounting information, supporting the importance of accounting 
information as a source of firm-specific information for retail investors. During earnings 
announcements, retail investors typically prefer accessing articles providing summary reports or 
in-depth analyses from reputable sources relative to the original Results Announcement filings. 
This is consistent with P3 and P4, suggesting that disclosure processing costs present frictions to 
the direct use of accounting information from regulatory filings for retail investors.  
With convenient access to a rich set of information through the integrated trading platform, 
retail trades at FutuBull are generally predictive of future stock returns, exhibiting significantly 
higher informativeness than I-Access, a no-frills trading platform that provides no information 
services, and demonstrating no significant differences in informativeness compared to institutional 
trades at Bulge Bracket brokers. These findings suggest that retail investors benefit significantly 
from having convenient access to a mosaic of information in the trading environment and can 
narrow the information gap relative to institutional investors.   
In particular, the informativeness of retail trades at FutuBull is more pronounced just after 
accounting disclosures, suggesting that the sources of informed trading partly come from 
processing accounting disclosures. During earnings announcements, aggregate retail trades at 
FutuBull tend to be contrarian if the level of their access to Results Announcement filing is low. 
Aggregate retail trades become more in line with earnings news if their access to Results 
Announcement filing is high. This suggests that the trading strategies by self-directed retail 
investors are likely quite heterogeneous and do not follow PEAD trading strategies systematically.  
Overall, the collective evidence supports the alternative form of both H1 and H2 in the 
registered proposal, but this registered report cannot clearly identify which specific pieces of 

 
 
38 
 
information contribute to informed trading by retail investors in accounting disclosures. The study 
finds an insignificant positive relationship between trading profitability and access to Results 
Announcement filings when linking retail trading to information access within the platform. It is 
possible that informed trading comes from having access to a mosaic of information that completes 
the picture, not just from a single piece of information in isolation on the integrated trading 
platform.  
There are several limitations and caveats in this registered report. First, the study does not 
observe the amount of time retail investors spent reading and analyzing the information contained 
in each document on the platform. Therefore, not all views necessarily represent retail investors’ 
diligent efforts in information extraction and integration. Second, the study only observes the 
aggregate viewership at the document level and the net trading behavior of “representative” retail 
investors at the firm level instead of tracking both at the individual level. Measurement errors due 
to data constraints may introduce noise or unknown bias in the test linking retail trades to 
information access within the platform. Non-significance in the results may be due to reduced test 
power from such measurement errors. Third, the study cannot disentangle whether the differences 
across platforms are attributable to client matching based on information demand or differences 
induced by differential information costs. Nevertheless, the findings can still speak to the 
heterogeneity of retail investors and the importance of information costs for self-directed retail 
investors. Fourth, the study cannot completely rule out the possibility that differences in trading 
decisions and profitability may be explained by other omitted factors correlated with investors’ 
usage of information during the underlying events. Last, the findings can speak to self-directed 
retail investors who trade through online/mobile apps and may not generalize to other retail 
investors who rely on broker advisory services in investment decisions.  
 

 
 
39 
 
References 
Ball, Ray, and Philip Brown. 1968. An empirical evaluation of accounting income 
numbers. Journal of Accounting Research 6 (2) (2021/07): 159-78. 
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean. 2007. All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on 
the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. The Review of Financial 
Studies 21 (2): 785-818. 
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean. 2000. Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common 
stock investment performance of individual investors. The Journal of Finance 55 (2) (04/01; 
2021/07): 773-806. 
Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu. 2008. Do retail trades move markets? The 
Review of Financial Studies 22 (1): 151-86. 
Barber, B. M., & Odean, T. 2008. All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the 
buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. The Review of Financial Studies, 
21(2), 785-818 
Barber, B. M., Y. Lee, Y. Liu, and Terrance Odean. 2009. "Just how Much do Individual 
Investors Lose by Trading?" The Review of Financial Studies 22 (2): 609–632.  
Barber, Brad M., Xing Huang, Terrance Odean, and Christopher Schwarz. 2021. “Attention 
Induced Trading and Returns:  Evidence from Robinhood Users.” Working Paper.               
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3715077 
Ben-Rephael, A., Da, Z., & Israelsen, R. D. 2017. It depends on where you search: Institutional 
investor attention and underreaction to news. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(9), 30093047. 
Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas. 1990. Evidence that stock prices do not fully reflect 
the implications of current earnings for future earnings. Journal of Accounting and 
Economics 13 (4) (December 1990): 305-40. 
Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas. 1989. Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed 
price response or risk premium? Journal of Accounting Research 27 (2021/07): 1-36. 
Blankespoor, Elizabeth, Ed deHaan, and Christina Zhu. 2018. Capital market effects of media 
synthesis and dissemination: Evidence from robo-journalism. Review of Accounting Studies, 
23(1), 1-36. 
Blankespoor, Elizabeth, Ed deHaan, John Wertz, and Christina Zhu. 2019. Why do individual 
investors disregard accounting information? the roles of information awareness and 
acquisition costs. Journal of Accounting Research 57 (1) (03/01; 2021/06): 53-84. 

 
 
40 
 
Blankespoor, Elizabeth, Ed deHaan, and Ivan Marinovic. 2020. Disclosure processing costs, 
investors’ information choice, and equity market outcomes: A review. Journal of 
Accounting and Economics, 70(2), 101344. 
Bloomfield, Robert J. 2002. The “Incomplete revelation hypothesis” and financial 
reporting. Accounting Horizons 16 (3): 233-43. 
BOEHMER, EKKEHART, CHARLES M. JONES, XIAOYAN ZHANG, and XINRAN 
ZHANG. 2021. Tracking retail investor activity. The Journal of Finance n/a (04/28; 
2021/07). 
Britainthinks. 2021. Understanding Self-Directed Investors: A summary report of research 
conducted for The Financial Conduct Authority.  
https://www.fca.org.uk/publication/research/understanding-self-directed-investors.pdf 
Deloitte. 2021. The Rise of Newly Empowered Retail Investors: How they’re changing customer 
expectations and investing dynamics.  Deloitte Center for Financial Services. 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/financial-services/us-therise-of-newly-empowered-retail-investors-2021.pdf 
BUSHEE, B. J., CORE, J. E., GUAY, W., & HAMM, S. J. W. 2010. The role of the business 
press as an information intermediary. Journal of Accounting Research, 48(1), 1-19. 
Drake, Michael S., Darren T. Roulstone, and Jacob R. Thornock. 2015. The determinants and 
consequences of information acquisition via EDGAR. Contemporary Accounting 
Research 32 (3) (09/01; 2021/07): 1128-61. 
DRAKE, MICHAEL S., DARREN T. ROULSTONE, and JACOB R. THORNOCK. 2012. 
Investor information demand: Evidence from google searches around earnings 
announcements. Journal of Accounting Research 50 (4) (09/01; 2021/07): 1001-40. 
Dure, Elana. 2021. The Rise of Self-Directed Investing. JPMogan Wealth Management: 
Investing Essentials. August 13, 2021.  
https://www.chase.com/personal/investments/learning-and-insights/article/the-rise-of-selfdirected-investing 
Dyer, T., Lang, M., & Stice-Lawrence, L. 2017. The evolution of 10-K textual disclosure: 
Evidence from latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 64(2), 221245. 
Elliott, W. B., Frank D. Hodge, and Kevin E. Jackson. 2008. The association between 
nonprofessional investors' information choices and their portfolio returns: The importance of 
investing experience. Contemporary Accounting Research 25 (2) (06/01; 2020/10): 473-98. 
Ernst, E., Gassen, J., & Pellens, B. (2009). Verhalten und Präferenzen deutscher Aktionäre: Eine 
Befragung von privaten und institutionellen Anlegern zum Informationsverhalten, zur 

 
 
41 
 
Dividendenpräferenz und zur Wahrnehmung von Stimmrechten [Information needs, dividend 
preferences and voting behavior of German investors: Results of a large-scale survey], 
Studien des Deutschen Aktieninstituts, Heft 42, Frankfurt am Main. 
Fama, E. F., and J. D. MacBeth. “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests.” Journal of 
Political Economy 81, no. 3 (1973): 607–36.  
Frederickson, James R., and Jeffrey S. Miller. 2004. The effects of pro forma earnings 
disclosures on analysts' and nonprofessional investors' equity valuation judgments. The 
Accounting Review 79 (3) (07/01; 2020/10): 667-86. 
Gassen, Joachim, and Kristina Schwedler. 2010. The decision usefulness of financial accounting 
measurement concepts: Evidence from an online survey of professional investors and their 
advisors. 19 (3) (09/01): 495-509. 
Grinblatt, M., & Keloharju, M. 2000. The investment behavior and performance of various 
investor types: A study of finland's unique data set. Journal of Financial Economics, 55(1), 
43-67. 
Hirshleifer, David A., James N. Myers, Linda A. Myers, and Siew Hong Teoh. 2008. Do 
individual investors cause post-earnings announcement drift? direct evidence from personal 
trades. The Accounting Review 83 (6) (2021/07): 1521-50. 
HIRSHLEIFER, DAVID, SONYA SEONGYEON LIM, and SIEW HONG TEOH. 2009. Driven 
to distraction: Extraneous events and underreaction to earnings news. The Journal of 
Finance 64 (5) (10/01; 2021/07): 2289-325. 
Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited (2015). Retail Investor Survey 2014. Accessed 
September 2020: 
https://www.hkex.com.hk/-/media/HKEX-Market/News/Research-Reports/HKEXSurveys/Retail-Investor-Survey_2014/RIS2014.pdf 
Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited (2017). Cash Market Transaction Survey 2016. 
Accessed September 2020: 
https://www.hkex.com.hk/-/media/HKEX-Market/News/Research-Reports/HKEXSurveys/Cash-Market-Transaction-Survey-2016/cmts2016.pdf?la=en 
Hvidkjaer, Soeren. 2008. Small trades and the cross-section of stock returns. The Review of 
Financial Studies 21 (3): 1123-51. 
KANIEL, R., SAAR, G., & TITMAN, S. 2008. Individual investor trading and stock returns. The 
Journal of Finance, 63(1), 273-310. 
KANIEL, RON, SHUMING LIU, GIDEON SAAR, and SHERIDAN TITMAN. 2012. 
Individual investor trading and return patterns around earnings announcements. The Journal 
of Finance 67 (2) (04/01; 2021/07): 639-80. 

 
 
42 
 
KELLEY, ERIC K., and PAUL C. TETLOCK. 2013. How wise are crowds? insights from retail 
orders and stock returns. The Journal of Finance 68 (3) (06/01; 2021/07): 1229-65. 
Kelley, Eric K., and Paul C. Tetlock. 2016. Retail short selling and stock prices. The Review of 
Financial Studies 30 (3): 801-34. 
KUMAR, ALOK, and CHARLES M. C. LEE. 2006. Retail investor sentiment and return 
comovements. The Journal of Finance 61 (5) (10/01; 2021/07): 2451-86. 
Lawrence, Alastair, James P. Ryans, and Estelle Y. Sun. 2017. Investor demand for sell-side 
research. The Accounting Review 92 (2): 123-49. 
Lawrence, A., Ryans, J., Sun, E., & Laptev, N. 2018. Earnings announcement promotions: A 
yahoo finance field experiment. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 66(2), 399-414. 
Lewellen, Jonathan. 2004. Predicting returns with financial ratios. Journal of Financial 
Economics 74 (2) (November 2004): 209-35. 
Maines, Laureen A., and Linda S. McDaniel. 2000. Effects of comprehensive-income 
characteristics on nonprofessional investors' judgments: The role of financial-statement 
presentation format. The Accounting Review 75 (2) (2020/10): 179-207. 
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Devin Shanthikumar. 2007. Are small investors naive about 
incentives?. The economics of conflicts of interest financial institutions. Vol. 85. 
Martin K., and R. Wigglesworth. 2021. “Rise of the Retail Army: The Amateur Traders 
Transforming Markets.” Financial Times, March 9, 2021.  
https://www.ft.com/content/7a91e3ea-b9ec-4611-9a03-a8dd3b8bddb5 
Michels, Jeremy. 2021. “Retail Investor Trade and the Pricing of Earnings”. Working Paper. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3833565 
Moss, Austin, James P. Naughton, and Clare Wang. 2020. “The Irrelevance of ESG Disclosure 
to Retail Investors: Evidence from Robinhood.”. Working Paper 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3604847 
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West. “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and 
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica 55, no. 3 (1987): 703–8. 
Odean, Terrance. 1998. Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? The Journal of Finance 53 
(5) (10/01; 2021/07): 1775-98. 
Olbert, L. (1989). Stock valuation methods of financial analysts in a thin stock market in Sweden 
with comparisons to the United Kingdom and the United States. The International Journal of 
Accounting, 123-135. 

 
 
43 
 
Ontario Securities Commision. 2021. Self-Directed Investors: Insights and Experiences. April 
2021.  
https://www.osc.ca/sites/default/files/2021-04/inv_research_20210421_self-directed-investorsurvey.pdf 
 
Ozik, G., Sadka, R., & Shen, S. (2020). Flattening the Illiquidity Curve: Retail Trading During 
the COVID-19 Lockdown. Working Paper. 
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman. 1985. The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers 
too long: Theory and evidence. The Journal of Finance 40 (3) (2021/06): 777-90. 
Sims, C.A., 2010. Rational inattention and monetary economics. In: Handbook of Monetary 
Economics (3): 155-181. 
Sims, C.A., 2003. Implications of rational inattention. Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (3): 
665-690. 
Sloan, Richard G. 1996. Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows 
about future earnings? The Accounting Review 71 (3) (2021/07): 289-315. 
Statman, Meir, Steven Thorley, and Keith Vorkink. 2006. Investor overconfidence and trading 
volume. The Review of Financial Studies 19 (4) (2021/06): 1531-65. 
Twedt, Brady. 2015. Spreading the word: Price discovery and newswire dissemination of 
management earnings guidance. The Accounting Review 91 (1): 317-46. 
Veldkamp, L.L., 2011. Information Choice in Macroeconomics and Finance. Princeton 
University Press. 
Welch, I. (2020). Retail Raw: Wisdom of the Robinhood Crowd and the COVID Crisis. Working 
Paper. 

 
 
44 
 
Appendix A: Variable Definitions 
VARIABLE 
DESCRIPTION 
SOURCE 
Views  
The natural logarithm of the number of views on each page (news article or the 
regulatory filing) minus the number of views on regulatory filings regarding 
“monthly return of equity issuer on movement securities” on the FutuBull 
integrated trading platform. If the view on the uninformative filing is abnormally 
large, resulting in negative adjusted numbers, use its median view counts over 
the entire sample period or the minimum view counts of all documents as the 
adjustment. 
FutuBull 
Filings 
An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to regulatory filings and zero if 
the page belongs to articles from information intermediaries 
FutuBull 
Accounting News An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to articles covering accountingrelated topics and zero otherwise. Articles covering accounting-related topics are 
identified using a combination of textual analyses on the article title using 
keyword searches and the timing of article release around accounting-related 
regulatory filings (Accounting Filings) 
FutuBull 
Summary Report 
An indicator that equals one if Accounting News contains fewer than 200 
Chinese words and the source is financial newswire, and zero otherwise 
FutuBull 
Export Opinion 
An indicator that equals one if Accounting News is from equity research firms 
or, if the title of the news article mentions equity research firms, or if the article 
provides in-depth analyses (over 800 Chinese words) from selected news sources 
(including traditional newspaper/magazines, industry research portals, 
crowdsourced research platforms) 
FutuBull 
Accounting 
Filings 
An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to regulatory filings on “Annual 
Reports”, “Semi-Annual Reports”, “Results Announcements,” or “Profit 
Warnings”, and zero otherwise  
FutuBull 
Financial Reports An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to regulatory filings on “Annual 
Reports” or “Semi-Annual Reports”, and zero otherwise 
FutuBull 
Annual Reports 
An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to regulatory filings on “Annual 
Reports”, and zero otherwise 
FutuBull 
Semi-Annual 
Reports 
An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to regulatory filings on “SemiAnnual Reports”, and zero otherwise 
FutuBull 
Results 
Announcements 
An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to regulatory filings on “Results 
Announcements”, and zero otherwise 
FutuBull 
Results Guidance An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to regulatory filings on “Profit 
Warnings”, and zero otherwise 
FutuBull 
Accounting 
Documents 
An indicator that equals one if the page belongs to Accounting Filings (i.e., 
regulatory filings on “Annual Reports”, “Semi-Annual Reports”, “Results 
Announcements,” or “Profit Warnings”) or Accounting News (i.e., articles 
covering accounting-related topics from information intermediaries), and zero 
otherwise 
FutuBull 
Firm Specific 
An indicator that equals one if the article covers firm-specific news for a given 
firm, proxied by either being tagged under only one firm’s news feeds or the title 
containing specific mentions of the company name or its ticker 
FutuBull 
Platform 
An indicator that equals one if the source of the article is generated by the 
FutuBull integrated trading platform 
FutuBull 
Shares 
The natural logarithm of (one plus) the number of shares to the community 
forum for each news article on the FutuBull integrated trading platform 
FutuBull 
Financial Media 
An indicator that equals one if the source of the article is from media outlets that 
specialize in financial news 
FutuBull 
Broker Research 
An indicator that equals one if the source of the article is from equity research 
firms or if the title of the news article mentions equity research firms 
FutuBull 

 
 
45 
 
Crowdsourced 
An indicator that equals one if the source of the article is from the crowdsourced 
equity research section of crowdsourced investment research platforms 
FutuBull 
Robo 
An indicator that equals one if the source of the article is generated by robojournalism  
FutuBull 
Broker Research 
Report 
An indicator that equals one if the source of the article is from equity research 
firms and the article contains the full text of the research report 
FutuBull 
Broker Summary 
Ratings 
An indicator that equals one if the article comes from sources that disseminate 
the summary ratings from broker research and its content can be inferred from 
the title 
FutuBull 
Positive 
An indicator that equals one if the predicted probability of positive sentiment is 
higher than the predicted probability of negative sentiment by 25% using a 
BERT-based model fine-tuned using manually labeled samples  
FutuBull 
Negative 
An indicator that equals one if the predicted probability of negative sentiment is 
higher than the predicted probability of positive sentiment by 25% using a 
BERT-based model fine-tuned using manually labeled samples 
FutuBull 
Numeric 
An indicator that equals one if the title of the article contains numbers 
FutuBull 
Title Length 
The natural logarithm of the number of Chinese words in the news article title  
FutuBull 
Featured Topics 
An indicator that equals one if the article is featured under popular topics on the 
FutuBull integrated trading platform 
FutuBull 
Headlines 
An indicator that equals one if the article is featured under headline news feeds 
on the FutuBull integrated trading platform 
FutuBull 
#Firms Tagged 
The number of firms covered by the news article, proxied by how many firms’ 
news feeds the news article appears in 
FutuBull 
Co-Tagged Views The natural logarithm of the total number of views in other news articles in 
which the firm is co-tagged within the two-day window [0,+1] after the release 
of regulatory filings or news articles  
FutuBull 
#Articles 
Quintile ranks of the total number of news articles that cover a given firm on the 
same day (may proxy for either attention or information overload/distraction) 
FutuBull 
Returns 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns within the two-day window [0,+1] 
after the release of regulatory filings or news articles 
Capital IQ 
|Return| 
The absolute value of average daily stock returns within the two-day window 
[0,+1] after the release of regulatory filings or news articles 
Capital IQ 
Turnover 
The average trading volume during the two-day window [0,+1] after the release 
of regulatory filings or news articles scaled by the total number of shares 
outstanding  
Capital IQ 
# Announcements The number of concurrent Results Announcement on the same day  
FutuBull 
After-Hour 
An indicator that equals one if the article is released after trading hours 
FutuBull 
Size 
The natural logarithm of the market capitalization of the firm  
Capital IQ 
Coverage 
The natural logarithm of (one plus) the number of sell-side analysts covering the 
firm 
I/B/E/S 
MB 
Market-to-book ratio of the given firm  
Capital IQ 
Profitability 
Return over total assets (ROA) of the given firm from its latest fiscal year 
Capital IQ 
Loss 
An indicator that equals one if the firm reports negative earnings in its latest 
fiscal year 
Capital IQ 
Leverage 
Total debt divided by total assets of the given firm from its latest fiscal year 
Capital IQ 
Stake 
Percentage stake held by retail investors at FutuBull trading platform in a given 
firm 
CCASS 
Surprise 
The absolute value of the difference between annualized EPS in the current 
period and annualized EPS in the same period from the previous fiscal year, 
scaled by stock price 
Capital IQ 
Accrual 
The absolute value of the divergence between accounting earnings and operating 
cash flows, scaled by total assets  
Capital IQ 

 
 
46 
 
Post (x) 
An indicator that equals one if the event periods are after the introduction of a 
significant new contributor that contributes news articles regarding results 
announcements under each specific event (x), and zero otherwise 
FutuBull 
Treated(x) 
An indicator that equals one if the firm receives coverage by the new contributor 
under each specific event (x), and zero otherwise 
FutuBull 
ΔHolding 
Percentage change in aggregate positions held by investors at FutuBull during 
the two-day window [0,+1] after the release of results announcements 
CCASS 
News 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns within the two-day window [0,+1] 
after the release of results announcements 
Capital IQ 
Mean Scaled 
Views 
(Document Type) 
The average number of views on each document type on the FutuBull integrated 
trading platform during results announcements divided by the market 
capitalization of the firm*percentage held by FutuBull users, where document 
type includes Results Announcements, Summary Reports, Expert Opinion 
FutuBull 
Max Scaled Views 
(Document Type) 
The maximum number of views on each document type on the FutuBull 
integrated trading platform during results announcements divided by the market 
capitalization of the firm*percentage held by FutuBull users, where document 
type includes Results Announcements, Summary Reports, Expert Opinion 
FutuBull 
Sum Scaled Views 
(Document Type) 
The total number of views on each document type on the FutuBull integrated 
trading platform during results announcements divided by the market 
capitalization of the firm*percentage held by FutuBull users, where document 
type includes Results Announcements, Summary Reports, Expert Opinion 
FutuBull 
High Views  
(Document Type) 
An indicator that equals one if Sum Scaled Views for the specified document 
type is higher than the median value for the year (the number of views is 
assumed to be zero in the absence of the document type), and zero if otherwise, 
where document type includes Results Announcements, Summary Reports, 
Expert Opinion 
FutuBull 
Returns 
[+1d, +5d] 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns in the five-day window [+1, +5] for a 
given stock on each date  
Capital IQ 
Returns 
[+1d, +20d] 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns in the twenty-day window [+1, +20] 
for a given stock on each date  
Capital IQ 
ΔHolding 
(FutuBull) 
Percentage differences in aggregate positions held by investors at FutuBull for a 
given stock on each date 
CCASS 
ΔHolding 
(I-Access) 
Percentage differences in aggregate positions held by investors at I-Access for a 
given stock on each date 
CCASS 
ΔHolding 
(Bulge Bracket) 
Percentage differences in aggregate positions held by investors using Bulge 
Bracket brokers for a given stock on each date 
CCASS 
Filings(Acc) 
[+1d,+5d] 
An indicator that equals one if there are any accounting-related disclosures 
through regulatory filings in the upcoming one to five days for a given stock on 
each date 
FutuBull 
Filings(Acc) 
[-1d,0] 
An indicator that equals one if there are any accounting-related disclosures 
through regulatory filings during the past [-1d,0] window for a given stock on 
each date 
FutuBull 
Returns 
[-4d, 0] 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns in the past [-4d, 0] window for a given 
stock on each date  
Capital IQ 
Returns 
[-25d, -5d] 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns in the past [-25d, -25d] window for a 
given stock on each date  
Capital IQ 

 
 
47 
 
Returns 
[-251d, -26d] 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns in the past [-251d, -26d] window for a 
given stock on each date  
Capital IQ 
Ln(IdioVol) 
The natural logarithm of idiosyncratic return volatility over the past 30-day 
rolling window for a given stock on each date 
Capital IQ 
Ln(Turnover) 
The natural logarithm of trading volume over the past 5-day rolling window for 
a given stock on each date 
Capital IQ 
|ΔHolding| 
The absolute value of ΔHolding during the two-day window [0,+1] after the 
release of results announcements 
CCASS 
Net Buy 
An indicator that equals one if ΔHolding during the two-day window [0,+1] 
after the release of results announcements is positive 
CCASS 
Trade 
Profitability 
(3-month) 
Cumulative market-adjusted trading returns in the three-month window [+2, 
+90] assuming that investors hold the traded positions for three months from 
their significant net trades conducted during the two-day window [0,+1] after the 
release of Accounting Documents 
Capital IQ 
Trade 
Profitability 
(6-month) 
Cumulative market-adjusted trading returns in the six-month window [+2, +182] 
assuming that investors hold the traded positions for six months from their 
significant net trades conducted during the two-day window [0,+1] after the 
release of Accounting Documents 
Capital IQ 
Returns 
[+2, +90] 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns in the three-month window [+2, +90] 
if the sign is consistent with the cumulative market-adjusted stock returns during 
the two-day window [0,+1] after the release of Results Announcements and the 
magnitude of the announcement returns is over 5% 
Capital IQ 
Returns 
[+2, +182] 
Cumulative market-adjusted stock returns in the three-month window [+2, +182] 
if the sign is consistent with the cumulative market-adjusted stock returns during 
the two-day window [0,+1] after the release of Results Announcements and the 
magnitude of the announcement returns is over 5% 
Capital IQ 
Futu 
An indicator that equals one if the broker is Futu, zero if otherwise 
CCASS 
ΔStake% 
(Broker) 
Percentage change in aggregate positions in the direction consistent with trade 
profitability held by investors at the specified broker (Broker) during the twoday window [0,+1] after the release of results announcements, where Broker can 
be Futu, I-Access, or bulge bracket investment banks without significant retail 
businesses in Hong Kong (Bulge Bracket) including Goldman Sachs, Morgan 
Stanley, JPMorgan Chase, Barclays, Bank of America (ML), Deutsche Bank, 
UBS, Credit Suisse 
CCASS 
#Futu 
(>x) 
The number of times ΔStake%(Futu) is more than x% under the specified 
circumstances  
CCASS, 
Capital IQ 
#I-Access 
(>x) 
The number of times ΔStake%(I-Access) is more than x% under the specified 
circumstances  
CCASS, 
Capital IQ 
#Bulge Bracket 
(>x) 
The number of times ΔStake%(Bulge Bracket) is more than x% under the 
specified circumstances, where Bulge Bracket includes Goldman Sachs, Morgan 
Stanley, JPMorgan Chase, Barclays, Bank of America (ML), Deutsche Bank, 
UBS, Credit Suisse 
CCASS, 
Capital IQ 
IPE 
Intra-period efficiency is calculated as an area-under-curve measure of the speed 
of price adjustment within the [0,+5] window after earnings announcement using 
the average of: [1 – (|AR5 – ARt|)/|AR5|], where AR is the abnormal return over 
[0,t].  
Capital IQ 
 
 
 

 
 
48 
 
Appendix B: FutuBull Trading Platform Interface 
Appendix B provides some snapshots of the integrated trading platform interface at FutuBull from 
March 12 to March 15, 2022. The main language used for the FutuBull platform is Chinese. The 
following snapshots display the interface after turning on the auto-translation feature within the 
mobile application to translate most Chinese content to English.  
Desktop Application Interface (March 12) 
• The “News” tab provides timely news feeds of media articles and the major types of 
informative regulatory filings related to each company.  
• Informative regulatory filings such as Results Announcements, Financial Reports, and Results 
Guidance are displayed in the news feeds 
• Uninformative regulatory filings such as “monthly return of equity issuer on movement in 
securities” are not displayed in the news feeds 
 
Figure B-1 FutuBull Desktop Application Interface (March 12) 
 
 
 

 
 
49 
 
Desktop Application Interface (March 15) 
• The “Announcement” tab specifically provides feeds of all corporate regulatory filings.  
 
Figure B-2 FutuBull Desktop Application Interface (March 15) 
 
 

 
 
50 
 
Desktop Application Interface (March 12) 
• After clicking on the news boxed in yellow in Figure B-1, the news page will pop up displaying 
the content. The number of views is tracked and shown at the bottom of the page (boxed in 
green in Figure B-3ii).  
 
Figure B-3i FutuBull Desktop Application – Top of News Page (March 12) 
 
Figure B-3ii FutuBull Desktop Application – Bottom of News Page (March 12) 

 
 
51 
 
Mobile Application Interface (March 12) 
• Similar to the desktop application, the “News” tab provides timely news feeds of media articles 
and the major types of informative regulatory filings related to each company.  
 
Figure B-4 FutuBull Mobile Application Interface (March 12) 
 
 

 
 
52 
 
Mobile Application Interface (March 15) 
• Similar to the desktop application, the “Announcement” tab specifically provides feeds of all 
corporate regulatory filings.  
 
Figure B-5 FutuBull Mobile Application Interface (March 15) 
 
 

 
 
53 
 
Mobile Application Interface (March 12) 
• After clicking on the news boxed in yellow in Figure B-4, the news page will display the 
content. The number of views is tracked and shown at the bottom of the page (boxed in green 
in Figure B-6ii) 
• The number of views increases with each visit to the news page through either the desktop or 
mobile application platform (e.g., from 449 in Figure B-3ii to 450 in Figure B-6ii) 
 
 
Figure B-6i  
FutuBull Mobile Application  
– Top of News Page  
(March 12) 
 
 
Figure B-6ii 
FutuBull Mobile Application  
– Bottom of News Page  
(March 12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
54 
 
Appendix C: Timing of Information Access 
To evaluate the timing of information access by users of the FutuBull platform, I set up a bot to 
track the views on a small sample of recent articles every 24 hours to examine the trends in daily 
views over time. From the list of “hot” stocks on FutuBull after the market closes on December 
28, January 10, and January 12, I extract the most recent 10 articles on these companies, 
respectively, and subsequently try to record the number of views for each article over time. The 
number of views is automatically recorded every 24 hours until mid-March.31 Figure C-1 displays 
the mean (colored in orange) and median (colored in grey) daily percentage increases in the 
number of views on these articles by the number of days since the article's publication date.  
 
Figure C-1 Percentage Increase in Daily Views from Article Release Date 
For the medium article, the pattern shows that over 99% of the views occur within the first two 
days of the article release date over the specified window tracked. On average, roughly 80% of the 
views occur within the first two days of the article release date over the tracked window. Roughly 
88% of the views occur within the first seven days of the article release date over the tracked 
window.  
 
 
31 There were some temporary network connection issues intermittently and some took a while to fix due to pandemic 
control restrictions. So the tracking was not 100% during the entire period, causing some holes in certain days for 
some articles. With three different starting time, the effect was fortunately spread out and should not have material 
impact on the patterns observed.  
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
1
5
9
13
17
21
25
29
33
37
41
45
49
53
57
61
65
69
73
77
81
85
89
% increase from prior day's views
Days Laggged
Daily % Increase in Article Views over Time
Mean
Median

 
 
55 
 
From another perspective, I also compare the cumulative views on articles for a sample of firms 
between two snapshots that are roughly 162 days apart to assess the information access patterns 
by the staleness of content on the FutuBull platform. For a list of 182 randomly chosen sample 
firms, I obtained two snapshots of the cumulative views on all the articles published seven days 
before the snapshot dates in August 2021 and January 2022, respectively, from these sample 
firms.32 Below I compare the changes in the cumulative views in this span of 162 days in Figure 
C-2 by the staleness of information measured on a quarterly basis.   
 
Figure C-2 Percentage Increase in the Cumulative Views of All Articles 
For the same list of 182 randomly chosen sample firms, I also look into the cumulative views on 
a subsample of their financial reports as of the snapshot dates in August 2021 and January 2022, 
respectively. Similarly, I compare the changes in cumulative views in this span of 162 days in 
Figure C-3 by the staleness of financial reports measured on a semi-annual basis.   
 
Figure C-3 Percentage Increase in the Cumulative Views of Financial Reports 
These patterns suggest that users of the FutuBull platform are generally interested in accessing 
timely information. They have similar interests in accessing stale financial reports relative to an 
average stale article that is within two-quarters of staleness.  
 
32 The data extraction exercise in August 2021 was preliminary (for feasibility investigation) and incomplete as I was 
still testing the extraction algorithms. 44,006 represents the number of articles with views tracked on both dates.  
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
quarters lagged
% Increase in Cumulative Views by Information Staleness
Average
Median
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 19 20 21 22 23 24
half-years lagged
% Increase in Cumulative Views by Information Staleness
Average
Median

 
 
56 
 
Appendix D: Growth of Integrated Trading Platform for Retail Investors 
Self-directed trading platforms have experienced rapid growth in many regions, without exception 
to the equity market in HK. Figure D-1 shows the growth of FutuBull, a low-cost integrated trading 
platform relative to another low-cost trading platform I-Access which does not provide any 
financial information or corporate news on the trading platform.  
  
Figure D-1 Trends in User Holdings at FutuBull vs. I-Access 
The pattern shows that the growth of the integrated trading platform FutuBull has outpaced that of 
I-Access ever since FutuBull incorporated more information services on its trading platform in 
2015. 
In 2021, the parent company of FutuBull claimed that it has become the top retail broker in Hong 
Kong by trading volume on its website (Figure D-2). On the other hand, I-Access has just 
announced in March 2022 that it is terminating the brokerage business owing to the Omicron 
outbreak in Hong Kong.33 
 
Figure E-2 Partial Screen Capture of Futu corporate website as of 8 April 2022 
 
33 “Along with the recent hike in the number of COVID-19 confirmed cases in Hong Kong, I-Access has some staff 
infected with the disease, and some other staff with cohabiting relatives already diseased; it is expected that these staff 
are highly probably infected. Infected staff cannot carry out their duties before recovery, leading to shortage in human 
resources at I-Access. If the situation does not improve, I-Access operations may be paralyzed. So, the Board expects 
our clients to take back your assets orderly before the worst case takes place.” 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Billions
Evolution in Platform User Total Holdings (HKD)
Futu
I-Access

 
 
57 
 
Appendix E: Profile of Retail Investors on the FutuBull Platform 
Based on the public disclosures from its parent company Futu, I compiled several data points on 
the demographic information of retail investors that utilize the FutuBull trading platform below.   
Figure E-1 shows that its number of paying clients has been growing rapidly over time.  
 
Figure E-1 Trends in the Number of Paying Clients 
 
Figure E-2 shows that its client base is relatively young, with a median age of 34-37 across 
different years. 
 
Figure E-2 Trends in Median Client Age 
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
800,000
1,000,000
1,200,000
1,400,000
2018
2019
2020
2021
Number of Paying Clients
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
2018
2019
2020
2021
Median Age of Client

 
 
58 
 
Figure E-3 shows that a significant proportion of its clients work in the Internet, information 
technology, or financial services industries. However, the proportion has been decreasing over 
time, suggesting that its client base is getting more diversified in terms of occupation.  
 
Figure E-3 Trends in Client Occupation 
 
Figure E-4 shows that the number of daily active users (i.e., the number of user accounts and 
visitors who access the platform at least once on a given trading day) has increased rapidly over 
time.   
 
Figure E-4 Trends in Daily Active Users 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
2018
2019
2020
% Clients Working in Internet, Information Technology or 
Financial Services Industries
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
800,000
1,000,000
1,200,000
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Daily Active Users

 
 
59 
 
Figure E-5 shows that the daily minutes spent on the platform by a user have displayed a slight 
upward trend over time, standing at ~38 minutes in 2020.    
 
Figure E-5 Trends in Daily Minutes Spent on the Platform by Users 
 
 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2018
2019
2020
Daily Minutes Spent on the Platform by User

 
 
60 
 
Appendix F: Revision Notes on Registered Proposal in the Execution Stage 
 
Table 7  
#1 
In the execution stage of this registered report, it is observed that the main independent variables 
Sum Scaled Views (Results Announcements), Sum Scaled Views (Summary Reports), and Sum 
Scaled Views (Expert Opinions) have a right-skewed distribution with many large values. This is 
due to their small denominators having close to zero economic interest held by FutuBull clients. 
Winsorizing the data using a 1% cutoff does not quite address the issue, as its prevalence is more 
than 1%. To address this small denominator problem, Table 7 introduces an additional sample 
selection condition (that is not mentioned in the registered proposal) by requiring firms to have 
over 10,000 HKD economic interest held by FutuBull clients to prevent small denominators from 
blowing up these Sum Scaled Views measures. 
#2 
In the registered proposal, Table 7 consists of both Panel A and B, where Panel B conducts 
subsampling analyses based on the level of institutional ownership. While both analyses have been 
conducted in the execution stage, the main specification in Panel A does not find any significant 
associations in the main independent variables. Similarly, there are no significant coefficients or 
differences in the main independent variables in the subsampling analyses in Panel B. To trim 
down on report length, the registered report no longer presents the results of the tests in Panel B 
as the results do not contribute much to further our understanding of the topic.  
 
Variable Measurement 
Views: The registered proposal subtracts the minimum view counts on the “monthly return of 
equity issuer on movement in securities” within the quarter from the raw view counts as the Views 
measure in Table 3 and 4 in order to mitigate the concerns that some views are generated by internal 
vetting or other systematic procedures. As the distribution is highly right-skewed, the registered 
proposal also takes the logarithmic transformations on view counts when used in regressions. In 
the execution stage, the adjustment may result in negative numbers before log transformation if 
the view counts on some posts are smaller than the benchmarks due to either low view counts on 
some uninformative posts or abnormally high view counts on the benchmarking filings (especially 
when bundled with other contents). When the original adjustment results in negative numbers 
before log transformation, the registered report will use the median view counts on the 
benchmarking filing across the entire sample period for each firm as the adjustment factor. If it 
still results in negative numbers, the registered report will use the global minimum view counts on 
all posts (i.e., 200) as the adjustment factor. 
Title Sentiment: In the registered proposal, the Sentiment variable is used to represent the sentiment 
in article titles. It is measured using the extent of positive sentiment in the press article title based 

 
 
61 
 
on BERT model with supervised fine-tuning trained using hand-labeled data. In execution, the 
BERT model is finetuned with multiclass classification with three categories: positive, neutral, 
and negative. As the negative sentiment part is likely also informative, the title sentiment measure 
has been refined to also incorporate the information from negative sentiment prediction. In the 
registered report, two variables are being used to represent the title sentiment of articles: an 
indicator Positive that equals one if the predicted probability of positive sentiment is higher than 
the predicted probability of negative sentiment by 25% as well as an indicator Negative that equals 
one if the predicted probability of negative sentiment is higher than the predicted probability of 
positive sentiment by 25% based on the BERT model. These two indicators are used to represent 
title sentiments in regressions in place of Sentiment.  
Holding Changes: The registered report uses percentage differences to calculate holding changes 
instead of percentage changes mentioned in the proposal to mitigate the zero-denominator problem 
when the initial holding is 0. 
Other Minor Changes 
Table 8 Panel A: In the comparison between brokers, the omitted category has been changed from 
benchmarking brokers I-Access in columns (1) and (2) and Bulge Bracket in columns (3) and (4) 
to FutuBull in all the columns. This is to facilitate easier interpretation of the coefficient on News 
so that it can directly inform readers how FutuBull clients are trading with respect to the news in 
disclosures in various windows in this accounting disclosure sample. Therefore, the indicator 
variable in the interaction term has been changed from Futu to I-Access in columns (1) and (2) as 
well as to Bulge in columns (3) and (4).  
Table 4 Panel A and Table 10:  While media articles are abundant overall, it turns out that media 
coverage is highly concentrated on only a subset of firms listed in HK. Most firms have no 
Summary Reports or Expert Opinion articles around earnings announcements. Therefore, the 
sample in Table 4 Panel A is much smaller than expected when the specification requires the 
presence of multiple types of documents for each event. With a small sample, some variables with 
little variations cannot be estimated in the regression due to collinearity with other variables or 
firm fixed effects. For example, there is almost no variation in the Topics or Highlight indicators 
in these samples as Summary Reports or Expert Opinion articles around earnings announcements 
are generally not related to a particular investment theme or promoted as headline news on the 
platform. In these two tables with a relatively small sample, the report uses # in the table to 
represent planned variables that are automatically dropped out in the estimation process due to the 
lack of variations or collinearity with other variables/fixed effects. 
Table 9: Analyses on PEAD opportunities have been deemphasized and moved to the additional 
analyses section with a trimmed-down discussion. This is partly due to the results in earlier parts 
suggesting that self-directed retail investors may use a heterogeneous set of trading strategies, with 
aggregate trading directions on average not in line with capturing PEAD opportunities. Therefore, 
the registered report relies more on the informativeness test (Table 6) that does not rely on using a 
particular trading strategy to make inferences, instead of focusing too much on interpreting trading 
directions only.  

 
 
62 
 
The untabulated additional analyses mentioned in Section 4.3.2 are currently discussed in footnote 
29 instead of the additional analyses section. 
Variable Name: The Profit Updates variable has been renamed as Results Guidance with no 
change in the underlying definition.  
 
 
 

 
 
63 
 
Figure 1: Exploratory Predictions on Information Access 
The figure lists the set of exploratory predictions regarding the interest of self-directed retail investors in accessing accounting disclosures.  
•Lower information extraction cost and higher information timeliness > lower information precision 
P1: Self-directed retail investors have a higher interest in viewing earnings guidance relative to earnings 
announcements. 
•High information extraction/integration cost and lower information timeliness > richer information 
content  
P2: Self-directed retail investors have a lower interest in viewing periodic financial reports relative to 
earnings announcements. 
Types of Filings
•High information extraction cost
P3: Self-directed retail investors have a higher interest in viewing summary press articles relative to 
regulatory filings. 
•High information integration cost
P4: Self-directed retail investors have a higher interest in viewing press articles covering expert analyses 
relative to regulatory filings. 
Alternative 
Channels
•Higher awareness of underlying disclosure events from media coverage
P5a: Media article views are associated with a higher interest displayed toward regulatory filings by selfdirected retail investors. (complementary)
•Media coverage reduces the need to access regulatory filings with higher processing costs
P5b: Media article views are associated with a lower interest displayed toward regulatory fiings selfdirected retail investors. (substitutes)
Filings and 
Intermediaries

 
 
64 
 
Figure 2 Documents with Accounting Information in the Setting 
 
 
Documents with 
Accounting Information
(Accounting Documents)
Regulatory Filings
(Accounting Filings)
"Results Announcements"
(Results Announcements)
Periodic Financial 
Reports
(Financial Reports)
"Semi-Annual Reports"
(Semi-Annual Reports)
"Annual Reports"
(Annual Reports)
"Profit Warnings"
(Results Guidance)
Media Articles
(Accounting News)
Summary Reports
Expert Opinion
Others

 
 
65 
 
Figure 3: General Information Usage Patterns (Planned Analyses) 
The charts below visualize the information usage patterns by users of the integrated trading platform 
FutuBull. 
Panel A:  News Articles vs. Regulatory Filings 
The pie charts below display the cumulative total number of views (left) as well the total number of posts 
(right) on media articles (Filings=0) and regulatory filings (Filings=1) under corporate news feeds.  
 
 
 
Panel B:  Firm-Specific vs. Macro/Industry/Market  
The pie charts below display the cumulative total number of views (left) as well the total number of posts 
(right) on media articles that contain firm-specific information (Firm Specific=1) and those that do not 
contain firm-specific information (Firm Specific=0) among all available media articles under corporate 
news feeds.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
66 
 
Panel C:  Media Articles and Views by Article Source 
The column charts below display the cumulative percentage of views (top) as well as the percentage of the 
quantity of media articles (bottom) from different publishing sources, including the Futu platform, financial 
media outlets, brokerage research firms, crowdsourced content, robo-journalism, etc. 
 
 

 
 
67 
 
Panel D:  The Importance of Accounting Information 
The pie charts below display the total percentage of cumulative views (left) and the quantity (right) of media 
articles covering accounting-related disclosures (Accounting News=1) on the top, as well as the regulatory 
filings covering accounting-related disclosures (Accounting Filings=1) at the bottom.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
68 
 
Panel E:  Views on Regulatory Filings that Disclose Accounting Information  
The pie charts below display the cumulative total number of views (left) and the quantity of regulatory 
filings on “Annual Reports”, “Interim Reports”, “Results Announcements”, and “Results Guidance” 
among filings containing accounting disclosures. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
69 
 
Panel F:  Views by Access Interface 
The pie charts below display the split of the cumulative total percentage of views and the number of posts 
by whether the media articles are promoted in headline news feeds on the trading app on the top as well as 
the split of the cumulative total percentage of views and the number of posts by whether the news articles 
also appear under featured thematic topics besides corporate news feeds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
70 
 
Figure 4: Information Usage Patterns by Firm Type (Planned Analyses) 
The charts below visualize the information access patterns by firm type.  
Panel A: Views and Firm Size 
The column charts below show the total number of views on (1) media articles that contain firm-specific 
information (in blue); (2) media articles and regulatory filings covering accounting-related disclosures (in 
green); (3) regulatory filings covering accounting-related disclosures (in red) aggregated by deciles of 
firm size measured using the average market capitalization of a given firm during the sample period. 
 
 
 

 
 
71 
 
Panel B: Views and Economic Interest in Firms 
The column charts below show the total number of views on (1) media articles that contain firm-specific 
information (in blue); (2) media articles and regulatory filings covering accounting-related disclosures (in 
green); (3) regulatory filings covering accounting-related disclosures (in red) aggregated by deciles of 
economic interest held by FutuBull traders measured using the total equity holdings in HK dollars of a 
given firm during the sample period. 
 

 
 
72 
 
Table 1: Sample Selection  
The table describes the sample selection procedures in various analyses of the study. 
Panel A: Document-Level Analyses 
FutuBull Integrated Trading Platform 
# Observations 
All articles and filings under the corporate news feed for 2,579 listed firms in 
Hong Kong from July 2014 to June 2021 
- 
Number of articles from information intermediaries: 662,786 
- 
Number of regulatory filings: 384,338 
1,047,124 
Observations removed due to:  
 
Missing data on views on external links 
43,586 
Missing data on title information 
143,669 
Missing data on control variables 
183,385 
Sample for Table 3 Panel A 
676,484 
Subsample for firm-specific information in Table 3 Panel B 
190,257 
Subsample for regulatory filings in Table 3 Panel C 
293,896 
Subsample for accounting documents in Table 4 Panel A 
93,103 
 
 
 
Panel B: Event-Level Analyses 
Results Announcements 
# Observations 
Results Announcements from July 2014 to June 2021 
19,080 
Observations removed due to missing data on control variables 
3,234 
Sample for Table 5 
15,851 
Subsample of value-relevant Results Announcements with clear trading 
direction by FutuBull users in Table 7 
1,454 
Broker-Level Data Using Results Announcements 
 
Trading decisions by FutuBull and I-Access users around Results 
Announcements in Table 8 Panel A Column (1) 
28,970 
Trading decisions by FutuBull and I-Access users around Results 
Announcements in Table 8 Panel A Column (3)  
29,021 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
73 
 
Table 2: Summary Statistics 
Panel A displays the summary viewership statistics on different types of documents among the entire set of 
1,047,124 documents. Panel B displays the descriptive statistics of the main variables used in the sample 
for various tables. See Appendix A for variable definitions.  
Panel A: Viewership of Accounting Information 
variable 
N 
mean 
sd 
p25 
p50 
p75 
Accounting Filings 
 51,617  
123 
456 
51 
102 
153 
-Results Announcements 
 18,408  
124 
568 
51 
101 
151 
-Semi-Annual Reports 
 7,838  
105 
120 
50 
101 
152 
-Annual Reports 
 8,179  
129 
371 
53 
103 
154 
-Results Guidance 
 2,319  
159 
711 
54 
105 
157 
Accounting News 
 86,422  
1739 
12967 
84 
148 
218 
-Summary Reports 
 18,270  
376 
1247 
79 
137 
196 
-Expert Opinion 
 35,342  
2507 
16055 
84 
150 
258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel B: Descriptive Statistics of Main Variables 
variable 
N 
mean 
sd 
p25 
p50 
p75 
Table 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Views 
676,484 
4.709 
1.844 
3.761 
4.500 
5.075 
Filings 
676,484 
0.434 
0.496 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
Accounting Documents 
676,484 
0.138 
0.345 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Firm Specific 
676,484 
0.285 
0.451 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
Platform 
676,484 
0.019 
0.136 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Financial Media 
676,484 
0.425 
0.494 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
Crowdsourced 
676,484 
0.006 
0.080 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Robo 
676,484 
0.007 
0.084 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Broker Research 
676,484 
0.028 
0.164 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Title Length 
676,484 
36.362 
28.753 
22.000 
29.000 
38.000 
Positive 
676,484 
0.465 
0.499 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
Negative 
676,484 
0.113 
0.316 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Numeric 
676,484 
0.602 
0.489 
0.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Featured Topics 
676,484 
0.010 
0.099 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Highlight 
676,484 
0.023 
0.151 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
#Firms Tagged 
676,484 
1.509 
2.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Shares 
676,484 
0.171 
0.713 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
#Articles 
676,484 
3.949 
5.167 
1.000 
2.000 
4.000 
Returns 
676,484 
0.005 
0.053 
-0.018 
0.000 
0.022 
|Return| 
676,484 
0.026 
0.031 
0.008 
0.016 
0.031 
Turnover 
676,484 
0.003 
0.008 
0.000 
0.001 
0.003 
# Announcements 
676,484 
17.192 
33.238 
1.000 
4.000 
17.000 
After-Hour 
676,484 
0.664 
0.472 
0.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Size 
676,484 
8.891 
2.521 
6.875 
8.787 
10.741 
Coverage 
676,484 
1.049 
1.116 
0.000 
0.693 
1.946 
MB 
676,484 
4.141 
21.576 
0.582 
1.094 
2.620 
Profitability 
676,484 
0.014 
0.098 
-0.001 
0.021 
0.054 
Loss 
676,484 
0.253 
0.435 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 

 
 
74 
 
Leverage 
676,484 
0.494 
0.237 
0.307 
0.487 
0.676 
Stake 
676,484 
0.006 
0.025 
0.000 
0.000 
0.002 
Table 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ΔHolding[-7d,+1d] 
 
15,846 
-0.017 
0.664 
-0.016 
0.000 
0.035 
ΔHolding[-7d,-1d] 
15,846 
-0.023 
0.567 
-0.012 
0.000 
0.021 
ΔHolding[0,+1d] 
15,846 
0.006 
0.382 
0.000 
0.000 
0.001 
News 
15,846 
-0.001 
0.049 
-0.024 
-0.003 
0.019 
Table 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Return[+1d,+5d] 
 2,881,203  
0.000 
0.060 
-0.029 
-0.004 
0.022 
Return[+1d,+20d] 
 2,881,203  
0.001 
0.122 
-0.059 
-0.010 
0.042 
ΔHolding(FutuBull) 
 2,881,203  
0.004 
0.378 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
ΔHolding(I-Access) 
 2,881,203  
-0.001 
0.276 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket) 
 2,881,203  
0.001 
0.297 
-0.002 
0.000 
0.001 
Filings(Acc)[-1d,0] 
 2,881,203  
0.020 
0.139 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Filings(Acc)[+1d,+5d] 
 2,881,203  
0.036 
0.186 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Return[-4d,0] 
 2,881,203  
0.003 
0.265 
-0.027 
-0.004 
0.020 
Return[-25d,-5d] 
 2,881,203  
0.011 
0.472 
-0.061 
-0.011 
0.042 
Return[-251d,-26d] 
 2,881,203  
-0.264 
2.518 
-0.316 
-0.086 
0.101 
Ln(IdioVol) 
 2,881,203  
-3.594 
0.619 
-4.008 
-3.640 
-3.238 
Ln(Turnover) 
 2,881,203  
-0.527 
2.390 
-2.084 
-0.390 
1.207 
Table 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trade Profitability(3-month) 
1,367 
0.008 
0.330 
-0.151 
0.003 
0.165 
Trade Profitability(6-month) 
1,367 
0.009 
0.518 
-0.191 
0.005 
0.221 
Sum Scaled Views 
(Results Announcements) 
1,367 
0.001 
0.003 
0.000 
0.000 
0.001 
Sum Scaled Views 
(Summary Reports) 
1,367 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Sum Scaled Views 
(Expert Opinion) 
1,367 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
News 
1,367 
0.011 
0.114 
-0.077 
0.052 
0.086 
|ΔHolding| 
1,367 
0.356 
0.582 
0.054 
0.102 
0.286 
Net Buy 
1,367 
0.552 
0.498 
0.000 
1.000 
1.000 
 
 

 
 
75 
 
Table 3: Information Usage on the Integrated Platform (Planned Analyses) 
This table displays the descriptive analyses examining the type of information investors display an interest 
in viewing on the integrated trading platform and the factors associated with their viewing patterns. Panel 
A uses all media articles and regulatory filings on the platform as the sample for analyses. Panel B focuses 
on media articles that contain firm-specific information as the sample for analyses. Panel C focuses on 
regulatory filings as the sample for analyses. See Appendix A for variable definitions. The standard errors 
are clustered by firm. The t-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 
0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively.  
Panel A: All Documents Extracted from Corporate News Feeds 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
Views 
Views 
Document Type/ Characteristics 
 
 
Filings 
-0.364*** 
-0.360*** 
 
(-6.67) 
(-7.43) 
Accounting Documents 
-0.099*** 
-0.104*** 
 
(-9.54) 
(-11.56) 
Firm Specific 
-0.331*** 
-0.345*** 
 
(-14.37) 
(-17.90) 
Platform 
0.835*** 
0.963*** 
 
(10.22) 
(12.01) 
Financial Media 
0.074 
0.159*** 
 
(1.44) 
(3.84) 
Crowdsourced 
0.232*** 
0.313*** 
 
(4.19) 
(7.44) 
Robo 
-0.530*** 
-0.430*** 
 
(-9.04) 
(-8.29) 
Broker Research  
-0.169*** 
-0.114*** 
 
(-4.39) 
(-3.71) 
Title Characteristics 
 
 
Title Length 
-0.004*** 
-0.003*** 
 
(-16.02) 
(-14.52) 
Positive 
-0.068*** 
-0.069*** 
 
(-9.29) 
(-11.11) 
Negative 
0.029** 
0.015 
 
(2.57) 
(1.55) 
Numeric 
0.068*** 
0.054*** 
 
(7.52) 
(6.54) 
Investor Attention 
 
 
Featured Topics 
0.882*** 
0.741*** 
 
(8.05) 
(6.92) 
Highlight 
0.877*** 
0.805*** 
 
(10.83) 
(12.40) 
#Firms Tagged 
0.199*** 
0.194*** 
 
(39.30) 
(37.21) 
Shares 
0.760*** 
0.689*** 
 
(27.13) 
(22.44) 
#Articles 
-0.003 
-0.009*** 
 
(-1.27) 
(-5.52) 
Returns 
-0.166*** 
-0.212*** 

 
 
76 
 
 
(-3.25) 
(-4.57) 
|Return| 
1.382*** 
1.445*** 
 
(8.90) 
(12.48) 
Turnover 
13.827*** 
8.809*** 
 
(14.20) 
(12.00) 
# Announcements 
-0.000*** 
-0.000*** 
 
(-4.43) 
(-3.37) 
After-Hour 
-0.188*** 
-0.146*** 
 
(-19.31) 
(-17.93) 
Firm Characteristics 
 
 
Size 
0.117*** 
0.165*** 
 
(12.79) 
(9.43) 
Coverage 
-0.042** 
-0.001 
 
(-2.33) 
(-0.05) 
MB 
0.001 
-0.000 
 
(1.52) 
(-0.77) 
Profitability 
0.320*** 
0.077 
 
(2.94) 
(0.74) 
Loss 
0.124*** 
0.052 
 
(4.13) 
(1.48) 
Leverage 
-0.266*** 
-0.073 
 
(-5.99) 
(-0.97) 
Stake 
1.633*** 
1.370*** 
 
(5.86) 
(4.29) 
Industry FE 
Yes 
No 
Firm FE 
No 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
676,484 
676,484 
R2 
0.562 
0.594 
 
 
 

 
 
77 
 
Panel B: Media Articles Containing Firm-Specific Information 
 
(1) 
 
Views 
Document Type/Source 
 
Accounting News 
0.048*** 
 
(5.25) 
Platform 
1.499*** 
 
(11.92) 
Financial Media 
0.080*** 
 
(5.06) 
Crowdsourced 
0.151*** 
 
(2.71) 
Robo 
-0.164*** 
 
(-5.15) 
Broker Research  
0.053*** 
 
(2.99) 
Title Characteristics 
 
Title Length 
-0.001*** 
 
(-3.44) 
Positive 
0.049*** 
 
(4.78) 
Negative 
0.061*** 
 
(4.69) 
Numeric 
0.066*** 
 
(3.61) 
Investor Attention 
 
Featured Topics 
0.660*** 
 
(3.88) 
Highlight 
0.787*** 
 
(6.56) 
Co-Tagged Views 
0.017*** 
 
(8.08) 
Shares 
1.014*** 
 
(35.90) 
#Articles 
-0.028*** 
 
(-13.08) 
Returns 
-0.583*** 
 
(-8.32) 
|Return| 
1.888*** 
 
(11.69) 
Turnover 
13.489*** 
 
(12.18) 
#Announcements 
0.000*** 
 
(2.73) 
After-Hour 
0.001 
 
(0.14) 
Control for Firm Characteristics 
Included 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
N 
190,257 
R2 
0.425 
 
 

 
 
78 
 
Panel C: Regulatory Filings 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
Views 
Views 
Document Type 
 
 
Accounting Filings 
-0.126*** 
 
 
(-15.53) 
 
Financial Reports 
 
-0.105*** 
 
 
(-9.91) 
Results Announcements 
 
-0.106*** 
 
 
(-9.95) 
Results Guidance 
 
-0.055** 
 
 
(-2.20) 
Investor Attention 
 
 
Co-Tagged Views 
0.010*** 
0.010*** 
 
(5.08) 
(5.12) 
#Articles 
-0.010*** 
-0.010*** 
 
(-6.30) 
(-6.11) 
Returns 
-0.075* 
-0.074* 
 
(-1.68) 
(-1.67) 
|Return| 
0.237*** 
0.233*** 
 
(2.69) 
(2.64) 
Turnover 
0.179 
0.210 
 
(0.49) 
(0.58) 
#Announcements 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
 
(-9.61) 
(-10.01) 
After-Hour 
-0.164*** 
-0.168*** 
 
(-22.08) 
(-22.67) 
Control for Firm Characteristics 
Included 
Included 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Pr(Financial Report=Results Announcements) 
 
0.96 
Pr(Results Guidance =Results Announcements) 
 
0.04 
N 
293,896 
293,896 
R2 
0.047 
0.047 

 
 
79 
 
Table 4: How Retail Investors Access Timely Accounting Information (Planned Analyses) 
This table presents the regression results examining how investors on FutuBull access timely accounting 
disclosures. See Appendix A for variable definitions. The standard errors are clustered by firm. The tstatistics are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, 
respectively.  
Panel A: Document-Level Analyses 
The table displays the results of document-level analyses with view counts for each document as the 
dependent variables among the sample of accounting disclosures (i.e., Accounting Documents = 1).  
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Views 
Views 
Views 
Document Type 
 
 
 
Results Announcements 
-0.030* 
-0.028 
-0.029* 
(-1.71) 
(-1.60) 
(-1.66) 
Financial Reports 
-0.113*** 
(-5.99) 
Results Guidance 
-0.322*** 
-0.325*** 
-0.327*** 
(-10.23) 
(-10.34) 
(-10.38) 
Summary Reports 
-0.085*** 
-0.084*** 
-0.085*** 
(-6.16) 
(-6.09) 
(-6.12) 
Expert Opinion 
-0.093*** 
0.277*** 
0.277*** 
(-2.87) 
(6.41) 
-6.41 
Annual Reports 
-0.052** 
-0.051** 
(-2.47) 
(-2.46) 
Semi-Annual Reports 
-0.171*** 
-0.171*** 
(-8.12) 
(-8.11) 
Broker Research 
-0.536*** 
(-9.14) 
Crowdsourced 
-0.110* 
-0.115* 
(-1.77) 
(-1.84) 
Robo 
-0.152 
-0.152 
(-1.01) 
(-1.01) 
Broker Research Report 
-0.612*** 
(-10.13) 
Broker Summary Ratings 
-0.255*** 
(-3.56) 
Title Characteristics 
Title Length 
-0.003*** 
-0.003*** 
-0.003*** 
 
(-8.78) 
(-8.85) 
(-8.85) 
Positive 
0.219*** 
0.226*** 
0.226*** 
-14.76 
(15.15) 
-15.16 
Negative 
0.260*** 
0.266*** 
0.266*** 
-14.82 
(14.98) 
-15.03 
Numeric 
0.033** 
0.030** 
0.028** 

 
 
80 
 
 
-2.29 
(2.08) 
-1.96 
Investor Attention 
Featured Topics 
1.481*** 
1.478*** 
1.480*** 
 
-11.93 
(11.88) 
-11.9 
Highlight 
3.546*** 
3.549*** 
3.549*** 
-43.12 
(43.08) 
-43.06 
Co-Tagged Views 
0.042*** 
0.043*** 
0.043*** 
-10.63 
(10.85) 
-10.82 
#Articles 
-0.017*** 
-0.017*** 
-0.017*** 
(-8.07) 
(-8.32) 
(-8.31) 
Returns 
-0.275** 
-0.276** 
-0.276** 
 
(-2.36) 
(-2.37) 
(-2.37) 
|Return| 
0.878*** 
0.876*** 
0.882*** 
-3.7 
(3.69) 
-3.72 
Turnover 
8.583*** 
8.451*** 
8.421*** 
-6.27 
(6.14) 
-6.14 
#Announcements 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
(-3.84) 
(-3.94) 
(-3.90) 
After-Hour 
-0.062*** 
-0.069*** 
-0.068*** 
 
(-3.49) 
(-3.89) 
(-3.82) 
Firm-Level Controls 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Pr(Financial Report=Results 
Announcements) 
0.00 
 
 
Pr(Results Guidance =Results 
Announcements) 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Pr(Summary Reports=Results 
Announcements) 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
Pr(Expert Opinion=Results 
Announcements) 
0.12 
0.00 
0.00 
Pr(Crowdsourced=Broker 
Research) 
 
0.00 
 
N 
93,103 
93,103 
93,103 
R2 
0.407 
0.408 
0.409 
 
 
 
 

 
 
81 
 
Panel B: Event-Level Analyses 
Panel B displays the results of event-level analyses using the mean, maximum, and sum of the view counts for each document type under each results 
announcement as the dependent variables. Columns (1) to (3) examine a sample of earnings announcements restricted to those with Summary Reports 
coverage in media articles. Columns (4) to (6) examine a sample of earnings announcements restricted to those with both Summary Reports and 
Expert Opinion coverage in media articles. # represents variables that are automatically dropped in the estimation process due to the lack of variations 
or collinearity with other variables/fixed effects.  
  
Sample 
Sample 
Presence of Results Announcements 
Presence of Results Announcements 
& Summary Reports 
& Summary Reports & Expert Opinion 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Mean 
Max 
Sum 
Mean 
Max 
Sum 
(Views) 
(Views) 
(Views) 
(Views) 
(Views) 
(Views) 
Document Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary Reports 
0.124*** 
0.185*** 
0.423*** 
0.166*** 
0.337*** 
0.787*** 
 
(11.18) 
(12.89) 
(20.31) 
(2.76) 
(3.41) 
(6.27) 
Expert Opinion 
 
 
 
0.338*** 
0.462*** 
0.769*** 
 
 
 
 
(5.48) 
(6.09) 
(8.79) 
Earnings Properties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Surprise 
0.08 
0.102* 
0.120* 
-0.014 
0.882 
0.85 
 
(1.44) 
(1.72) 
(1.73) 
(-0.02) 
-0.91 
-0.82 
Accrual 
0.104* 
0.129** 
0.179*** 
-0.275 
-0.53 
-0.311 
 
(1.87) 
(2.22) 
(2.80) 
(-0.51) 
(-0.78) 
(-0.45) 
Interaction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Surprise* Summary Reports 
-0.081 
-0.101 
-0.028 
-0.215 
-0.494 
-0.761 
 
(-1.41) 
(-1.52) 
(-0.29) 
(-0.22) 
(-0.35) 
(-0.48) 
Accrual * Summary Reports 
-0.042 
-0.066 
-0.187** 
0.798 
1.111 
1.195 
 
(-0.77) 
(-0.93) 
(-2.06) 
-1.2 
-0.93 
-0.87 
Surprise * Expert Opinion 
 
 
 
-0.988 
-1.735 
-2.412* 
 
 
 
 
(-1.11) 
(-1.59) 
(-1.83) 
Accrual * Expert Opinion 
 
 
 
0.118 
0.684 
0.977 
 
 
 
 
-0.24 
-1.27 
-1.17 
Investor Attention 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Featured Topics 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 
# 

 
 
82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Highlight 
# 
# 
# 
14.176*** 
3.050*** 
2.512*** 
 
 
 
 
-7.35 
-10.42 
-7.92 
Co-Tagged Views 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0.000*** 
0 
 
-11.3 
-13.12 
-11.5 
-3.92 
-4.07 
-1.1 
#Articles 
0.005 
0.012*** 
0.026*** 
0.004 
0.012* 
0.023*** 
 
-1.55 
-2.92 
-7.33 
-0.84 
-1.93 
-3.56 
Returns 
-0.108 
-0.084 
-0.057 
-1.057** 
-1.054** 
-1.119** 
 
(-1.25) 
(-0.89) 
(-0.51) 
(-2.23) 
(-2.31) 
(-2.19) 
|Return| 
0.141 
0.204 
0.373 
2.162 
3.349** 
2.806 
 
-0.79 
-1.02 
-1.62 
-1.48 
-2.18 
-1.49 
Turnover 
5.755*** 
6.851*** 
7.961*** 
-5.205 
-10.177 
-3.979 
 
-2.95 
-3.25 
-3.49 
(-0.82) 
(-1.33) 
(-0.42) 
#Announcements 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-0.001 
 
-0.67 
-0.36 
(-0.23) 
-0.51 
-0.03 
(-0.83) 
After-Hour 
0.026 
0.029 
0.02 
-0.004 
0.006 
0.1 
  
-0.99 
-1 
-0.54 
(-0.05) 
-0.07 
-1.18 
Control for Firm Characteristics 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Pr(Summary Reports= Expert 
Opinion) 
 
 
 
0.01 
0.21 
0.87 
N 
7,674 
7,674 
7,674 
988 
988 
988 
R2 
0.474 
0.496 
0.521 
0.692 
0.695 
0.672 
 
 
 

 
 
83 
 
Panel C: Media Articles and Regulatory Filings 
Panel C presents the regression results examining how the introduction of new information intermediaries to the FutuBull platform influences 
investors’ access to accounting disclosures in regulatory filings using a difference-in-difference research design. Column (1) utilizes the introduction 
of new major financial news portals in 2H2015 as the event. Column (2) utilizes the introduction of newsflash sources in 2H2019 as the event. 
Column (3) utilizes the introduction of in-house financial press Futu Information in 2H2017 as the event. Column (4) utilizes the introduction of 
free research reports from selected sell-side brokers in 1H2015 as the event.  
EVENT(x) 
New Feeds from  
Financial Media 
New Feeds from 
Newsflash 
New Feeds from  
Futu Information 
New Feeds from  
Broker Research 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Views 
Views 
Views 
Views 
 
 
 
 
 
Post(x)*Treated(x) 
-0.016 
-0.019 
0.015 
-0.109 
 
(-0.41) 
(-0.52) 
(0.21) 
(-0.25) 
Post 
0.128 
-0.062 
-0.121* 
0.075 
 
(1.41) 
(-0.82) 
(-1.68) 
(1.17) 
Investor Attention 
 
 
 
 
Co-Tagged Views 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
 
(0.27) 
(1.37) 
(0.37) 
(0.87) 
#Articles 
0.007 
0.001 
-0.007 
0.014 
 
(0.84) 
(0.32) 
(-0.81) 
(0.79) 
Returns 
0.245 
0.049 
-0.113 
0.274 
 
(0.99) 
(0.28) 
(-0.43) 
(0.47) 
|Return| 
-0.164 
-0.344 
-0.572 
-0.649 
 
(-0.29) 
(-0.93) 
(-0.98) 
(-0.51) 
Turnover 
-0.907 
9.574** 
-0.119 
3.283 
 
(-0.42) 
(2.44) 
(-0.04) 
(0.80) 
#Announcements 
-0.000 
-0.000 
0.001 
0.000 
 
(-0.40) 
(-0.70) 
(1.31) 
(0.23) 
After-Hour 
0.123*** 
0.028 
0.073 
-0.009 
 
(2.87) 
(0.71) 
(0.95) 
(-0.10) 
Control for Firm Characteristics 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
12,380 
18,384 
9,186 
3,788 
R2 
0.121 
0.170 
0.171 
0.318 
 

 
 
84 
 
Table 5: Trading Decisions around Results Announcements (Planned Analyses) 
This table presents the regression results examining the association between the trading directions by FutuBull platform users in various time 
windows and earnings news during earnings announcements (columns 1 to 3) and whether high viewership on different types of accounting-related 
documents moderates the relationship on trading decisions from processing of accounting information after announcements (columns 4 to 6). See 
Appendix A for variable definitions. The standard errors are clustered by firm. The t-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance 
at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively.  
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
ΔHolding 
[-7d,+1d] 
ΔHolding 
[-7d,-1d] 
ΔHolding 
[0,+1d] 
ΔHolding 
[0,+1d] 
ΔHolding 
[0,+1d] 
ΔHolding 
[0,+1d] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
News 
-0.007 
-0.040 
-0.001 
-0.163** 
-0.038 
0.002 
 
(-0.06) 
(-0.35) 
(-0.02) 
(-2.04) 
(-0.51) 
(0.02) 
High Views (Results Announcements) 
 
 
 
0.101*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(9.33) 
 
 
News* High Views (Results Announcements) 
 
 
 
0.312** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.26) 
 
 
High Views (Summary Reports) 
 
 
 
 
0.036** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.52) 
 
News* High Views (Summary Reports) 
 
 
 
 
0.355 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1.33) 
 
High Views (Expert Opinion) 
 
 
 
 
 
0.060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1.34) 
News* High Views (Expert Opinion)) 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.371 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(-1.42) 
Control for Firm Characteristics 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
15,846 
15,846 
15,851 
15,851 
15,851 
15,851 
R2 
0.164 
0.146 
0.163 
0.172 
0.164 
0.163 
 

 
 
85 
 
Table 6: Informativeness of Trading Decisions around Accounting Disclosures (Planned Analyses) 
This table presents the results from daily Fama and MacBeth [1973] regressions of market-adjusted returns from days t+1 through t+5/t+20 as the 
dependent variable on holding changes of self-directed retail investors using an integrated trading platform (Futubull) in columns (1) and (2). As a 
comparison, the regression also includes the holding changes of self-directed retail investors using a no-frills trading platform (I-Access) and the 
holding changes of investors using selected Bulge-Bracket brokers that primarily serve institutional investors (Bulge Bracket) in columns (3) and 
(4). Panel A examines the predictability of returns from days t+1 to t+5, while Panel B examines the predictability of returns from days t+1 through 
t+20. The table reports average regression coefficients. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with four lags appear in parentheses.  
Panel A: Predictability of Return [+1d,+5d] 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Return 
[+1d,+5d] 
Return 
[+1d,+5d] 
Return 
[+1d,+5d] 
Return 
[+1d,+5d] 
ΔHolding(FutuBull) 
0.001 
0.000 
0.001* 
0.001* 
 
(1.57) 
(1.33) 
(1.89) 
(1.77) 
ΔHolding(FutuBull)*Filings(Acc)[+1d,+5d] 
 
-0.038 
 
0.101 
 
 
(-0.45) 
 
(1.40) 
ΔHolding(FutuBull)*Filings(Acc)[-1d,0] 
 
0.733** 
 
82.667 
 
 
(1.99) 
 
(1.02) 
ΔHolding(I-Access) 
 
 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
 
 
 
(-3.76) 
(-3.62) 
ΔHolding(I-Access)*Filings(Acc)[+1d,+5d] 
 
 
 
448.147 
 
 
 
 
(1.00) 
ΔHolding(I-Access)*Filings(Acc)[-1d,0] 
 
 
 
0.092 
 
 
 
 
(0.14) 
ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket) 
 
 
0.001 
0.001 
 
 
 
(1.54) 
(1.51) 
ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket)*Filings(Acc)[+1d,+5d] 
 
 
 
2.172 
 
 
 
 
(0.92) 
ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket)*Filings(Acc)[-1d,0] 
 
 
 
-3.147 
 
 
 
 
(-1.54) 
Return[-4d,0] 
-0.031*** 
-0.031*** 
-0.032*** 
-0.032*** 
 
(-13.60) 
(-13.65) 
(-13.65) 
(-13.86) 
Return[-25d,-5d] 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
 
(-0.43) 
(-0.46) 
(-0.48) 
(-0.47) 
Return[-251d,-26d] 
0.000* 
0.000* 
0.000* 
0.000* 
 
(1.82) 
(1.80) 
(1.81) 
(1.83) 

 
 
86 
 
Ln(IdioVol) 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
-0.001*** 
 
(-3.75) 
(-3.73) 
(-3.74) 
(-3.72) 
Ln(Turnover) 
0.000** 
0.000** 
0.000** 
0.000** 
 
(2.03) 
(2.03) 
(2.06) 
(2.07) 
Pr(ΔHolding(FutuBull)= ΔHolding(I-Access)) 
 
 
0.00 
0.00 
Pr(ΔHolding(FutuBull)= ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket)) 
 
 
0.78 
0.77 
N 
2,881,219 
2,881,219 
2,881,219 
2,881,219 
R2 
0.028 
0.030 
0.030 
0.035 
 
Panel B: Predictability of Return [+1d,+20d] 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Return 
[+1d,+20d] 
Return 
[+1d,+20d] 
Return 
[+1d,+20d] 
Return 
[+1d,+20d] 
ΔHolding(FutuBull) 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
0.002*** 
0.003*** 
 
(3.36) 
(3.46) 
(3.61) 
(3.71) 
ΔHolding(FutuBull)*Filings(Acc)[+1d,+5d] 
 
0.341 
 
0.358 
 
 
(1.08) 
 
(1.32) 
ΔHolding(FutuBull)*Filings(Acc)[-1d,0] 
 
1.074* 
 
37.849 
 
 
(1.96) 
 
(1.01) 
ΔHolding(I-Access) 
 
 
-0.002*** 
-0.002*** 
 
 
 
(-3.34) 
(-3.41) 
ΔHolding(I-Access)*Filings(Acc)[+1d,+5d] 
 
 
 
171.440 
 
 
 
 
(1.02) 
ΔHolding(I-Access)*Filings(Acc)[-1d,0] 
 
 
 
0.330 
 
 
 
 
(0.52) 
ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket) 
 
 
0.001** 
0.002** 
 
 
 
(2.06) 
(2.18) 
ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket)*Filings(Acc)[+1d,+5d] 
 
 
 
0.121 
 
 
 
 
(0.07) 
ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket)*Filings(Acc)[-1d,0] 
 
 
 
-1.255 
 
 
 
 
(-0.53) 
Return[-4d,0] 
-0.041*** 
-0.041*** 
-0.041*** 
-0.042*** 
 
(-10.53) 
(-10.59) 
(-10.56) 
(-10.68) 
Return[-25d,-5d] 
-0.006*** 
-0.006*** 
-0.006*** 
-0.006*** 
 
(-3.36) 
(-3.38) 
(-3.36) 
(-3.39) 
Return[-251d,-26d] 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 
-0.000 

 
 
87 
 
 
(-1.39) 
(-1.40) 
(-1.38) 
(-1.35) 
Ln(IdioVol) 
-0.002** 
-0.002** 
-0.002** 
-0.002** 
 
(-2.32) 
(-2.31) 
(-2.31) 
(-2.30) 
Ln(Turnover) 
0.000* 
0.000* 
0.000* 
0.000* 
 
(1.74) 
(1.74) 
(1.76) 
(1.77) 
Pr(ΔHolding(FutuBull)= ΔHolding(I-Access)) 
 
 
0.00 
0.00 
Pr(ΔHolding(FutuBull)= ΔHolding(Bulge Bracket)) 
 
 
0.30 
0.29 
N 
2,881,203 
2,881,203 
2,881,203 
2,881,203 
R2 
0.028 
0.030 
0.030 
0.035 
 
 
 

 
 
88 
 
Table 7: Trading Profitability from Processing Accounting Information during Results Announcements (Planned Analyses) 
This table presents the regression results examining the association between the number of views through various channels of accounting information 
and the trading profitability of Futubull traders during earnings announcements. The sample is limited to those Results Announcements that contain 
value-relevant information as proxied by generating over 5% of market-adjusted stock price movement in the two-day window [0,+1] after their 
releases and those with clear trading direction exhibited by FutuBull users (i.e., |ΔHolding|>3%), conditional on economic interest held by Futubull 
clients exceeding 10,000 HKD in the firm. The dependent variables represent the trading profitability assuming a three-month (columns 1-4) or sixmonth (columns 5-8) holding period for those trades. See Appendix A for variable definitions. The standard errors are clustered by firm. The tstatistics are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively.  
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
 
Trade 
Profitability 
(3-month) 
Trade 
Profitability 
(3-month) 
Trade 
Profitability 
(3-month) 
Trade 
Profitability 
(3-month) 
Trade 
Profitability 
(6-month) 
Trade 
Profitability 
(6-month) 
Trade 
Profitability 
(6-month) 
Trade 
Profitability 
(6-month) 
Sum Scaled Views 
4.677 
 
 
4.181 
6.388 
 
 
5.555 
(Results Announcements) 
(1.10) 
 
 
(0.94) 
(1.35) 
 
 
(1.13) 
Sum Scaled Views  
 
24.872 
 
19.317 
 
45.171 
 
36.687 
(Summary Reports) 
 
(0.69) 
 
(0.52) 
 
(1.06) 
 
(0.83) 
Sum Scaled Views  
 
 
-520.982 
-521.238 
 
 
-204.262 
-210.208 
(Expert Opinion) 
 
 
(-1.36) 
(-1.36) 
 
 
(-0.41) 
(-0.42) 
News 
0.160* 
0.161* 
0.160* 
0.161* 
0.235* 
0.237* 
0.235* 
0.237* 
 
(1.79) 
(1.81) 
(1.79) 
(1.80) 
(1.75) 
(1.77) 
(1.75) 
(1.77) 
|ΔHolding| 
-0.002 
0.001 
0.002 
-0.002 
-0.042 
-0.037 
-0.035 
-0.042 
 
(-0.12) 
(0.07) 
(0.12) 
(-0.12) 
(-1.33) 
(-1.19) 
(-1.15) 
(-1.33) 
Net Buy 
0.014 
0.016 
0.017 
0.015 
0.055* 
0.057* 
0.058* 
0.055* 
 
(0.68) 
(0.76) 
(0.81) 
(0.72) 
(1.70) 
(1.78) 
(1.80) 
(1.71) 
Control 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
1,367 
1,367 
1,367 
1,367 
1,367 
1,367 
1,367 
1,367 
R2 
0.047 
0.046 
0.046 
0.048 
0.047 
0.047 
0.046 
0.047 
 
 

 
 
Table 8: Trading Decisions and Profitability from Accounting Information: FutuBull vs. I-Access vs. Bulge Brackets  
(Planned Analyses) 
This table presents the regression results comparing the trading directions and profitability between retail investors using FutuBull vs. I-Access as 
well as between retail investors using FutuBull vs. institutional investors using Bulge Bracket brokers. Across the panels, columns (1) and (2) 
compare between the retail investors using FutuBull and I-Access, whereas columns (3) and (4) compare between the retail investors using FutuBull 
and institutional investors using Bulge Bracket platforms. See Appendix A for variable definitions. The standard errors are clustered by firm. The tstatistics are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively.  
Panel A: Trading Decisions around Release of Accounting Information 
Panel A examines whether there are differences regarding how investors trade on accounting signals before and after the release of accounting 
information. Columns (1) and (3) examine the pre-announcement trading decisions utilizing the holding changes by investors in the [-5d, -1d] 
window before accounting disclosures as the dependent variable. Columns (2) and (4) examine the post-announcement trading decisions utilizing 
the holding changes by investors in the [0, +1d] window during accounting disclosures as the dependent variable.  
SAMPLE 
FutuBull vs. I-Access 
FutuBull vs. Bulge Bracket  
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
ΔHolding[-5,-1] 
ΔHolding[0,+1] 
ΔHolding[-5,-1] 
ΔHolding[0,+1] 
News 
0.103 
-0.228*** 
0.114 
-0.242*** 
 
(1.19) 
(-2.83) 
(1.31) 
(-3.00) 
News *I-Access 
-0.079 
0.170** 
 
 
 
(-0.91) 
(2.15) 
 
 
News *Bulge Bracket 
 
 
-0.007 
0.220** 
 
 
 
(-0.07) 
(2.58) 
Controls 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
N 
28,970 
28,793 
29,021 
28,849 
R2 
0.082 
0.093 
0.080 
0.090 
 
 
 
 

90 
 
Panel B: Trading Profitability in Anticipation of Accounting Information Release 
Panel B compares the trading profitability of investors between platforms in anticipation of accounting-related news utilizing a sample of accounting 
disclosure events limited to those with clear trading direction exhibited by various platform users using 3% as the cutoff for |ΔHolding|. The 
dependent variables are the trade profitability measured as the cumulative market-adjusted return in the two-day window for columns (1) and (3) or 
in the one-week window for columns (2) and (4) by those trades during earnings announcements.  
SAMPLE 
FutuBull vs. I-Access 
FutuBull vs. Bulge Brackets  
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Trade Profitability 
(Announcement) 
Trade Profitability 
(1-week) 
Trade Profitability 
(Announcement) 
Trade Profitability 
(1-week) 
Futu 
0.001 
0.004 
-0.003 
-0.001 
 
(0.31) 
(1.05) 
(-0.92) 
(-0.17) 
Net Buy[-5,-1] 
0.011*** 
0.012** 
0.012*** 
0.010** 
 
(3.00) 
(2.37) 
(3.22) 
(1.99) 
Controls 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
N 
6,312 
6,312 
5,747 
5,747 
R2 
0.016 
0.014 
0.020 
0.016 
 
 
 

91 
 
Panel C: Trading Profitability from Processing Accounting Information Released 
Panel C compares the trading profitability of investors between platforms for trades initiated in the [0, +1d] window after processing the accounting 
information released. The dependent variables are the trade profitability assuming a three-month horizon in columns (1) and (3) or a six-month 
horizon in columns (2) and (4) for those trades. 
SAMPLE 
FutuBull vs. I-Access 
FutuBull vs. Bulge Brackets  
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Trade Profitability 
(3-month) 
Trade Profitability 
(6-month) 
Trade Profitability 
(3-month) 
Trade Profitability 
(6-month) 
 
 
 
 
 
Futu 
0.012*** 
0.019*** 
0.002 
0.007 
 
(2.74) 
(2.78) 
(0.31) 
(0.82) 
News 
0.102** 
0.229*** 
0.061 
0.141* 
 
(2.26) 
(3.32) 
(1.17) 
(1.70) 
Net Buy[0,+1] 
0.005 
0.032*** 
-0.003 
0.033*** 
 
(0.84) 
(3.13) 
(-0.45) 
(2.88) 
Controls 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
N 
24,308 
24,306 
21,865 
21,861 
R2 
0.010 
0.014 
0.008 
0.013 
 

92 
 
Table 9: Capturing PEAD Opportunities by Platform Users (Planned Analyses) 
This table explores to what extent investors at different trading/brokerage platforms take advantage of postearnings-announcement drift (PEAD) opportunities after financial results announcements. The table 
compares the performance of investors using different platforms in capturing PEAD opportunities (either 
in a three-month or six-month window) by tabulating how many times the aggregate trading behavior of 
users at these platforms (#Futu, #I-Access, #Bulge Bracket) is consistent with the PEAD opportunities 
during earnings announcements as well as the aggregate directional bets by platform users during earnings 
announcements under these circumstances (ΔStake%).  
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Returns 
[+2, +90] 
>5% 
Returns 
[+2, +90] 
>10% 
Returns 
[+2, +182] 
>5% 
Returns 
[+2, +182] 
>10 
 
 
 
 
 
Total Number 
8,907 
7,575 
9,435 
8,502 
 
 
 
 
 
#Futu (>1%) 
2,175 
1,909 
2,257 
2,073 
#I-Access (>1%) 
2,214 
1,937 
2,322 
2,124 
#Bulge Bracket (>1%) 
2,081 
1,871 
2,136 
1,998 
#Futu (>3%) 
1,866 
1,670 
1,917 
1,784 
#I-Access (>3%) 
1,840 
1,664 
1,904 
1,778 
#Bulge Bracket(>3%) 
1,706 
1,600 
1,725 
1,649 
#Futu (>5%) 
1,703 
1,545 
1,724 
1,616 
#I-Access (5%) 
1,650 
1,518 
1,703 
1,609 
#Bulge Bracket (5%) 
1,556 
1,476 
1,570 
1,512 
Positive Drift 
 
 
 
 
ΔStake% (Futu) 
0.10% 
-0.10% 
0.11% 
-0.04% 
ΔStake% (I-Access) 
-0.22% 
-0.11% 
-0.14% 
-0.08% 
ΔStake% (Bulge Bracket) 
0.55% 
-0.39% 
-0.29% 
-0.44% 
Negative Drift 
 
 
 
 
ΔStake% (Futu) 
1.34% 
1.21% 
2.00% 
1.75% 
ΔStake% (I-Access) 
0.33% 
0.16% 
0.12% 
-0.07% 
ΔStake% (Bulge Bracket) 
0.05% 
-0.14% 
-0.02% 
-0.17% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

93 
 
Table 10: Access to Accounting Information and Price Efficiency (Planned Analyses) 
This table presents the regression results examining the association between viewership on accountingrelated disclosures through various channels and the stock’s intra-period efficiency (IPE). The sample is 
limited to those Results Announcements that contain value-relevant information as proxied by generating 
over 5% of market-adjusted stock price movement in the two-day window [0,+5] after their releases as well 
as firms having over 3% average aggregate holding by Futubull users around earnings announcements. The 
dependent variables are an area-under-curve measure of the speed of price adjustment within the [0,+5] 
window after earnings announcement IPE[0,+5]. See Appendix A for variable definitions. The standard 
errors are clustered by firm. The t-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 
0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels, respectively. # represents variables that are automatically dropped in the 
estimation process due to the lack of variations or collinearity with other variables/fixed effects.  
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
IPE 
[0,+5] 
IPE 
[0,+5] 
IPE 
[0,+5] 
 
 
 
 
High Views 
-0.278 
 
 
(Results Announcements) 
(-0.87) 
 
 
High Views 
 
-0.396** 
 
(Summary Reports) 
 
(-2.26) 
 
High Views 
 
 
# 
(Expert Opinion) 
 
 
 
|ΔHolding(FutuBull)| 
0.091 
0.088 
0.093 
 
(1.53) 
(1.46) 
(1.56) 
|ΔHolding(FutuBull)|* 
0.854 
 
 
High Views(Results Announcements) 
(1.50) 
 
 
|ΔHolding(FutuBull)|* 
 
# 
 
High Views(Summary Reports) 
 
 
 
|ΔHolding(FutuBull)|* 
 
 
# 
High Views(Expert Opinion) 
 
 
 
News 
-0.855 
-0.833 
-0.814 
 
(-1.03) 
(-1.02) 
(-1.00) 
Control for Firm Characteristics 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Firm FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Pr(|ΔHolding(FutuBull)|+|ΔHolding(FutuBull)|*High 
Views(Results Announcements=0) 
0.11 
 
 
N 
269 
269 
269 
R2 
0.929 
0.929 
0.929 
 
