Running head: STAT ARB AND ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
 
 
 
 
Statistical Arbitrage and Robust Tests for Cointegration 
 
Thomas A. Hanson 
Kent State University 
 
Joshua R. Hall 
Kent State University 
 
September 25, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Thomas A. Hanson,  
Kent State University, College of Business Administration, Department of Finance,  
P.O. Box 5190, Kent, Ohio 44242.  Phone: (330) 672 – 1129.  Fax: (330) 672 – 9806.   
E-mail: thanson3@kent.edu 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
2  
Statistical Arbitrage Using Robust Tests for Cointegration 
Abstract 
One application of cointegration tests is screening candidate stocks for the investment strategy 
known as statistical arbitrage.  This paper develops two robust tests for cointegration by using 
rank-based and least absolute deviation regression to modify the seminal Engle-Granger test.  
Critical values are generated and power calculated for various error distributions.  Finally, the 
tests are utilized in a simple pairs trading strategy and backtested on daily data from 2001 to 
2010.  The rank-based cointegration test has superior qualities in that context, suggesting one 
application of this new statistical test. 
Keywords: Statistical arbitrage, pairs trading, cointegration, robust statistics, rank-based 
statistics, weighted Wilcoxon regression, least absolute deviation 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
3  
Statistical Arbitrage Using Robust Tests for Cointegration 
1.0 Introduction 
Statistical arbitrage is a heavily quantitative strategy that remains popular with traders 
today as a way to make money on relative market moves, rather than absolute price bets through 
fundamental analysis (Gatev, Goetzmann, & Rouwenhorst, 2006; Vidyamurthy, 2004).  
Determining candidate stocks for implementation of the strategy requires some statistical 
measure to identify profitable opportunities.  The statistical concept of cointegration (Engle & 
Granger, 1987) provides one such tool.  However, extant cointegration tests are quite sensitive to 
the assumption of normality of the time series and have notoriously low power.  This paper seeks 
to develop robust cointegration tests that overcomes these problems and to apply those tests to a 
simple pairs trading strategy. 
The roots of the pairs trading strategy can be traced to the long-short mutual fund 
investment strategies of A. Winslow Jones in the 1950s.  His idea was to create a hedged 
portfolio of long and short positions to eliminate market risk; the return on the portfolio stemmed 
from the relative, not absolute, performance of the positions.  By purchasing undervalued stocks 
and selling short overvalued stocks, this general strategy is a form of contrarian trading that 
amounts to betting that prices will converge, or to put the same thing another way, that the 
spread between the two assets will shrink. 
While the origins of the strategy involved fundamental analysis to identify over- and 
under-valued companies, statistical arbitrage took shape in the mid-1980s when Nunzio Tartaglia 
assembled a group of traders to create computer models that could efficiently access and analyze 
more data.  Increases in computing power allowed pairs trading to become based primarily on 
statistics and technical factors, rather than fundamental analysis.  (The latter still exists, and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
4  
many strategies of that sort fall into the category of risk arbitrage, which lie beyond the scope of 
this investigation.) 
This paper offers two new cointegration tests, which are more robust than the EngleGranger procedure regarding the distribution underlying the price process.  The robust qualities 
are achieved through the use of weighted-Wilcoxon (rank-based) and least absolute deviation 
regression techniques.  The development of these tests, as well as Monte Carlo simulations to 
calculate critical values and power for these tests is a primary contribution of this paper. 
Among the potential applications of these robust tests, they could be particularly useful 
for use with stock prices, which are well known to violate normality assumptions (Mandelbrot, 
1963; Fama, 1965).  Pairs trading is the application presented here and is a second contribution 
of this paper.  The robust tests are shown to create more profitable trading opportunities with a 
superior Sharpe ratio. 
The next section discusses the development of the new cointegration tests.  Section three 
describes a simulation study to test these cointegration tests, and results of those simulations are 
presented in section four.  Section five outlines a simple pairs trading strategy that employs these 
tests, and section six provides backtest results of that trading strategy from 2001 to 2010.  
Section seven concludes. 
2.0 Robust Cointegration Test Description  
Cointegration can be conceptually described as a long-run equilibrium relationship 
between two or more nonstationary time series1.  In other words, when considered 
independently, the time series appear to wander in an unpredictable random walk, but some 
                                                 
1 In this study, all nonstationary time series will be assumed to be I(1), which implies that taking a first difference 
results in a stationary, invertible ARMA representation.  This has been a common assumption in finance and 
economics since the work of Nelson and Plosser (1983) and also follows from the assumption that stock prices are 
random walks in an efficient market. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
5  
linear combination of those same variables exists that is stationary.  A properly identified linear 
combination therefore follows a pattern of mean-reversion. 
To help fix this idea, consider the graphs in Figure 1.  The top row consists of time series 
plots of two variables constructed by the cumulative sum of 100 independent standard normal 
random variables.  Both series were transposed vertically so that the first term is zero.  
Therefore, while starting at the same point, these variables are otherwise completely independent 
of each other and are nonstationary.  The third plot, a scatterplot of y versus x, makes the random 
and independent nature of their relationship visually clear.  There is no evident relationship 
between the two time series.  Finally, the fourth plot is a time series plot of the difference of 
these two variables.  If the two series were cointegrated, this difference would be stationary and 
demonstrate mean reversion, which would manifest itself in multiple crossings of the x-axis.  In 
this case, however, the difference series appears qualitatively similar to the random walks of 
each time series. 
Figure 1 also suggests the relationship between cointegration and spurious regression, 
which can occur when dealing with nonstationary time series.  Hendry (1986) provides the long 
historical background of nonsense regressions, of which one example is Hooker (1901), who 
demonstrated a relationship between trade and the marriage rate.  Granger and Newbold (1974) 
provide a rule of thumb for identifying such meaningless relationships, suggesting that any R2 
greater than the associated Durbin-Watson statistic should raise suspicions.  Such problematic 
time series require first differencing of the variables to induce stationarity, unless the two series 
under consideration are cointegrated. 
By contrast, Figure 2 shows the same four plots for two cointegrated series, c and d.  The 
data for time series c were again generated by the cumulative sum of 100 independent standard 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
6  
random normal variables.  However, in this case, the second series was set equal to the first, plus 
a random disturbance term of the same form.  The two series were then transposed vertically to 
begin at the origin. 
The cointegrated relationship between c and d is clear in all four graphs.  The first two 
plots demonstrate that the series tend to vary directly with each other; their local minima and 
maxima occur at approximately equal points.  The scatterplot shows a strong linear relationship 
between the two variables, in stark contrast to the random scatterplot of Figure 1.  Finally, the 
difference series appears to be stationary.  That is, the mean and variance are both approximately 
constant.  Finally, the fourth graph exhibits a strong mean-reversion with its multiple crossings 
of the x-axis. 
The goal of cointegration testing is to identify time series that exhibit the same kind of 
stable relationship as in Figure 2.  As implied by those graphs and the discussion above 
regarding spurious regression, one basic approach for cointegration testing involves a regression 
of one time series on the other.  This seminal test for cointegration was developed by Engle and 
Granger (1987).  Their definition states that two series are cointegrated if they are both I(1) and 
there exists a cointegrating coefficient β such that           is I(0). 
The test for cointegration is a two-step procedure.  First, the following regression 
equation is estimated:            .  The series of residuals  ̂  is then tested for 
stationarity2.  If the residuals are stationary (do not contain a unit root), the original series are 
cointegrated.  This second-step requires a unit root test; in their consideration of seven 
contenders, Engle and Granger (1987) favor the Dickey-Fuller test as the most powerful. 
                                                 
2 The estimate  ̂ is termed superconsistent because it converges to its true value at a rate of T, rather than the usual 
convergence rate of    
⁄ (Stock, 1987).   
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
7  
The Dickey-Fuller test (Dickey & Fuller, 1979) and Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test 
(ADF; Dickey & Fuller, 1981) remain the most popular and commonly utilized unit root tests, 
thanks largely to their implementation in statistical software packages.  The basic version is 
based on the equation              , which is reparameterized to the following form: 
      (   )       .  This equation is estimated with a least-squares regression, and the 
appropriate test statistic is used for the null hypothesis that    .  While the test statistic is a 
standardized version of the mean, it does not follow a standard t-distribution.  Mistakenly doing 
so can result in significant over-rejection of the null (Maddala & Kim, 1998).  Therefore, Dickey 
and Fuller (1981) calculated the appropriate critical values through numerical analysis. 
One shortcoming of the original Dickey-Fuller test is that it includes the implicit 
assumption that the error term is not serially correlated.  The ADF test overcomes this problem 
by expanding the previous equation as follows: 
         (   )     ∑          
 
   
 
The lag length m must be determined by the researcher.  The number can be assumed a priori or 
determined from the data.  Once the lag length has been chosen, a least squares regression leads 
to a ratio statistic to test the null hypothesis that            .  (If no time trend is included, 
only the latter parameter is tested.)  As before, the critical values are non-standard due to the 
non-stationary nature of the series under the null hypothesis. 
This extended description of the Engle-Granger two-step testing procedure for 
cointegration is meant to highlight the fact that it demands the use of two least-squares 
regressions.  This approach results in maximum likelihood estimators when the experimental 
errors are normally distributed.  However, the estimates can be suboptimal in the presence of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
8  
outliers, which may stem directly from a violation of the normality assumption.  Therefore, each 
regression will be replaced with robust regression techniques in the next section’s development 
of more robust cointegration tests. 
As a final note, it should be noted that the standard Dickey-Fuller test critical values do 
not apply in the second step of the Engle-Granger cointegration test.  The reason is that the series 
of residuals is itself based upon the first step regression estimate.  For this reason, Engle and 
Granger (1987) employed Monte Carlo simulation to generate the appropriate critical values, an 
approach that is followed in the present investigation.  This allows a direct comparison both to 
the original study and to the robust cointegration tests developed next. 
2.1 Robust Regression 
 
Least squares regression is conducted by minimizing a dispersion function, equal to the 
sum of the squared residuals, with respect to the parameter β: 
   ( ) ∑(  ( ))
 
 
   
 
Here, the expression   ( ) represents the regression residuals            while making their 
dependence on the parameter explicit in the notation.  Problems with this estimate are outlined 
by Wilcox (1997), and they include low power, poor coverage, and distortions that arise from 
incorrect variance estimates when the error distribution is fat tailed.  This has motivated a range 
of alternative regression techniques, two of which are employed in this study. 
 
The first is weighted-Wilcoxon (WW) regression, also referred to as rank-based 
regression.  Terpstra and McKean (2005) describe how an estimate is found through minimizing 
the following linear model, in which bij denotes a weight used in the (i, j)th comparison: 
   ( ) 
∑
   |  ( )   ( )|
       
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
9  
When       for all     and zero otherwise (known as Wilcoxon weights), Hettmansperger 
(1984) demonstrated that this dispersion function reduces to a simpler form: 
   ( )  ∑( (  ( ))    
 
)
 
   
  ( ) 
Here,  (  ( )) denotes the rank of the residuals, which demonstrates why WW regression can 
be considered a rank-based procedure.  Terpstra and McKean (2005) further noted that this 
function corresponds to Jaeckel’s (1972) dispersion function with Wilcoxon scores.  Since this 
function is invariant to location, a reasonable and typical estimate of the intercept is given by 
 ̂        (  ( ̂)) (Hettmansperger & McKean, 1998).  Finally, the robust nature of these 
estimates is evident from the linear effect of outliers as opposed to the quadratic influence in the 
least squares method (Hettmansperger, 1984). 
 
The rank-based regression estimates for this study are conducted with R’s contributed 
package Rfit (Kloke & McKean, 2012).  This statistical code provides point estimates as well as 
standard errors, and the reader is referred to Hettmansperger and McKean (2011) and the 
associated R package for further details. 
 
The second alternative regression technique employed in creating robust cointegration 
tests is least absolute deviation (LAD) regression.  Historically, this method actually predates the 
development of least squares by 50 years, and its potential efficiency advantage over least 
squares was known by Laplace (Wilcox, 1997).  The LAD estimator minimizes the sum of the 
absolute values of the residuals, giving rise to the following dispersion function: 
    ( ) ∑|  ( )|
 
   
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
10  
This function further limits the influence of outliers and produces better estimates for leptokurtic 
distributions. 
 
The coefficients are standardized to calculate a test statistic for inference.  These 
estimates are generally inferior for normally distributed errors but superior for a wide range of 
other error distributions (Koenker & Bassett, 1978).  The numerical estimations used here come 
from the R package quantreg (Koenker, 2012). 
2.2 Robust Cointegration Test Methodologies 
 
The robust cointegration tests proposed here follow the same two-step framework as the 
Engle-Granger procedure.  They begin with a cointegrating regression.  Rather than using 
ordinarly least squares, however, the rank-based test utilizes WW regression and the LAD-based 
test employs LAD regression, both as described in the previous section.  By using different 
norms in their dispersion functions, these regression techniques minimize the influence of 
outliers and yield slightly different parameters and residuals. 
 
The second step, again following Engle-Granger, is a unit root test on the residuals from 
the cointegrating regression.  The tests are identical in spirit to the ADF test, but again replace 
the OLS regressions with WW and LAD regressions.  Once again, the goal is to overcome any 
undue influence from outlying observations or violations of the normality assumption that 
underlies the Engle-Granger test.  As an example of this property, the Wilcoxon test for the 
location problem of locating the median is known to have 95% efficiency for the normal 
distribution.  Hettmansperger and McKean (1998) show further that rank-based procedures are 
superior to least-squares for even 1% contamination of the normal distribution and that LAD 
estimation also surpasses least squares, with a crossover at 10% contamination.  Thus, error 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
11  
distributions with fatter tails (i.e., greater variance) than a normal distribution will be better 
modeled and tested with rank- and LAD-based methods. 
 
The robust cointegration tests are not solvable in closed form and do not follow a 
standard distribution (similar to the ADF and Engle-Granger tests themselves).  Therefore, the 
critical values are generated through Monte Carlo simulation with 10,000 repetitions, as 
described more fully in section three. 
2.3 Alternative Robust Tests 
 
Before describing the Monte Carlo simulation, we briefly consider other alternative 
cointegration tests that have been developed.  In the past thirty years, a wide range of 
modifications and alternative procedures have been proposed for more robust unit root and 
cointegration tests.  Some of these tests still contain within them a least squares estimation step; 
for example, the Said-Dickey test (1984) and Phillips-Perron test (1987) for a unit root.  The 
underlying least squares regression limits their robustness.  Furthermore, both suffer from 
significant size distortion (Phillips & Perron, 1988), so these tests offer only marginal 
improvements over the ADF test. 
 
Maddala and Kim (1998) discuss a broad assortment of other unit root tests.  Among 
them are tests based on the Durbin-Watson statistic (Sargan & Bhargava, 1983), a variance ratio 
test (Cochrane, 1988; Lo & MacKinlay, 1988), and instrumental variable regression (Hall, 1989; 
Choi, 1992).  One test that reverses the hypotheses and uses stationarity as the null is the KPSS 
test (Kwiatkowski, Phillips, Schmidt, & Shin, 1992).  Each of these tests offers some 
improvement at the cost of complexity, but none has been found to be universally better in 
simulation studies.  Maddala and Kim (1998) end their extensive review by urging simple but 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
12  
robust replacements for the ADF test.  The rank- and LAD-based tests proposed here are offered 
as conceptually straightforward statistics with superior qualities in practice. 
 
Alternative cointegration tests have also flourished in recent years.  The most prominent 
is the Johansen test (1988).  However, both the Engle-Granger and the Johansen tests perform 
poorly when faced with nonlinearities, homoscedasticity, or structural breaks.  Some proposed 
alternatives that attempt to overcome these problems include induced order statistics (Escribano, 
Santos, & Sipols, 2008), record counting correction (Escribano, Sipols, & Aparicio, 2006), and a 
nonparametric version of the Johansen test (Bierens, 1997).  Despite the ongoing research in this 
area, few of the alternative cointegration tests have been used in applications or compared in 
published simulations.  One advantage of the present investigation is the direct comparison to the 
Engle-Granger procedure and the direct application to pairs trading. 
3.0 Simulation Study Parameters 
 
This section provides details on the Monte Carlo simulations that allow for comparison of 
the power of the proposed robust cointegration tests with the Engle-Granger procedure.  All 
simulations employ the following data-generation process for the two time series xt and yt: 
         
          
            
             | |   
In general, the cointegrating constant β can take on any real value, but it is convenient for the 
purpose of testing and comparison to limit the data-generation to one particular value.  In this 
study, it is fixed at β = 2, which is a common assumption in previous studies (e.g., Phillips & 
Hansen, 1990).  The error vector (       )  consists of two independent and identically 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
13  
distributed stable random variables (as formally defined below), each with an expected value of 
zero.  This basic form of the data generating process has been widely employed (e.g., Banerjee, 
Dolado, Hendry, & Smith, 1986; Engle & Granger, 1987; Phillips & Loretan, 1991; Kremers, 
Ericsson, & Dolado, 1992). Solving for x and y gives the following equations, used to generate 
the simulated time series: 
    (   )     (   )     
    (   )     (   )     
 
When | |  , both time series are I(1), and the two series are not cointegrated.  In that 
case, the null hypothesis is false; this allows for estimation of the tests’ size.  When | |  , both 
variables are still I(1) but they are cointegrated with cointegrating coefficient     .  Thus, 
varying the value of ρ allows for estimation of power.  It is more difficult for the tests to 
differentiate the near-cointegrated cases when | | is close to one; that is, power varies inversely 
with ρ.  The simulations include a range of values for comparison: ρ = (0.8, 0.9, 0.95, 1). 
3.1 Time series length 
Much of the theory of cointegration tests is based on the validity of asymptotic 
distributions.  However, practitioners frequently work with time series of limited length.  This 
simulation focuses on time series of lengths t = (50, 100, 250).  The largest of these values 
corresponds approximately to the number of trading days on the New York Stock Exchange in a 
one year period.  This calibration is thus ideal for pairs trading strategies that use a one-year 
formation period, as explained in section 4. 
 
In the simulations, time series of length t + 20 are generated, and the first 20 values are 
discarded.  This methodology minimizes start-up effects.  Furthermore, it allows for the valid 
inclusion of a constant term in all regressions and tests. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
14  
3.2 Error distributions 
 
The data-generating process is quite general with regard to the distribution of the error 
terms.  Engle and Granger (1987) considered only normally distributed errors in the development 
of their cointegration test.  Most papers since then have made similarly strong restrictions by 
considering a narrow range of error distributions.  The purpose of the proposed Rank- and LADbased methods is to demonstrate more robust tests that apply to a broader range of error 
distributions. 
 
Stable distributions provide a family of probability distributions that can include the 
properties of both heavy tails and skewness.  One theoretical reason for their use is that the 
normal distribution is a special case within this family.  In fact, the normal, Cauchy, and Levy 
distributions are the only three special cases within this family for which a density function 
exists in closed form.  In general, stable distributions are those distributions that maintain their 
shape under addition, leading to Nolan’s (2003) definition of the stable law: if              
are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) stable random variables, then for all n, 
          
 →       for some constants      and   . 
 
There are at least three reasons that stable distributions meeting this criterion may be 
chosen as a model for a given data set, as outlined in Nolan (2003).  First, there may be 
theoretical reasons for expecting such a distribution in a physical process.  Second, empirical 
investigations may demonstrate that a data set exhibits heavy tails and skewness.  This 
motivation has a long history in finance, with examples from Mandelbrot (1963) and Fama 
(1965) to Rachev and Mittnik (2000).  Stock prices, in particular, are well known to exhibit 
leptokurtic, left-skewed distributions. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
15  
 
The final motivation for modeling with stable distributions is the Generalized Central 
Limit Theorem (GCLT).  The classical Central Limit Theorem is based on a random sample with 
non-infinite variance and proves convergence in distribution to the standard normal distribution.  
The GCLT drops the assumption of finite variance and shows that the limiting distribution must 
be stable.  That is, if              are i.i.d. random variables, there exist constants     , bn, 
and a non-degenerate random variable Z such that   (       )   
 →  if and only if Z is 
stable (Nolan, 2003).  Therefore, if an observed data series can be thought of as the sum of many 
small terms, it may be modeled adequately by a stable distribution.  This coincides well with the 
notion of efficient markets and random walks in price series. 
 
In general, stable distributions are characterized by four parameters: a characteristic 
exponent   (   ], a skewness parameter   [    ], a scale parameter    , and a location 
parameter     (Nolan, 2003).  In this investigation, the normal distribution (       ) is 
included as a baseline for comparison to the heavy-tailed distributions.  The other distributions 
considered are chosen for their leptokurtic shapes or fat tails. 
 
In the Monte Carlo simulations, the particular value of       is selected based on 
Mandelbrot’s (1963) estimate of the parameter from the time series of cotton prices.  In that 
same work, Mandelbrot notes that the data suggest the series are not symmetric.  Instead, β 
“takes a small negative value” (p. 405).  This motivates consideration of a skewness parameter of 
–0.25 in this study.  The power of the Rank- and LAD-based tests should increase as α decreases, 
and the power of all tests should suffer from skewness in the error distributions. 
 
The Engle-Granger data-generating process originally required an expected value of zero.  
Stable distributions, however, do not always have well-defined expectations.  Specifically, the 
mean does not exist whenever    .  In that case, the requirement could be more broadly 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
16  
interpreted to mean a location parameter ( ) equal to zero.  This is equivalent to the original 
assumption of a zero mean, when the mean is well-defined. 
 
The final parameter is the scale parameter γ, which corresponds to variance for the 
normal distribution.  Unlike the other three parameters, which are equal in both time series 
within a given simulation, the ratio of scale parameters is varied so that it takes on the following 
values:      (     )
⁄
.  This can be thought of as a signal-to-noise ratio, as in Hansen and 
Phillips (1990).  Using the normal distribution in a Monte Carlo simulation study of 
cointegration, Banerjee, et al. (1993) allowed the ratio of variances to cover a similarly wide 
range.  The authors measured the bias in estimating the cointegrating coefficient and found that it 
varied inversely with the ratio of variances.  This logically implies that the power should vary 
directly with the ratio of the spread parameter used to generate the error terms. 
3.3 Lag length 
 
The size and power of the cointegration tests are influenced by the number of lagged 
terms included in the second-step unit root test (Schwert, 1989).  This necessitates a choice from 
several potential guidelines for the number of lagged terms: an arbitrary fixed level, a function of 
the length of the time series, the Akaike or Schwart Information Criteria, of a sequential rule.  
Examples of the last method are discussed in Hall (1994), in which a general-to-specific 
methodology is described.  The researcher begins with a large value, tests the significance of the 
last term, and then decreases the lag length until a significant statistic is found. 
 
In a comparison study of these choices, Ng and Perron (1995) conclude that the generalto-specific method consistently chooses larger values for the appropriate lag length.  This 
inclusion of more lags tends to decrease power slightly, but it lessens size distortions (DeJong, 
Nankervis, Savin, & Whiteman, 1992). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
17  
 
In a computational study, any search procedure is expensive in terms of processing time.  
Therefore, the Monte Carlo simulations employ a fixed number of lags as a function of the time 
series length.  The particular function for the number of lags is given as follows (Banerjee, 
Dolado, Galbraith, & Hendry, 1993),   ⌊(      ( )  )  
⁄ ⌋. 
3.4 Critical Value Generation 
 
In making comparisons among Monte Carlo simulation results, it is imperative to ensure 
approximately equal size for each test.  Tests that are liberal or conservative in comparison to 
their nominal size also have distorted power.  Naïve power comparisons that ignore this issue of 
size distortion can lead to incorrect conclusions.  Lloyd (2005a, 2005b) provides several 
suggestions to ensure valid comparisons, including post hoc methods to calculate size-adjusted 
power.  He argues most forcefully that no matter what method is chosen, steps must be taken to 
ensure the validity of power comparisons among proposed tests. 
 
This investigation avoids the necessity for size-adjusted power by generating the critical 
values in the same manner as Engle and Granger (1987).  The distributions of the test statistics 
are built through 10,000 repetitions of the test under the null hypothesis, and the 5% critical 
values are determined from the empirical distribution of the test statistic.  These critical values 
are then used in the simulations to calculate size and power.  In this way, all of the tests have 
approximately equal empirical size of 5% and not just a nominal size that can vary widely in 
application. 
 
There are two advantages of this approach.  First, it eliminates the need for post hoc size 
adjustments before comparing the tests.  Second, the least squares results are analogous to the 
original results of Engle and Granger (1987).  Similar results in that case provide assurance that 
the simulation code is correctly specified. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
18  
3.5 Size and Power Estimation 
 
Once the critical values have been generated, the simulations are run again under the null 
hypothesis of no cointegration.  In that case, the time series are built from independent random 
errors, and the tests are based upon the generated critical values.  Theoretically, all tests should 
have an empirical size of 5% with a standard error of √
 ̂(   ̂)
      , since the simulations are all run 
with 10,000 repetitions (Lloyd, 2005a).  This standard error is dependent upon the calculated 
size, but for an expected size of 5% the standard error would be approximately just 0.2179%. 
 
Power calculations are made by generating cointegrated series and applying the tests with 
the estimated critical values.  As mentioned in the discussion of the data generating process, 
power is calculated for three values of ρ.  Comparison of the power of the three different tests is 
a primary contribution of this study. 
3.6 Summary 
 
The Monte Carlo simulations employ 10,000 replications on the parameter space implied 
by the following specification:   (          )     
⁄
 (     )       (              ).  
Furthermore, three different error distributions are considered in the data generating process.  In 
addition to the normal distribution, errors are generated using two stable distributions, one with 
             , the other with                  .  Finally, each of the three 
cointegration tests (OLS-, Rank-, and LAD-based) is applied to allow for comparison of the 
tests’ size and power.  This gives a total of 324 experiments. 
4.0 Cointegration Test Results 
 
Results of the Monte Carlo simulations are presented in Tables 1, 2, and 3.  In Table 1, 
the error distributions are generated with a dispersion ratio of one (      
⁄
), while Tables 2 
and 3 represent dispersion ratios of two and four, respectively.  In each table, Panel A employs 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
19  
normally distributed errors in the data generating process, Panel B uses a stable distribution with 
fatter tails (     ) and Panel C additionally includes a negative skew in the error distribution 
(       ). 
 
In the tables, the three tests are labeled as follows: least squares Engle-Granger procedure 
(OLS), weighted-Wilcoxon rank-based (Rank), and least absolute deviation-based (LAD).  All 
reported values are the means over 10,000 replications, so standard errors of the reported figures 
are given by the formula √
 ̂(   ̂)
      .  Therefore, the maximum half-width of a 95% confidence 
interval is 0.0098; any reported figures for power that differ by more than 0.0196 between 
experiments would be guaranteed to differ significantly at the 5% level.  This is the most 
conservative estimate.  For reported power of 0.8, for example, the half-width would shrink to 
0.004.  Throughout the tables, the results display the superiority of the proposed rank- and LADbased test statistics over the original Engle-Granger procedure3. 
 
First, we observe that the power increases in all cases with the length of the time series 
being tested, as expected.  Performance for t = 50 is unacceptable in any case, with power never 
surpassing 50% for any of the test procedures.  However, results for t = 250 are adequate for 
practical use in many cases, depending on the other parameters. 
 
In all cases, the power of the tests varies inversely with ρ, again matching expectations.  
Power suffers significantly for all tests in the near cointegrated cases, where ρ = 0.95.  This is 
one parameter that demonstrates the superiority of the robust tests.  For example, in Table 1, 
Panel C, the rank-based statistic has reported power of 70.92% for t = 250 and ρ = 0.95, while 
                                                 
3 In unreported results, the newly developed statistics were also compared to the Johansen test (Johansen, 1988; 
Johansen and Juselius, 1990).  The Johansen procedure was much inferior, in terms of power, to all three tests under 
consideration here. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
20  
the OLS test has power of only 24.94%.  In general, the rank-based test maintains its power 
better as ρ increases, which is one important aspect of its overall performance. 
 
To compare the effect of the error distribution, we can examine the corresponding 
numbers from Panels A and B within each table.  From these comparisons, it is evident that the 
LAD- and rank-based tests perform better in the presence of fat-tailed distributions, which is 
precisely the situation in which the OLS test has declining power.  This is a primary advantage of 
the robust tests over the standard Engle-Granger procedure.  As an example, in Table 1 for t = 
250 and ρ = 0.95, the power of the rank-based test increases from 27.22% in Panel A to 70.34% 
in Panel B.  For the same parameters, the power of the OLS-based test decreases from 27.74% to 
24.14%. 
 
The skewness parameter introduced in Panel C of all three tables causes little change in 
the performance of the tests.  In some cases, there is actually moderate improvement in the tests’ 
power, particularly for lower values of ρ.  To give one example, for t = 100 and ρ = 0.8, the 
power of the rank-based test is 87.31% in Panel B of Table 1, but it improves to 89.42% in Panel 
B.  For the same parameters, the OLS test improves in power from 59.07% to 63.67%.  From 
this, we conclude that moderate skewness does not damage performance of the cointegration 
tests significantly. 
 
To consider the effect of the dispersion parameter ratio, comparisons are made across the 
three tables.  There is little difference in power due to variation in this parameter; however, the 
general trend is for power to increase as the ratio increases.  This trend can be seen in the slightly 
higher reported power in Table 3.  For instance, in Panel B, for the rank-based test with t = 250 
and ρ = 0.95, Table 1 reports power of 70.34%, which increases to 74.91% in Table 2 and 
76.38% in Table 3. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
21  
 
Overall, the results show that in the case of normally distributed errors (Panel A of all 
tables), the most power test is the Engle-Granger methodology.  This is unsurprising, since 
normally distributed errors are a key assumption of the theoretical validity of that procedure.  
However, the rank-based procedure sacrifices little power, even in this baseline case.  This 
minimal loss of power suggests there is little misspecification risk from using the rank-based test 
when errors are, in fact, normally distributed. 
 
For non-normally distributed errors, the rank- and LAD-based tests quickly gain power 
and overtake the Engle-Granger estimation method.  In fact, the robust tests perform better as the 
tails of the error distribution get fatter, even for large values of ρ.  This is especially powerful 
evidence in favor of the robust tests, because the Engle-Granger (and other) early testing 
procedures suffered from notoriously low power.  For time series of lengths 50 or 100, the power 
of the OLS method barely exceeds the test’s size.  Clearly, this is a substandard test for drawing 
valid conclusions, because the risk of Type II error is so large. 
 
Finally, note that the critical values of the robust test statistics are relatively stable over 
all simulations.  The critical value of the rank-based test ranges from -3.36 for a time series of 
length 50 and normally distributed errors to just -3.15 for a time series of length 250 in Table 3 
Panel C.  This stability is a desirable feature because it demonstrates that slight misspecifications 
will not dramatically alter the test’s conclusions.  It also provides a heuristic rule-of-thumb for 
the test, with -3.25 serving as a useful benchmark for a general rank-based test. 
 
Overall, the superiority of the robust cointegration tests developed in this paper is 
evident.  The new tests possess greater power for fat-tailed distributions, while sacrificing little 
in the baseline case of normal errors.  They have stable critical values, with a nominal and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
22  
empirical size of approximately 5%.  They perform well for near-cointegrated series and are 
conceptually simple and easy to implement with existing statistical packages. 
5.0 Pairs Trading Strategy 
 
Pairs trading is one direct application of the robust cointegration tests developed in the 
previous section.  Though the algorithm or model employed in a particular statistical arbitrage 
strategy will be unique to the individual or firm, they all follow the same basic format.  First, an 
initial universe of candidate stocks is identified.  This preliminary step allows a trader to focus 
on a particular industry or other subset that might be presumed to have a high degree of 
comovement, if desired. 
 
Second, candidate pairs are tested for suitability.  In this study, we use a cointegration test 
to determine if a pair of stocks is likely to be profitable in a mean-reverting trade.  Previous 
papers have also used a minimum squared distance requirement, most notably the work of Gatev, 
Goetzmann, & Rouwenhorst (2006).  This step is conducted over a training period, and only 
stocks that reach a predetermined threshold pass on to the trading that takes place in step three.  
This study utilizes a one-year training period.  Stocks are tested for cointegration based on 250day time series, using the Engle-Granger procedure as well as the rank- and LAD-based 
cointegration tests. 
 
Third, the spread between the stocks is calculated.  This can be a difference, a ratio, or 
regression based.  This study, like most that use a cointegration test, uses the third approach.  
The regression parameters from the training period are assumed stable for the subsequent 125 
trading days, and the residual is calculated for the pair over that period.  The spread is then 
traded, according to the trader’s risk management scheme. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
23  
 
In this study, a trade is put on whenever the spread moves more than two standard 
deviations (in either direction) beyond its historical mean from the training period.  The spread is 
then considered a synthetic instrument for trading, though it requires two positions, a long and a 
short position in the two stocks.  The trade is closed at a profit when the pair reverts to its 
historical mean.  The trade is also closed at a loss if the spread widens to three standard 
deviations, as a basic loss prevention technique.  The trade is also closed, regardless of 
profitability, at the end of the 125-day trading period. 
 
One example of a pair that is traded is presented in Figure 3.  In the top panel, the spread 
of the two stocks is plotted for the trading period.  The solid horizontal line represents the mean 
from the training period, and the dotted horizontal lines represent the two- and three-standard 
deviation marks above the mean.  This pair opens on day 8 and closes on day 39 at a loss, 
because the stop loss limit is reached when the spread widens beyond three standard deviations.  
On day 73, the spread crosses the second standard deviation from below again, so the trade is 
reentered.  It terminates profitably at day 122 and is not open at the end of the period.  The 
middle panel presents a bar graph of when a position is held in the pair, and the lower panel is a 
graph of cumulative profitability. 
 
The data used for the backtest are daily prices for the stocks that constitute the S&P100 
within each year, with data collected from CRSP.  Because these are large, American companies, 
there is a reasonable a priori expectation that prices are more likely to be cointegrated than 
random pairings in the broader market.  We do not attempt to limit the candidate pool further by 
selecting stocks in the same industry or any other similar requirement.  Doing so would likely 
increase profitability and be a more sophisticated trading strategy. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
24  
 
For the S&P 100 stocks, there are 4,950 possible pairs to test for cointegration each year.  
All stocks that pass the cointegration test become candidates for inclusion in the trading 
portfolio, and cumulative log returns are calculated for all open positions.  The pairs are equally 
weighted, as if $1 were invested in each synthetic spread position, and the portfolio return is 
considered for comparison among the various testing procedures, as well as the Sharpe ratio and 
excess returns in the form of Jensen’s alpha and Fama-French 3-factor regressions. 
 
The general strategy is chosen because it compares well with previous work (e.g., Do & 
Faff, 2009).  It is not presented as a realistic trading algorithm but rather as a straightforward 
rubric by which to compare the usefulness of the three cointegration tests.  We stress that the 
main interest here is not profitability per se, but rather the difference in profitability due to the 
various cointegration tests.  The next section provides results from the trading. 
6.0 Pairs Trading Profitability 
 
Table 4 displays the number of candidate pairs that are identified as cointegrated for each 
year of the sample.  Recall that for 100 stocks, there are 4,950 pairs that are tested for 
cointegration.  The fluctuation in the number of cointegrated pairs is dramatic for just a ten year 
sample.  As the extreme cases, the rank-based test identifies 289 pairs (5.8%) as cointegrated in 
2006, while in 2009 fully 1,489 (30.1%) are similarly identified. 
 
The results in Table 4 demonstrate that the rank-based cointegration test generally 
identifies more candidate pairs than the Engle-Granger (OLS) test, while the LAD test typically 
offers the fewest pairs for trading.  These results suggest that the stock price series are not fattailed enough for the LAD test to be superior.  In the remainder of the results, we focus primarily 
on the OLS and rank-based results. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
25  
In particular, Table 4 also presents the degree to which these two tests identify the same 
pairs.  In each year, the two tests each identify a certain subset that the other does not, while 
there is also a subset of stocks that are identified by both screening tests.  The overlap percent 
ranges from 38.1% in 2001 to 57.5% in 2004.  This creates multiple portfolios for consideration 
and comparison in terms of profitability. 
We present five portfolios for comparison; three of them are based on all pairs identified 
by the OLS, rank, and LAD procedures.  The fourth portfolio is all pairs that the OLS test 
recognizes as cointegrated while the rank test does not.  Similarly, the fifth portfolio is all stocks 
that are identified as cointegrated by the rank test, but not so identified by the OLS test.  
Profitability of these five portfolios appears in Table 5. 
In six of the ten years in the sample period, the rank-based trading procedure outperforms 
the OLS version.  Over the 10-year period, the average outperformance is 0.37%.  The LAD test 
outperforms OLS in five years and outperforms the rank version in five years.  The “rank only” 
portfolio consists of the pairs that are identified only by the rank cointegration test.  This 
portfolio outperforms the OLS procedure in seven of the ten years and with a 10-year average of 
0.77%, more than double the whole rank-based portfolio.  These results suggest that the pairs 
identified solely by the rank procedure are uniquely profitable for this sample. 
The above results focus on year-by-year comparisons, but it is in the longer term returns 
that the superiority of the rank test can truly be seen.  Over the entire 10-year period, the OLS 
test yields a total return of 3.62% while the rank test returns 7.32%, more than double.  It does so 
on almost identical standard deviation (0.023 for OLS, 0.024 for rank).  The Sharpe ratio of the 
rank-based test is a high 1.81, compared to just 0.26 for the OLS version. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
26  
We present excess returns based on Jensen’s alpha and Fama-French three-factor 
regressions in Table 6 for the rank-based profits.  The alphas are generally positive but not 
significant, with the exception of 2002.  This is in line with expectations from previous research 
(e.g., Do & Faff, 2009).  It would appear that the profits of this simple trading strategy do not 
exceed what could be expected due to known risk factors.  We conjecture that there are too many 
losing trades in the portfolios because the stock pairs are not limited to be beta neutral, within the 
same industry, or any additional screening factors that might further limit divergence risk.  This 
bears further scrutiny in future research. 
Finally, Table 7 begins to explore the source of the superiority of the rank-based 
methodology.  The table presents the percent of identified pairs that lose money during the 
trading period.  In eight of the ten years, the robust cointegration tests results in a small 
percentage of losing pairs.  In other words, pairs identified by the OLS procedure are more likely 
to diverge beyond the three standard deviation stop-loss rule, compared to the rank-based test.  
This is one source of the test’s superiority, which again will be explored in further applications in 
the future. 
7.0 Conclusion 
 
Pairs trading and various incarnations of convergence trading remain popular on Wall 
Street.  These strategies will always demand some statistical measure to identify portfolios of 
tradable opportunities.  This paper proposes two new tests as alternative to the Engle-Granger 
cointegration test.  These tests are more robust to outliers and violations of the assumption of 
normally distributed errors in stock returns.  Robustness is accomplished through weightedWilcoxon (rank-based) and LAD regression techniques.  The two new tests have superior power 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
27  
in many situations of interest.  The critical values generated through Monte Carlo simulation and 
presented here allow for the use of these tests in more situations in future research. 
 
To demonstrate one such application, pairs trading results for the S&P100 from 2001 to 
2010 were calculated using a simple pairs trading strategy.  The rank-based test provided stock 
pairs with superior traits.  Profitability was generally better, particularly in the long term, and the 
Sharpe ratio was considerably improved over OLS testing. 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
28  
8.0 References 
Banerjee, A., Dolado, J., Galbraith, J., & Hendry, D.  (1993).  Cointegration, Error Correction, 
and the Econometric Analysis of Non-Stationary Data, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Banerjee, A., Dolado, J., Hendry, D., & Smith, G.  (1986).  Exploring equilibrium relationships 
in econometrics through static models: Some Monte Carlo evidence.  Oxford Bulletin of 
Economics and Statistics, 48, 253 – 278. 
Bierens, H.  (1997).  Nonparametric cointegration analysis. Journal of Econometrics, 77, 379 – 
404. 
Choi, I.  (1992).  Effects of data aggregation on the power of tests for a unit root: A simulation 
study.  Economics Letters, 40, 397 – 401. 
Cochrane, J.  (1988).  How big is the random walk in GNP?  Journal of Political Economy, 96, 
893 – 920. 
DeJong, D., Nankervis, J., Savin, N., & Whiteman, C.  (1992).  The power problems of unit root 
tests for time series with autoregressive errors.  Journal of Econometrics, 53, 323 – 343. 
Dickey, D., & Fuller, W.  (1979).  Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series 
with a unit root.  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74, 427 – 431. 
Dickey, D., & Fuller, W.  (1981).  Likelihood ratio statistics for autoregressive time series with a 
unit root.  Econometrica, 49, 1057 – 1072. 
Do, B., & Faff, R.  (2009).  Does simple pairs trading still work?  Financial Analysts Journal, 
66, 83 – 95. 
Engle, R., & Granger, C.  (1987).  Cointegration and error correction: Representations, 
estimation, and testing.  Econometrica, 55, 252 – 276. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
29  
Escribano, A., Santos, M., & Sipols, A.  (2008).  Testing for cointegration using induced-order 
statistics.  Computational Statistics, 23, 131 – 151. 
Escribano, A., Sipols, A., & Aparicio, F.  (2006).  Nonlinear cointegration and nonlinear error 
correction: Record counting cointegration tests.  Communications in Statistics: Simulation & 
Computation, 35, 939 – 956. 
Fama, E.  (1965).  The behavior of stock prices.  Journal of Business, 38, 34 – 105. 
Gatev, E., Goetzmann, W., & Rouwenhorst, K.  (2006).  Pairs trading: Performance of a relative 
value arbitrage rule.  Review of Financial Studies, 19, 797 – 827. 
Granger, C., & Newbold, P.  (1974).  Spurious regression in econometrics.  Journal of 
Econometrics, 2, 111 – 120. 
Hall, A.  (1989).  Testing for a unit root in the presence of moving average errors.  Biometrica, 
76, 49 – 56. 
Hall, A.  (1994).  Testing for a unit root in time series with pretest data-based model selection.  
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 12, 461 – 470. 
Hendry, D.  (1986).  Econometric modeling with cointegrated variables: An overview.  Oxford 
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 48, 201 – 212. 
Hettmansperger, T.  (1984).  Statistical Inference Based on Ranks.  New York: Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. 
Hettmansperger, T., & McKean, J.  (2011).  Robust Nonparametric Statistical Methods, 2nd ed.  
New York: Chapman Hall. 
Hooker, R.  (1901).  Correlation of the marriage rate with trade.  Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
30  
Jaeckel, L.  (1972).  Estimating regression coefficients by minimizing the dispersion of the 
residuals.  Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 43, 1449 – 1458. 
Johansen, S.  (1988).  Statistical analysis of cointegration vectors.  Journal of Economic 
Dynamics and Control, 12, 231 – 254. 
Johansen, S., & Juselius, K.  (1990).  Maximum likelihood estimation and inference on 
cointegration with applications to the demand for money.  Oxford Bulletin of Economics and 
Statistics, 52, 169 – 210. 
Koenker, R.  (2012).  quantreg: Quantile Regression.  R package version 4.90. 
Koenker, R., & Bassett, G.  (1978).  Regression quantiles.  Econometrica, 46, 33 – 50. 
Kloke, J., & McKean, J.  (2011).  Rfit: Rank estimation for linear models.  R package version 
0.14. 
Kremers, J., Ericsson, N., & Dolado, J.  (1992).  The power of cointegration tests. Oxford 
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 54, 325 – 348. 
Kwiatkowski, D., Phillips, P., Schmidt, P., & Shin, Y.  (1992).  Testing the null hypothesis of 
stationarity against the alternative of a unit root.  Journal of Econometrics, 54, 159 – 178. 
Lloyd, C.  (2005a).  Estimating test power adjusted for size.  Journal of Statistical Computation 
and Simulation, 75, 921 – 934. 
Lloyd, C.  (2005b).  On comparing the accuracy of competing tests of the same hypotheses from 
simulation data.  Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 128, 497 – 508. 
Lo, A., & MacKinlay, A.  (1988).  Stock market prices do not follow random walks: Evidence 
from a simple specification test.  Review of Financial Studies, 1, 41 – 66. 
Maddala, G., & Kim, I.  (1998).  Unit Roots, Cointegration, and Structural Change.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
31  
Mandelbrot, B.  (1963).  The variation of certain speculative prices.  Journal of Business, 36, 394 
– 419. 
Nelson, C., & Plosser, C.  (1982).  Trends and random walks in macroeconomic time series.  
Journal of Monetary Economics, 10, 139 – 162. 
Ng, S., & Perron, P.  (1995).  Unit root tests in ARMA models with data-dependent methods for 
the selection of the truncation lag.  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, 268 – 
281. 
Nolan, J.  (2003).  Modeling financial data with stable distributions.  Handbook of Heavy Tailed 
Distributions in Finance, ed. Rachev, S., Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, B.V. 
Phillips, P., & Hansen, B.  (1990).  Statistical inference in instrumental variables regression with 
I(1) processes.  Review of Economic Studies, 57, 99 – 125. 
Phillips, P., & Loretan, M.  (1991).  Estimating long-run economic equilibria.  Review of 
Economic Studies, 58, 407 – 436. 
Phillips, P., & Perron, P.  (1988).  Testing for a unit root in time series regression.  Biometrika, 
75, 335 – 346. 
Rachev, S., & Mittnik, S.  (2000).  Stable Paretian Models in Finance.  New York City: Wiley. 
Said, S., & Dickey, D.  (1984).  Testing for unit roots in autoregressive-moving average models 
of unknown order. Biometrica, 71, 599 – 607. 
Sargan, J., & Bhargava, A.  (1983).  Testing residuals from least squares regression for being 
generated by the Gaussian random walk. Econometrica, 51, 153 – 174. 
Schwert, G.  (1989).  Tests for unit roots: A Monte Carlo investigation.  Journal of Business and 
Economic Statistics, 7, 147 – 159. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
32  
Stock, J.  (1987).  Asymptotic properties of least squares estimators of cointegrating vectors.  
Econometrica, 55, 1035 – 1056. 
Terpstra, J., & McKean, J.  (2005).  Rank-based analyses of linear models using R.  Journal of 
Statistical Software, 14, 1 – 26. 
Vidyamurth, G.  (2004).  Pairs Trading, Quantitative Methods and Analysis.  Hoboken, New 
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Wilcox, R.  (1997).  Introduction to Robust Estimation and Hypothesis Testing.  San Diego: 
Academic Press. 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
33  
Figure 1. Example of non-cointegrated time series 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
34  
Figure 2. Example of cointegrated time series 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
35  
Figure 3. Pairs trading example 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
36  
Table 1. Simulation results for     
⁄
   
Panel A 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Normal 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.4451 
0.0464 
0.1970 
0.0846 
0.0583 
100 -3.3570 
0.0525 
0.6744 
0.2009 
0.0926 
250 -3.3595 
0.0465 
1.0000 
0.8424 
0.2774 
Rank 
50 -3.3637 
0.0446 
0.1710 
0.0822 
0.0542 
100 -3.3008 
0.0549 
0.6008 
0.1852 
0.0890 
250 -3.3049 
0.0500 
0.9999 
0.7917 
0.2722 
LAD 
50 -3.7573 
0.0468 
0.1278 
0.0786 
0.0600 
100 -3.5673 
0.0529 
0.2971 
0.1171 
0.0738 
  
250 -3.2925 
0.0565 
0.8746 
0.4409 
0.1804 
Panel B 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Stable (α = 1.7) 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.5084 
0.0463 
0.1648 
0.0706 
0.0509 
100 -3.4543 
0.0482 
0.5907 
0.1568 
0.0719 
250 -3.3896 
0.0498 
0.9944 
0.8009 
0.2414 
Rank 
50 -3.3453 
0.0497 
0.3364 
0.1229 
0.0705 
100 -3.2876 
0.0464 
0.8731 
0.4213 
0.1557 
250 -3.1685 
0.0483 
0.9990 
0.9844 
0.7034 
LAD 
50 -3.7025 
0.0534 
0.2423 
0.1111 
0.0699 
100 -3.4337 
0.0471 
0.6320 
0.3127 
0.1304 
  
250 -3.0901 
0.0498 
0.9950 
0.8765 
0.5325 
Panel C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Skewed stable (α = 1.7, β = –0.25) 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.4908 
0.0483 
0.1707 
0.0749 
0.0545 
100 -3.3929 
0.0553 
0.6367 
0.1823 
0.0757 
250 -3.3895 
0.0524 
0.9953 
0.8187 
0.2494 
Rank 
50 -3.3656 
0.0456 
0.3334 
0.1219 
0.0668 
100 -3.2249 
0.0553 
0.8942 
0.4501 
0.1688 
250 -3.1552 
0.0484 
0.9990 
0.9861 
0.7092 
LAD 
50 -3.6807 
0.0518 
0.2503 
0.1138 
0.0731 
100 -3.3901 
0.0531 
0.6487 
0.3159 
0.1417 
  
250 -3.1056 
0.0472 
0.9956 
0.8756 
0.5287 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
37  
Table 2. Simulation results for     
⁄
   
Panel A 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Normal 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.4125 
0.0520 
0.2251 
0.0975 
0.0610 
100 -3.3722 
0.0523 
0.6991 
0.2170 
0.0988 
250 -3.3764 
0.0451 
1.0000 
0.8542 
0.2967 
Rank 
50 -3.3135 
0.0516 
0.2060 
0.0918 
0.0610 
100 -3.3197 
0.0524 
0.6251 
0.2007 
0.0937 
250 -3.3613 
0.0489 
1.0000 
0.8044 
0.2849 
LAD 
50 -3.7356 
0.0508 
0.1331 
0.0766 
0.0616 
100 -3.5960 
0.0495 
0.2980 
0.1246 
0.0796 
  
250 -3.3808 
0.0491 
0.8659 
0.4184 
0.1675 
Panel B 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Stable (α = 1.7) 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.4863 
0.0466 
0.1872 
0.0792 
0.0549 
100 -3.3956 
0.0491 
0.6753 
0.1918 
0.0850 
250 -3.3872 
0.0559 
0.9977 
0.8548 
0.2680 
Rank 
50 -3.3655 
0.0457 
0.3747 
0.1518 
0.0733 
100 -3.2332 
0.0514 
0.9086 
0.4913 
0.1994 
250 
-3.145 
0.0512 
0.9998 
0.9916 
0.7491 
LAD 
50 -3.7836 
0.0477 
0.2628 
0.1206 
0.0705 
100 -3.3833 
0.0505 
0.6692 
0.3492 
0.1667 
  
250 -3.0873 
0.0495 
0.9964 
0.8938 
0.5585 
Panel C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Skewed stable (α = 1.7, β = –0.25) 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.4606 
0.0505 
0.1983 
0.0820 
0.0542 
100 -3.4496 
0.0462 
0.6496 
0.1801 
0.0790 
250 -3.3655 
0.0543 
0.9977 
0.8685 
0.2737 
Rank 
50 
-3.304 
0.0559 
0.4091 
0.1559 
0.0800 
100 -3.2002 
0.0567 
0.9116 
0.5174 
0.2110 
250 -3.1415 
0.0510 
0.9998 
0.9914 
0.7553 
LAD 
50 -3.6893 
0.0543 
0.2832 
0.1268 
0.0741 
100 -3.3937 
0.0516 
0.6650 
0.3515 
0.1570 
  
250 -3.1219 
0.0489 
0.9964 
0.8785 
0.5575 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
38  
Table 3. Simulation results for     
⁄
   
Panel A 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Normal 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.4352 
0.0494 
0.2287 
0.0955 
0.0685 
100 -3.3874 
0.0462 
0.6993 
0.2234 
0.0963 
250 -3.3462 
0.0503 
1.0000 
0.8747 
0.3157 
Rank 
50 -3.3361 
0.0513 
0.2084 
0.0929 
0.0668 
100 -3.3513 
0.0449 
0.6134 
0.1957 
0.0896 
250 -3.3115 
0.0506 
1.0000 
0.8253 
0.2937 
LAD 
50 -3.8014 
0.0473 
0.1307 
0.0753 
0.0611 
100 -3.5844 
0.0469 
0.3063 
0.1255 
0.0751 
  
250 -3.3837 
0.0466 
0.8696 
0.4285 
0.1762 
Panel B 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Stable (α = 1.7) 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.4652 
0.0519 
0.1999 
0.0874 
0.0580 
100 -3.4146 
0.0522 
0.6849 
0.1963 
0.0789 
250 -3.3885 
0.0532 
0.9991 
0.8651 
0.2740 
Rank 
50 -3.3428 
0.0503 
0.4114 
0.1724 
0.0818 
100 -3.2155 
0.0536 
0.9154 
0.5184 
0.2168 
250 -3.1421 
0.0541 
0.9999 
0.9922 
0.7638 
LAD 
50 -3.6671 
0.0529 
0.2893 
0.1385 
0.0780 
100 -3.4183 
0.0491 
0.6668 
0.3555 
0.1677 
  
250 -3.0954 
0.0490 
0.9969 
0.8873 
0.5729 
Panel C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Error Distribution: Skewed stable (α = 1.7, β = –0.25) 
Method 
t 
CV 
Size 
0.8 
0.9 
0.95 
OLS 
50 -3.4661 
0.0495 
0.2008 
0.0849 
0.0608 
100 -3.4563 
0.0477 
0.6604 
0.1759 
0.0792 
250 -3.4412 
0.0475 
0.9992 
0.8503 
0.2536 
Rank 
50 -3.3232 
0.0515 
0.4103 
0.1719 
0.0863 
100 -3.2654 
0.0487 
0.9031 
0.4934 
0.2137 
250 -3.1514 
0.0489 
1.0000 
0.9923 
0.7595 
LAD 
50 -3.7416 
0.0469 
0.2760 
0.1350 
0.0741 
100 
-3.435 
0.0469 
0.6558 
0.3446 
0.1671 
  
250 -3.1023 
0.0465 
0.9970 
0.8846 
0.5736 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
39  
 
Table 4. Number of cointegrated pairs identified 
 
  
OLS 
Rank 
LAD 
OLS/Rank Overlap 
Percent Overlap 
2001 
555 
742 
685 
358 
38.13 
2002 
719 
854 
626 
514 
48.54 
2003 
798 
570 
392 
450 
49.02 
2004 
798 
618 
439 
517 
57.51 
2005 
623 
461 
372 
371 
52.03 
2006 
396 
289 
240 
207 
43.31 
2007 
356 
382 
411 
222 
43.02 
2008 
646 
825 
605 
450 
44.07 
2009 
1388 
1489 
1210 
1038 
56.44 
2010 
429 
459 
399 
275 
44.86 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
40  
Table 5. Average profitability 
 
 
  
OLS 
Rank 
LAD 
OLS only 
Rank only 
2001 
-2.98% 
-2.41% 
-3.22% 
-3.46% 
-1.89% 
2002 
4.59% 
4.29% 
2.63% 
4.14% 
2.94% 
2003 
0.74% 
1.38% 
1.25% 
0.39% 
1.89% 
2004 
-0.49% 
0.44% 
1.94% 
-2.16% 
2.32% 
2005 
0.22% 
1.03% 
1.25% 
0.16% 
2.12% 
2006 
0.60% 
2.65% 
0.96% 
-1.13% 
3.70% 
2007 
-3.13% 
-3.30% 
-3.11% 
-1.87% 
-2.11% 
2008 
2.15% 
2.70% 
1.92% 
3.56% 
3.42% 
2009 
2.41% 
1.74% 
2.17% 
2.31% 
1.01% 
2010 
-0.48% 
-1.18% 
-1.93% 
-0.56% 
-2.08% 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
41  
Table 6. Regression results for portfolio returns, rankbased testing procedure 
Jensen's Alpha 
Fama-French 3-Factor 
  
Alpha 
Prob 
Alpha 
Prob 
2001 
-0.074 
0.219 
-0.066 
0.296 
2002 
0.072 
0.014* 
0.082 
0.006* 
2003 
0.015 
0.543 
0.017 
0.489 
2004 
0.009 
0.347 
0.007 
0.511 
2005 
-0.003 
0.921 
0.001 
0.976 
2006 
0.011 
0.672 
0.009 
0.702 
2007 
-0.016 
0.613 
-0.016 
0.596 
2008 
0.103 
0.419 
0.089 
0.486 
2009 
0.035 
0.451 
0.049 
0.288 
2010 
-0.029 
0.404 
-0.026 
0.466 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735

STAT ARB USING ROBUST COINTEGRATION 
42  
Table 7. Percent of losing pairs 
  
OLS 
Rank 
2001 
19.28% 
30.05% 
2002 
9.04% 
8.78% 
2003 
15.41% 
8.42% 
2004 
21.43% 
6.31% 
2005 
20.22% 
10.63% 
2006 
24.49% 
12.80% 
2007 
21.35% 
21.20% 
2008 
15.94% 
15.88% 
2009 
8.65% 
8.46% 
2010 
17.95% 
24.18% 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2154735
