Multivariate Cointegration in Statistical Arbitrage
Jo˜ao Ramos Jungbluta∗
joaoramosjungblut@hotmail.com
aFaculty of Economics Sciences, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Jo˜ao Pessoa, 52, Porto
Alegre, Brazil, zip 90040-000
Abstract
The present study investigates financial arbitrage strategies, overcoming limitations of
techniques such as pairs trading. Through multivariate cointegration in the Johansen sense,
the aim is to construct a long-short portfolio by identifying an equilibrium relationship
among multiple assets. Parameters were estimated using maximum likelihood, while arbitrage opportunities were discovered by modeling the spread, targeting mean-reversion trades.
This approach is consistent with economic theory and allows for determining portfolio asset weights. The empirical analysis collected data from Economatica, covering 203 stocks
from the Bovespa index from 1997 to 2023. Results were compared to a benchmark and
subjected to robustness tests, confirming the strategy’s effectiveness in generating returns
without significantly increasing risk.
Keywords: Statistical arbitrage; long-short portfolio; multivariate cointegration; timeseries analysis; econometrics.
1
Introduction
Efficient markets are those in which asset prices fully reflect all available information [Fama,
1970] . This implies that profit opportunities are short-lived because participants quickly exploit
any discrepancies, thereby restoring price equilibrium. Arbitrage, on the other hand, refers to
the act of taking advantage of discrepancies in asset prices across different scenarios to gain
risk-free profit. The goal is to buy an asset at a lower price in one market and sell it at a higher
price in another, capitalizing on this difference. In essence, arbitrage relies on the concept of
market inefficiency. The challenge is to identify inefficiencies that can be exploited to generate
profit without incurring greater risks. In practice, this pursuit becomes feasible when analyzing
∗The author expresses gratitude for the financial support from the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher
Education Personnel (CAPES) through a scholarship.
1

various assets, precisely due to the complexity of modeling hidden patterns across multiple
variables.
Pairs Trading is a statistical approach developed to identify pairs of assets with price comovement, aiming to anticipate convergence to equilibrium in situations of overvaluation or
undervaluation. This strategy was developed in the 1980s, according to Cavalcante et al. [2016],
and gained prominence in academia after the publication of the distance method by Gatev et al.
[2006], which proposes selecting pairs by minimizing a distance criterion (Euclidean). Perlin
[2009] assesses the effectiveness of this approach in the Brazilian market, which I will explore
in this work. However, Taylor [2011] argues that the distribution of stocks does not follow a
normal distribution. Since the distance method is based on metrics such as Euclidean distance
or correlation, which rely on the assumption of a normal distribution to capture short-term
linear relationships, its reliability is compromised by the inherent inconsistency of such relations.
Hence, it is more appropriate to use methods that capture non-linear dependence. For example,
the use of copulas for constructing a mispricing index, as explored by Xie et al. [2016], and more
recently, the mixture of copulas proposed by Sabino da Silva et al. [2023].
Cointegration, despite being a linear statistical method, is more appealing to work with
because it captures long-term equilibrium relationships. This enables the identification of price
divergences that align with a theory consistently. Some works provide practical insights, such
as, for example, Chan [2021] and Diamond [2014]. In this approach, we are essentially interested
in modeling two assets to produce a stationary time series called spread. Thus, if the two assets
have an equilibrium relation, this series tends to revert to the mean in the long term, allowing for
long and short operations. An empirical analysis of the Brazilian market involving cointegration
has already been conducted by Caldeira and Moura [2013]. They found high profitability in
applying cointegration but did not impose any restrictions on the pair selection universe.
Seeking to enhance the method, Ramos-Requena et al. [2017] introduced the use of the
Hurst exponent to assess the quality of random walk diffusion, observing whether the spread
is truly mean-reverting. This could be done through the variance test proposed by Lo and
MacKinlay [1989], aiming to identify the hypothesis that financial asset prices follow or not a
random walk. Alternatively, the evaluation could be performed through the half-life, calculated
from the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, as employed by Teixeira [2014]. The latter used it as
a criterion to determine the exit time of operations to reduce losses and increase profitability.
Finally, Sarmento and Horta [2021] combines the techniques described above with the use of
unsupervised machine learning models to improve efficiency in identifying pairs of ETFs in
intraday data.
The author employs the OPTICS and DBSCAN algorithms to narrow the
2

search for cointegrated pairs within specific clusters. Subsequently, filters are developed using
the Hurst exponent and half-life for the selection of the most promising pairs.
That being said, some considerations must be made. The first of these concerns the sensitivity of these models to specific market conditions. The performance of pair-based strategies
may be affected by extraordinary events or periods of extreme volatility, which can compromise
the robustness and reliability of the results. Regarding this, Palomar [2020] demonstrates how
to use the Kalman filter to make corrections to the spread when structural breaks occur, as well
as how to weigh each asset in the operations.
Another significant shortcoming of the pair selection technique is the fact that it does not
provide ways to construct a well-optimized portfolio. Simply identifying cointegrated pairs does
not take into account effective diversification and resource allocation. In this regard, we built
a cointegrated portfolio using Johansen [1988] test which allows for exploring cointegration
in a multivariate case. Unlike traditional methods focusing solely on pairs, this methodology
conducts cointegration tests across multiple assets concurrently.
By doing so, it facilitates
portfolio construction rooted in the principles of mean-reversion trading, leveraging spread
analysis to identify and exploit price divergences from equilibrium points.
We used stock price data comprising the Bovespa index from 1997 to 2023, collected from
Economatica. The database was consistently divided into one-year in-sample periods and sixmonth out-of-sample periods. The study was conducted on the Brazilian market, an emerging
market with the potential for identifying arbitrage opportunities compared to more established
markets. This market also lacks sufficient research, especially regarding pairs trading strategies,
such as Perlin [2009] and Caldeira and Moura [2013], stated earlier, which did not construct
a well-optimized portfolio. The chosen study period coincides with the implementation of the
Plano Real in Brazil. Also, this period encompasses various economic crises, providing a rich
dataset to analyze how the strategy performed in the face of market volatility and economic
uncertainty.
Backtesting unveils promising outcomes, showcasing the potential of statistical arbitrage to
yield substantial rewards with minimal risk. Impressively, during the study period, this strategy
not only surpassed benchmarks but also demonstrated lower drawdowns.
By examining its
performance over the selected period and addressing the research gap, valuable insights into
the strategy’s robustness and effectiveness across different market conditions can be obtained,
offering implications for investors.
The structure of this work is organized as follows: in the Background section 2, we provide
detailed explanations of the Vector Autoregressive (VAR), cointegration, Vector Error Correc3

tion Model (VECM), Johansen’s approach, and Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). In
the Methodology section 3, we present the Trading Strategy and Performance Methods. In the
Empirical Analysis 4, we present the data, discuss the results, and validate them through the
robustness test. Finally, in the Conclusion 5, we review the obtained results and fundamental
concepts of the model in order to discuss potential improvements and future research directions.
2
Background
The models for implementing the trading strategy will be presented here. First, we will
explain the VAR, the basis for a deeper understanding of the others. Following that, we will
address the concept of cointegration and formulate the VECM. The Johansen test will be used
to identify cointegrated vectors, and parameter estimation will then be performed through MLE.
The notations used are based on the works of Bueno [2018].
2.1
VAR
The VAR expresses entire economic models by providing constraints and equations, allowing
parameters to be estimated. It is significant because it examines the trajectory of endogenous
variables in the presence of a structural shock. Following this approach, it is possible to use the
information presented to separate long-term patterns from short-term ones, thereby identifying
mispriced assets. These variations are studied using residuals caused by noise in the price series
of financial assets, and modeling them leads to the VECM.
In a general sense, we can express a model of order p, with n endogenous variables interconnected by a matrix A:
AXt = B0 +
p
X
i=1
BiXt−i + Bϵt,
ϵt ∼i.i.d.
A is a n × n matrix that defines the simultaneous constraints among the variables forming
the n × 1 endogenous variables at time t, Xt. The constant vector B0 is n × 1, Bi is a n × n
matrix, B is a diagonal matrix of standard deviations, and ϵt is a n × 1 vector of uncorrelated
random disturbances.
Examining the explanation for a bivariate situation helps better understand the model’s
endogeneity. Consider these equations:
x1,t = b10 −a12x2,t + b11x1,t−1 + b12x2,t−1 + σx1ϵx1,t
x2,t = b20 −a21x1,t + b21x1,t−1 + b22x2,t−1 + σx2ϵx2,t.
4

In this context, (i) x1,t and x2,t are stationary, (ii) ϵx1,t ∼RB(0, 1) and ϵx2,t ∼RB(0, 1), and
(iii) ϵx1,t ⊥ϵx2,t ⇒Cov(ϵx1,t, ϵx2,t) = 0.
These conditions are required for the model’s validity and the accurate interpretation of the
results. By ensuring the stationarity of variables and the independence of error terms, we may
proceed with explaining the reduced form of the simple model, which becomes:
Xt = A−1B0 + A−1
p
X
i=1
BiXt−i + A−1Bϵt
= Φ0 +
p
X
i=1
ΦiXt−i + et.
The simple model’s reduced form is
Xt = Φ0 + Φ1Xt−1 + et,
where Φ0 = A−1B0, Φ1 = A−1B1, and Aet = Bϵt. The stability condition is ensured when
the eigenvalues are positioned outside the unit circle (I −Φ1L), which ensures convergence
over time. Moving on, the question arises about the presence of trends in the variables, i.e., if
one may predict the other under what circumstances. This question introduces the notion of
cointegration.
2.2
Cointegration
According to Engle and Granger [1987b], the elements of the vector Xt, n × 1, are said to
be cointegrated of order (d, b), denoted by Xt ∼CI(d, b), if ( i) all elements of Xt are integrated
of order d, I(d), and ( ii) there exists a non-zero vector β such that
ut = X′
tβ ∼I(d −b),
b > 0.
Therefore, when X′
tβ = 0, β is the cointegration vector that defines a linear combination among
the elements of Xt.
Consider β = [ˆβ1, ˆβ2], which defines the long-term equilibrium between the variables I(1),
x1,t, and x2,t. Then,
h
x1,t
x2,t
i


ˆβ1
ˆβ2

= ˆβ1x1,t + ˆβ1x2,t = 0
5

h
x1,t
x2,t
i

1
β2

= x1,t + β2x2,t = 0.
With the normalization of β2 =
ˆβ2
ˆβ1 , ut can be considered the residual of one coordinate of Xt
against the other variables. Thus, the variables are cointegrated, and β generates the residual
whose order of integration is lower than the original variables. The same holds for cases with
more than two variables.
The VAR is significant because it attempts to predict the trajectory of endogenous variables
in the face of a structural shock. To trade, we must first assess the shock and determine entry
and exit points. Given the condition for a stationary disturbance, the logical next step is to
test the residuals, fit the best VAR model, and send the information to the VECM.
2.3
VECM
The VECM is nothing more than a conventional VAR, but it includes the error correction
term. To visualize this, we need to consider a cointegration relationship given by:
x1,t = µ + βx2,t + ut.
So, there are ways to manipulate the VAR such that, if cointegration exists, the original model
can be rewritten for the residuals to enter explicitly:
∆x1,t = α1ˆut−1 +
p−1
X
j=1
λ11,j+1∆x1,t−j +
p−1
X
j=1
λ12,j+1∆x2,t−j + ex1,t
∆x2,t = α2ˆut−1 +
p−1
X
j=1
λ21,j+1∆x1,t−j +
p−1
X
j=1
λ22,j+1∆x2,t−j + ex2,t.
In the multivariate model, each Xt is a n × 1 vector of endogenous variables.
Now, consider the VAR at the level, ignoring the presence of constants, to better comprehend
the VECM.
Xt = Φ1Xt−1 + Φ2Xt−2 + . . . + ΦpXt−p + et
[I −(Φ1L + Φ2L2 + . . . + Φp
L)]Xt = et
Φ(L)Xt = et.
Note, when L = 1,
Φ(1) = [I −(Φ1 + Φ2 + . . . + Φp)] = −Φ.
6

The characteristic polynomial is given by:
Φ(Z) = I −
p
X
i=1
ΦiZi,
where Z is a diagonal matrix of n elements. Linear algebra tells us that if the matrix’s determinant is zero, its rank is not full. That is, [Φ(I)] = 0 ⇐⇒rank(Φ) < n. As a result, the process
has a unit root, and Z can be factored as follows:
Φ(Z) = (I −Z)(I −λ1Z)(I −λ2Z) . . . (I −λpZ).
Remember that matrix’s rank is the number of independent rows or columns. The number
of columns and rows will always be fewer than or equal to the rank. According to Bueno [2018],
this allows us to state Granger’s theorem, originally proposed by Gonzalo and Granger [1995].
Theorem 1 (Granger). Let Φ : Rn×r →Rn×n be a linear map s.t.
(i) |Φ(Z)| = 0 ⇒Z > I, where I denotes the n × n identity matrix;
(ii) 0 < rank(Φ) = r < n.
Then, ∃α ∈Rn×r and β ∈Rr×n such that Φ = αβ.
The theorem expresses the idea that Φ can be decomposed into two multiplicative matrices,
β is the matrix of cointegration and α is the matrix of adjustment. From this, we derive the
VECM, recursively adding and subtracting past terms to generalize the equation. Thus, let
Xt = ΦXt−1 +
2
X
i=1
Λi∆Xt−i + et,
with Λi = P3
j=1+i Φj, i = 1, 2.
The model is called error correction because it explains ∆Xt by two components: the shortterm factors and the long-term relationship given by the coordinates of the vector of endogenous
variables.
It becomes evident, therefore, that in the presence of cointegration, it is always
possible to associate the VAR with error correction, and that is precisely what the representation
theorem deals with, Engle and Granger [1987a].
Theorem 2 (Granger Representation Theorem). If Xt ∼CI(1, 1), Xt has a representation in
the form of a VECM.
7

2.4
Johansen’s approach
Johansen presents a test to identify the rank of the matrix Φ and, consequently, estimate
the cointegration vectors included in the matrix β. His methodology is intriguing because it is
performed concurrently with the estimation of the cointegration model.
Consider the following non-stationary equation system in cointegration:
Xt = β0 + β1Xt−1 + ut,
in vector form,

x1,t
x2,t

=

β10
β20

+

β11
α11
α21
β21



x1,t−1
X2,t−1

+

u1,t
u2,t

.
In this system, x1t and x2t are non-stationary I(1) processes. A linear combination exists
that is I(0) when they are cointegrated. We can express the VAR model in terms of the I(0)
variables only.

x1,t −x1,t−1
x2,t −x2,t−1

=

β10
β20

+

β11 −1
α11
α21
β21 −1



x1,t−1
X2,t−1

+

u1,t
u2,t

.

∆x1,t
∆x2,t

=

β10
β20

+

Φ11
Φ12
Φ21
Φ22



x1,t−1
X2,t−1

+

u1,t
u2,t.

.
Now, the model is represented in the VECM form, as explained by the Granger Representation
Theorem.
∆Xt = β0 + ΦXt−1 + ut
The matrix’s rank indicates the number of linearly independent rows and columns. If one
of the rows cannot be stated as a multiple of the other, they are considered independent. As a
result, the existence of a I(0) linear combination for x1 and x2 depends on the rank. Johansen
[1991] proposed two tests to evaluate the matrix’s rank: the trace test and the maximum
eigenvalue test. We are solely interested in the maximum eigenvalue test for this work, where
the hypothesis is formulated as follows, given that r is the maximum number of cointegrated
eigenvectors.
H0 : rank(Φ) < r
or
Φ = αβ′
Even after defining the rank, the matrices α and β are not identifiable as they form an
8

overparameterization of the model. However, we can delimit the cointegration space to span(β).
2.5
MLE
Parameters estimation can be done by maximum likelihood. Drawing from the discussions
in Maddala and Kim [1998] and its references, consider the complete VAR:
Xt = Φ1Xt−1 + Φ2Xt−2 + . . . + ΦpXt−p + δdt + et.
This model can be represented in error correction form, and the objective is to estimate using
Maximum Likelihood subject to the constraint of incomplete rank: Φ = αβ′.
∆Xt = αβ′Xt−1 +
p
X
i=1
Λi∆Xt−i + δdt + et
Consider vectorizing the above model, where Υ0,t = ∆Xt, Υ1,t = Xt−1, Υ2,t = [∆X′
t−1∆X′
t−2 . . . , d′
t],
and Λ = [Λ1Λ2 . . . δ]. The VECM is simplified to:
Υ0,t = αβ′Υ1,t + ΛΥ2,t + et.
The problem is to maximize the likelihood function subject to nonlinear constraints on the
parameters given by:
ln L(α, β, Λ, Σ) = −T
2 ln|Σ| −1
2
T
X
t=1
e′
tΣ−1et,
with the first-order conditions being:
0 =
T
X
t=1
(Υ0,t −αβ′Υ1,t + ˆΛΥ2,t)Υ′
2,t
⇒
T
X
t=1
Υ0,tΥ′
2,t = αβ′
T
X
t=1
Υ1,tΥ′
2,t + ˆΛ
T
X
t=1
Υ2,tΥ′
2,t.
Renaming the variables as Πij =
PT t = 1ΥijΥ′
ij
T
, we can rewrite the previous equation as:
Π02 = αβ′Π12 + ˆΛΠ22.
Bueno [2018] shows that to obtain et, we do not need ˆΛ. First, let’s regress Υ0,t on Υ2,t,
that is,
Υ0,t = BΥ1,t + r0,t
9

so that ˆB = (Υ0,tΥ′
2,t)(Υ2,tΥ′
2,t)−1 = Π02Π−1
22 , and obtain the residuals
ˆ
r0,t = Υ0,t −Π02Π−1
22 Υ2,t.
Next, regressing Υ1,t on Υ2,t and obtain the residuals ˆ
r1,t = Υ1,t −Π12Π−1
22 Υ2,t. Note that:
ˆet = ˆ
r0,t −αβ ˆ
r1,t.
Thus, the quantities
ˆ
r0,t and
ˆ
r1,t can be obtained from the auxiliary regressions, and we can
estimate α and β.
The new function to maximize becomes:
ln L(α, β, Σ) = −T
2 ln|Σ| −1
2
T
X
t=1
( ˆ
r0,t −αβ ˆ
r1,t)′Σ−1( ˆ
r0,t −αβ ˆ
r1,t).
One way is to estimate α and Σ for a given β,
ˆα(β) = S01β(β′S11β)
ˆΣ(β) = S00 −S01β(β′S11β)−1β′S10
with S = T −1 PT
t=1 ˆri,tˆrj,t, j = 0, 1.
The matrix β has not been estimated yet; nonetheless, starting from the last derivation, β
can be found by maximizing the likelihood.
L(β)−2
t = |ˆΣ(β)|,
where according to Johansen [1991], we can obtain it through the maximum eigenvalue test.
L
−2
t
max = |S00|
n
Y
i=1
(1 −ˆλi).
Thus, the cointegrated eigenvectors will define the matrix
ˆβ =
h
ˆβ1, ˆβ2, . . . , ˆβr
i
which is an n × r matrix.
10

In this context, let’s clarify some details further.
Π02 = αβ′Π12 + ˆΛΠ22
contains the coefficients associated with cointegration, with α and β being the coefficients we
want to estimate. r0,t and r1,t are related to the variables deviating from their cointegration
relationship (observed divergences), where r0,t is the residual of Xt (level) and r1,t is the residual
of ∆Xt (trend). Furthermore, as we are only looking at the cointegrated space, the residual
presented will be
et = αβ′Xt.
3
Methodology
The methodology is separated into two parts. The trading strategy is introduced in the first
phase, with details on how buy and sell signals are identified based on the spread and when
trades are executed. The second section introduces the performance metrics that will be used
to evaluate the strategy’s performance later.
3.1
Trading Strategy
The chosen strategy is similar to pairs trading using the cointegration method, according to
books like Chan [2021] and studies like Caldeira and Moura [2013] and Diamond [2014]. On the
other hand, our approach distinguishes itself by attempting to build a cointegrated portfolio.
The central proposal is to identify periods when the movement of a financial asset deviates from
the others in the short term, anticipating a long-term convergence to equilibrium.
Detecting these price divergences requires observing the residuals of the linear relationships.
Although the strategy is almost identical to pairs trading, we have n financial assets in the
multivariate model. As explained in Section 2, the residuals are given by:
et = ΦXt.
We shall use a separate nomenclature here to clarify the strategy’s implementation. During
the out-of-sample phase, the computed residuals will be referred to as spread and represent the
vector of price divergences to be exploited. The Z-score, which is effectively the standardized
spread, is calculated from these residuals and is represented as Zscore = et−µe
σe
.
Meanwhile, the normalized vector Φ = [1,
ˆΦ2
ˆΦ1 ,
ˆΦ3
ˆΦ1 , . . . ,
ˆΦr
ˆΦ1 ], obtained by Maximum Likelihood
11

Estimation (MLE), will constitute the hedge ratios. To determine the portfolio weights, w, we
divide the hedge ratios by their norm
w =
Φ
||Φ||.
This way, we ensure that only available capital is used; the remaining question is whether this
is the best way to weigh the portfolio once assets with large value parameters concentrate all
capital. The portfolio return is calculated as follows:
Rport = wRt.
The strategy is built on the mean-reversion principle.
Entry points are defined by the
spread’s distance from the mean, whereas exit points are determined by the spread’s proximity
to the mean. The Z-score is important because it allows us to determine entry and exit locations
based on standard deviations.

























if Zscore ≤−2,
then St = 1 (open long position)
if Zscore ≥2,
then St = −1 (open short position)
if Zscore = 0,
then St = 0 (close position)
if Zscore ≤−3,
then St = 2 (stop loss)
if Zscore ≥3,
then St = −2 (stop loss)
Here, St denotes the trading signal at time t, where 1 indicates the initiation of a long
position, −1 the initiation of a short position, 0 denotes the closing signal, and 2 or −2 implies
the activation of a stop loss. Consequently, when the Z-score reaches −2, a long position is
opened in the portfolio (Rport = wRt.), closing it with a positive return at a Z-score of 0 or with
a loss at −3. Conversely, when the Z-score attains 2, a short position is opened (Rport = −wRt.),
closing it at 0 or 3. A schematic representation in Figure 1 illustrates these events, wherein
dashed green lines signify entry points, dashed black lines represent exit points, the dashed red
line indicates the stop loss level, and the blue line depicts the spread.
3.2
Performance Measures
The evaluation of the investment portfolio’s performance involves the computation of diverse measures. These metrics thoroughly evaluate the portfolio’s risk and return attributes,
facilitating a more nuanced understanding of its risk and return characteristics across different
market conditions.
The following key measures are calculated: annualized return, annualized standard deviation, annualized Sharpe ratio, annualized Sortino ratio, annualized Value
12

Figure 1: Graph depicting the spread of cointegrated portfolios from 1998 to 2023 for generating
trading signals
at Risk (VaR), V aR0.95, annualized Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR), CV aR0.95, and WorstDrawdown. These measures were chosen because they are widely used in the financial market
according to Bacon [2008] and Chan [2021].
The annualized return serves as a metric for gauging the average rate of return per year
during a designated investment period. Typically computed using the formula:
An. Ret. =
 252
Y
t=1
1 + Rt
!
1
252
−1
where Rt denotes the daily return, this measure encapsulates the compounded effect of daily
returns over the entire investment horizon.
For logarithmic returns rt, the formula takes a
slightly different form:
An. Ret. =
 
1
T
T
X
t=1
rt
!
× 252
This representation for logarithmic returns provides an alternative perspective on the annualized
return, particularly when dealing with continuously compounded returns.
This metric quantifies the volatility or risk of the investment by measuring the dispersion
of returns around the mean over a one-year period. The annualized Standard Deviation is the
13

rescaled daily Standard Deviation and can be calculated as
An. Std.-Dev. =
v
u
u
t 1
T
T
X
t=1
(Rt −µR)2 ×
√
252
with µR being the mean of returns.
The Sharpe ratio evaluates the risk-adjusted return by comparing the portfolio’s excess
return over the risk-free rate to its standard deviation. It is a widely used metric in finance
to assess the risk-adjusted performance of an investment or portfolio. It quantifies the excess
return generated per unit of risk taken. The formula for the Sharpe ratio is given by:
SR = E[R] −Rf
σ
×
√
252
where Rf is the return of the risk-free asset and σ =
q
1
T
PT
t=1(Rt −µR)2, with µR being the
mean of returns.
The Sortino ratio is a modified version of the Sharpe ratio that considers only downside
risk, which is calculated using the semi-deviation. It tries to provide a more relevant measure of
risk-adjusted performance, especially in instances when investors are concerned about downside
volatility, represented by σ−=
q
1
T
PT
t=1 (min(Rt −µR, 0))2.
Sortino = E[R] −Rf
σ−
×
√
252
VaR, denoted as V aRα(X), is a critical risk management metric that assesses the maximum
expected loss with a 1 −α confidence level over a defined time horizon. It serves as a powerful
tool for quantifying the potential downside risk inherent in an investment portfolio.
The calculation for V aRα involves determining the loss level at which there is a probability
of exceeding it during the specified time frame. Mathematically, it can be expressed as follows:
V aRα = inf{x ∈R | FX(x) ≥α}
An. V aRα = V aRα ×
√
252.
Here, we used VaR at 5% level.
CVaR, denoted as CV aRα(X), represents a critical risk measure used to gauge the expected
loss under extreme scenarios. It is calculated as the expected value of the random variable X
conditional on X being less than or equal to its VaR at the same confidence level. This can be
14

expressed mathematically as follows:
CV aRα = E[X|X ≥V aRα(X)]
=
1
1 −α
Z 1
α
V aRu(X) du
An. CV aRα = CV aRα ×
√
252.
In essence, CV aRα(X) provides valuable insights into the potential loss magnitude beyond the
VaR, by averaging over all levels for u ≤α. The level of CVaR used is 5%.
The worst-drawdown is a measure that quantifies the maximum percentage decline in a
portfolio’s value from a previous peak to the lowest subsequent point. It helps investors understand the largest loss they might have experienced during a specific investment period. The
worst-drawdown can be calculated using the following formula:
Worst-Drawdown = Maximum Drawdown = max
i,j
Vi −Vj
Vi

× 100%,
where Vi is the portfolio’s value at time i, Vj is the lowest subsequent value after the peak at
time j, and maxi,j represents the maximum value over all peak-to-trough periods.
4
Empirical Analysis
To assess the effectiveness of the proposed strategy, I conducted a rigorous backtest, taking
into account statistical biases. Initially, the data was collected and appropriately handled. To
avoid model overfitting, cointegration analysis was only performed in the in-sample period,
while trading operations were only undertaken in the out-of-sample period.
The assets used were randomly selected from the composition of the Bovespa index, mitigating potential issues related to data-snooping bias and survivorship bias. The generated signals
were verified, and entries were made the following day to avoid look-ahead bias, ensuring the
portfolio’s return was calculated without incorporating future information.
Subsequently, risk and return measures were examined, and the portfolio’s performance was
compared to a benchmark, the Bovespa index, demonstrating the strategy’s success. Transaction
costs of 0.03% based on Frazzini et al. [2018] have been included. These steps ensured a thorough
examination, considering numerous circumstances that could impact the backtest results.
15

4.1
Data
The historical data of adjusted close prices for stocks and the composition of the Bovespa
index were collected from the Economatica database, covering the period from January 2, 1997,
to December 28, 2023. The chosen time frame represents the longest duration obtained since
the inception of the Real Plan implementation, an event that marks a significant change in
Brazil’s monetary and fiscal policies. A total of 203 assets were collected during this period,
including the tickers listed in Table 1.
ABEV3
ACES4
AEDU3
ALLL11
ALLL3
ALPA4
AMBV4
AMER3
ARCE3
ARCE4
ARCZ6
ASAI3
ATMP3
AZUL4
B3SA3
BBAS3
BBAS4
BBDC3
BBDC4
BBSE3
BEEF3
BESP4
BHIA3
BIDI11
BISA3
BMTO4
BNCA3
BPAC11
BPAN4
BRAP4
BRDT4
BRFS3
BRKM5
BRML3
BRPR3
BRTP3
BRTP4
CASH3
CCRO3
CESP5
CESP6
CEVA4
CGAS5
CIEL3
CLSC4
CMET4
CMIG3
CMIG4
CMIN3
COGN3
CPFE3
CPLE6
CPSL3
CRFB3
CRTP5
CRUZ3
CSAN3
CSNA3
CSTB4
CTAX4
CTIP3
CVCB3
CYRE3
DASA3
DURA4
DXCO3
EBEN4
EBTP3
EBTP4
ECOR3
EGIE3
ELET3
ELET6
ELPL4
EMAE4
EMBR3
EMBR4
ENBR3
ENEV3
ENGI11
EPTE4
EQTL3
ERIC4
EVEN3
EZTC3
FIBR3
FLRY3
GEPA4
GETI4
GFSA3
GGBR4
GNDI3
GOAU4
GOLL4
HAPV3
HGTX3
HYPE3
IGTA3
IGTI11
INEP4
IRBR3
ITSA4
ITUB4
JBSS3
JHSF3
KLBN11
KLBN4
LAME4
LAND3
LCAM3
LIGT3
LIPR3
LOGG3
LREN3
LWSA3
MGLU3
MMXM3
MRFG3
MRVE3
MULT3
NETC4
NTCO3
OGXP3
OIBR3
OIBR4
PALF3
PCAR3
PCAR4
PDGR3
PETR3
PETR4
PETZ3
PMAM4
POMO4
POSI3
PRIO3
PRML3
PRTX3
PTIP4
QUAL3
RADL3
RAIL3
RCTB31
RCTB41
RDCD3
RDOR3
RENT3
REPA4
RLOG3
RRRP3
RSID3
RUMO3
SANB11
SAPR11
SBSP3
SDIA4
SHAP4
SLCE3
SMLS3
SOMA3
SUBA3
SULA11
SUZB3
SUZB5
SYNE3
TAEE11
TAMM4
TBLE6
TCOC4
TCSL4
TELB3
TELB4
TIMS3
TLCP4
TMAR5
TMAR6
TMCP4
TNEP4
TNLP3
TNLP4
TOTS3
TPRC6
TRJC6
TRPL4
TSPC3
TSPC6
UBBR11
UGPA3
UGPA4
UNIP6
USIM3
USIM5
VALE3
VALE5
VBBR3
VCPA4
VIVO4
VIVT3
VIVT4
VVAR11
WEGE3
WHMT3
YDUQ3
Table 1: List of all tickers used to search for cointegrated assets from 1997 to 2023.
The assets were separated between in-sample periods of one year and out-of-sample periods
of six months. The dataset is updated every six months. The assets in the in-sample dataset
are always chosen because they were part of the Bovespa index composition at the time. The
same assets are kept during the out-of-sample period, whether or not they were delisted. Figure
4.1 illustrates this division over time, with the in-sample period in blue and the out-of-sample
period in green.
During the backtest execution, priority was given to ensuring that the portfolio contained 10
assets to avoid excessive diversification, as the total amount of assets depends on the investor.
The assets were selected randomly. Adhering to the concept that our portfolio is cointegrated,
stocks were chosen, and cointegration was tested. If no cointegration relationship was found,
an additional 10 assets were randomly selected until the hypothesis was satisfied. If, during the
16

Figure 2: Illustration of period splitting for in-sample and out-of-sample data, with a one-year
and six-month rolling window updated every six months.
period, the hypothesis was rejected for all possible combinations, the portfolio’s return for that
period would be equal to zero, as no operations would be conducted.
4.2
Results
The empirical analysis compared the results generated by the cointegrated portfolio against
a benchmark, the Bovespa index. It was found that the statistical arbitrage strategy achieved
superior performance during the analyzed period.
Table 2 presents the results for risk and
return measures.
Statistics
Portfolio
Benchmark
Annualized Returns
13.9200
10.0900
Annualized Standard Deviation
23.6500
30.4700
Sharpe Ratio
0.5900
0.3300
Sortino Ratio
0.2400
0.4500
Annualized VaR 95%
-0.0000
-0.4600
Annualized CVaR 95%
-0.4100
-0.6900
Worst Drawdown
-0.2300
-0.8000
Table 2: Performance measures comparing cointegrated portfolio against Bovespa index for the
period 1998-2023.
According to the reported results, the portfolio’s annualized return is higher than the benchmark. One likely explanation for this performance is the strategy’s capacity to create profits
regardless of the economic condition, which leads to increased stability over time. This tendency
is readily visible in figure 3, where the portfolio’s development (blue line) contrasts with the
benchmark’s extensive period of lateralization (green line). The red and orange lines represent
the portfolio’s and benchmark’s drawdowns, respectively.
Furthermore, the cointegrated portfolio exhibits lower volatility, with downturns being found
to be less severe than the benchmark. This discovery implies that the portfolio has a faster
17

Figure 3: Performance comparison between cointegrated portfolio and Bovespa index.
recovery potential, which is critical for preserving consistency in results.
These behavioral
patterns demonstrate the strategy’s robustness and efficiency.
The Sharpe and Sortino ratios contribute to this analysis since they reflect the link between
expected return and risk, emphasizing the cointegrated portfolio’s superiority. What is noteworthy here is the fact that the portfolio outperformed the Sharpe ratio by a large vantage.
Also, the observation that the Sortino ratio does not outperform the Sharpe ratio is a result of
higher volatility during downturns - a negative factor - is higher than volatility overall, thereby
indicating the risk associated with structural breaks in the spread.
Moreover, while our yearly VaR and CVaR values are lower than the benchmark, our cointegrated portfolio has never experienced decreases at the CVaR level. On the contrary, the
Bovespa index fell by more than the value of the CVaR, indicating that the portfolio’s performance is unaffected by market changes.
The findings align with similar studies conducted in the Brazilian market, such as those by
Perlin [2009], Caldeira and Moura [2013], and more recently, Venturini and de Moraes [2024].
However, the distinction lies in the fact that these studies traditionally focused on comparing
the financial arbitrage strategy using pairs of cointegrated assets rather than a comprehensively optimized investment portfolio. This highlights that, by extending the method to the
multivariate case, it continues to demonstrate its effectiveness.
4.3
Robustness Test
A critical feature of a backtest is evaluating the outcomes acquired from factors, particularly
when working with a statistical arbitrage approach. In this environment, portfolio returns must
be independent of the causes underlying market behavior.
18

To execute a robustness test, portfolio returns must be regressed against these factors. In
this regard, I will use the Fama-French five-factor model, as indicated by Fama and French
[2015].
The dependent variables in this are RMRF (market return relative to the risk-free
rate), SMB (small minus big), HML (high minus low), RMW (robust minus weak), and CMA
(conservative minus aggressive).
The coefficients associated with each factor are estimated using the Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS) method. Given the objective of the test, OLS is well-suited for this purpose due to its
simplicity and efficiency in estimating linear relationships between variables, aligning with the
scope and requirements of the analysis. Another study employing a similar test is conducted
by Sabino da Silva et al. [2023]. The regression equation is expressed as follows:
Rport = −0.0105 × RMRF + 0.0146 × SMB −0.0044 × HML0.0098 × RMW −0.0014 × CMA.
Table 3 presents the results of the relevant tests conducted in our analysis.
Test
Test Statistic
P-Value
Conclusion
R-squared
0.000
-
Low variability explanation
Jarque-Bera
11062092.095
0.00
Non-normality of residuals
Omnibus
5411.615
0.00
Low significance between parameters
Durbin-Watson
2.210
-
Possible autocorrelation in residuals
Table 3: Robustness Test Results conducted with Brazilian market factors from 1998 to 2023.
The analysis yields a R2 equal to zero, indicating that the factors evaluated cannot adequately explain the portfolio’s performance.
This low explained variability shows that the
portfolio approach is genuinely market-neutral. In the meantime, the Omnibus test shows that
the explained variance is less than the unexplained variance, which indicates that the model
parameters have minimal relevance, validating the notion that the included factors have little
influence on the portfolio’s performance. Finally, the Jarque-Bera test validates the residuals’
non-normality. This lack of normality underscores the presence of patterns or behaviors not
captured by the factors, emphasizing additional complexity in the portfolio returns.
5
Conclusion
The decision to use multivariate cointegration to generate a portfolio, rather than just
pairs, was based on Johansen’s theoretical framework. This methodology enabled the execution
of cointegration tests on several assets simultaneously, supporting portfolio design based on the
logic of mean-reversion trading through the spread, which represents price divergences from an
equilibrium point.
19

The backtest findings show that statistical arbitrage has the potential to earn rewards while
posing no substantial risks. During the investigated time, the strategy produced great returns,
outperforming the benchmark, while having lower drawdowns. The robustness test validated
the independence of returns from market fluctuations, which is an expected characteristic of an
arbitrage strategy.
A few words of caution are also in order. To begin, transaction costs were included in the
backtest in addition to the steps taken to avoid statistical biases. Given the portfolio’s short
positions, these expenses can occasionally result in considerable losses, potentially negating the
acquired return. My analysis revealed that even in this case, the cointegrated portfolio would
outperform the market.
The pre-selection of assets is another unexplored element that could improve the results.
Approaches such as Sarmento and Horta [2021], which uses unsupervised machine learning
algorithms to discover stocks in clusters, are intriguing because they restrict the search, making
it easier to locate assets with more common behaviors.
It is vital to note that structural
breaks in the out-of-sample period may have an impact on the spread, as previously mentioned.
Hence, improved spread modeling and forecasting can provide a clearer description of entry and
exit points. Meucci [2009] indicates that an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process properly represents
residuals, allowing for a more precise calculation of its mean and variance to produce a Zscore that better reflects price divergences. Other works, such as that of Robert J. Elliott and
Malcolm [2005] used the Markov Chain to model the spread, or by Dunis et al. [2006] who
employed neural networks to forecast the spread, can be considered to improve the strategy.
All these suggestions can be incorporated into the same framework, providing a more sophisticated and concrete approach. Lastly, analyzing specific sub-periods could add more reliability
to the presented results. Given the extensive database, assessing performance during significant
events like the dot-com bubble, the 2008 financial crisis, and the COVID-19 pandemic would
be interesting.
References
C.R. Bacon. Practical Portfolio Performance Measurement and Attribution. The Wiley Finance
Series. Wiley, 2008. ISBN 9780470778050.
Rodrigo De Losso da Silveira Bueno. Econometria de s´eries temporais. Cengage Learning, 2018.
Jo˜ao Frois Caldeira and Gulherme Valle Moura. Sele¸c˜ao de uma carteira de pares de a¸c˜oes
20

usando cointegra¸c˜ao: Uma estrat´egia de arbitragem estat´ıstica. Brazilian Review of Finance,
11(1):49–80, 2013.
Rodolfo C. Cavalcante, Rodrigo C. Brasileiro, Victor L.F. Souza, Jarley P. Nobrega, and Adriano L.I. Oliveira. Computational intelligence and financial markets: A survey and future
directions. Expert Systems with Applications, 55:194–211, 2016.
Ernest P Chan. Quantitative trading: how to build your own algorithmic trading business. John
Wiley & Sons, 2021.
Richard V Diamond. Learning and trusting cointegration in statistical arbitrage. Available at
SSRN 2220092, 2014.
Christian Dunis, Jason Laws, and Ben Evans. Modelling and trading the gasoline crack spread:
A non-linear story. Journal of Derivatives & Hedge Funds, 12:126–145, 2006.
Robert F. Engle and C. W. J. Granger. Co-integration and error correction: Representation,
estimation, and testing. Econometrica, 55(2):251–276, 1987a.
Robert F. Engle and C. W. J. Granger. Co-integration and error correction: Representation,
estimation, and testing. Econometrica, 55(2):251–276, 1987b.
Eugene F. Fama. Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. The Journal
of Finance, 25(2):383–417, 1970.
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial
Economics, 116(1):1–22, 2015.
Andrea Frazzini, Ronen Israel, and Tobias J Moskowitz. Trading costs. Available at SSRN
3229719, 2018.
Evan Gatev, William N. Goetzmann, and K. Geert Rouwenhorst. Pairs Trading: Performance
of a Relative-Value Arbitrage Rule. The Review of Financial Studies, 19(3):797–827, 02 2006.
Jesus Gonzalo and Clive Granger. Estimation of common long-memory components in cointegrated systems. Journal of Business Economic Statistics, 13(1):27–35, 1995.
Søren Johansen. Statistical analysis of cointegration vectors. Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 12(2):231–254, 1988.
Søren Johansen. Estimation and hypothesis testing of cointegration vectors in gaussian vector
autoregressive models. Econometrica, 59(6):1551–1580, 1991.
21

Andrew W. Lo and A.Craig MacKinlay. The size and power of the variance ratio test in finite
samples: A monte carlo investigation. Journal of Econometrics, 40(2):203–238, 1989.
Gangadharrao S Maddala and In-Moo Kim. Unit roots, cointegration, and structural change.
1998.
Attilio Meucci.
Review of statistical arbitrage, cointegration, and multivariate ornsteinuhlenbeck. 2009.
Daniel P Palomar. Pair’s trading. Portfolio Optimization with R, 2020.
Marcelo Scherer Perlin. Evaluation of pairs-trading strategy at the brazilian financial market.
Journal of Derivatives & Hedge Funds, 15:122–136, 2009.
J.P. Ramos-Requena, J.E. Trinidad-Segovia, and M.A. S´anchez-Granero.
Introducing hurst
exponent in pair trading. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 488:39–45,
2017.
John Van Der Hoek * Robert J. Elliott and William P. Malcolm. Pairs trading. Quantitative
Finance, 5(3):271–276, 2005.
Fernando A.B. Sabino da Silva, Flavio A. Ziegelmann, and Jo˜ao F. Caldeira. A pairs trading
strategy based on mixed copulas. The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 87:16–34,
2023.
Sim˜ao Moraes Sarmento and Nuno Horta. A Machine Learning based Pairs Trading Investment
Strategy. Springer, 2021.
Stephen J Taylor. Asset price dynamics, volatility, and prediction. Princeton university press,
2011.
Ariel Amadeu Edwards Teixeira. Pair trading in Bovespa with a quantitative approach: cointegration, Ornstein-Uhlenbeck equation and Kelly criterion. PhD thesis, 2014.
Lucas Stumpf Venturini and Gustavo In´acio de Moraes. Pairs trading aplicado ao mercado
de capitais brasileiro: Uma abordagem via cointegra¸c˜ao e ornstein-uhlenbeck. Revista de
Administra¸c˜ao, Contabilidade e Economia da Fundace, 15(1), 2024.
Wenjun Xie, Zhao Zhi Toh, and Yuan Wu. Copula-based pairs trading in asia-pacific markets.
, 24(4):1–17, 2016.
22
