Statistical Arbitrage within Crypto Markets using
PCA
Jaehyun Jung
March 2025
1

Abstract
This paper explores the application of principal component analysis (PCA) in
statistical arbitrage trading. The methodology involves constructing eigenportfolios, estimating the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process for residual mean reversion, and
implementing a walk-forward validation framework. Performance metrics indicate
that the approach may not be robust in the cryptocurrency market, but room for
improvement definitely exists.
2

Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Market Neutral Strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Statistical Arbitrage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Objective of Study and Value Added . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Survey
6
2.1
Distance Based Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Cointegration Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Stochastic Residual Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Avellaneda and Lee (2008) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
Application in Crypto
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Dynamic Trading Universe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Special Coins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Exponential Weighted Moving Average and Market Cap
. . . . .
12
3.1.3
Median Trading Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.4
Negative Shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Statistical Factors via PCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Trading the Idiosyncratic Return Component
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Modeling with the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.1
Brief Exposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.2
Naive Approach: Euler Discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.3
Exact Approach: Closed-Form Discretization and Parameter Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.4
Mean reversion Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.5
Signal Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Execution and Backtesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5.1
Execution Nuance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5.2
Drift in Dollar Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5.3
Dynamic Rebalancing of Statistical Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5.4
Walk-Forward Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5.5
Parameter Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Results
22
4.1
EDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Performance of Coins Over the Trading Period . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.2
PCA Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Performance of Eigenportfolios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.4
Stability of Hedge Ratios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.5
Residual & Auxiliary Series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Backtesting Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.1
In-Sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Walk-Forward Validation & Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3

4.4
Testing Period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Discussion
31
5.1
Insufficient Number of Trades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Persistence of Mean Reversion and Non-Mean Reversion
. . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Mean Reversion Parameter: A Proxy for Stop Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Limitations and Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4.2
Too Many Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4.3
Trading the Residual Using Other Approaches . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4.4
Idiosyncratic Component Does Not Mean-Revert
. . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Bonus Strategy: Integrating Cointegration with PCA . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Conclusion
38
4

1
Introduction
The main objective of this study is to focus on the implementation details of the pairs
trading strategy presented by Avellaneda (2008), discussing the nuances that arise in
practical use.
Although there are several studies extending this framework to ETFs,
almost none explore eigenportfolio-based factor proxies in depth. One reason for this gap
may be the additional complexity eigenportfolios introduce, making their interpretation
and execution less straightforward. This paper attempts to clarify those concepts while
simultaneously applying the strategy to cryptocurrency markets, a relatively new and
evolving area.
Before delving into the core methodology, we offer an introductory overview of certain
concepts and terminologies relevant to this discussion.
1.1
Market Neutral Strategies
Market neutral strategies aim to neutralize exposure to risk factors within a portfolio.
This is typically desired by portfolio managers who may or may not wish to take active
views on particular factors. By neutralizing unwanted risks, managers can isolate and
capture only the “alpha,” or idiosyncratic returns, and avoid exposure to broader market
factors they do not wish to bet on.
In practice, market neutral strategies are often implemented either through (1) dollar
neutrality or (2) beta neutrality. Dollar neutrality means taking equal dollar amounts
in long and short positions. Beta neutrality, on the other hand, neutralizes exposure to
specific market factors. While beta neutrality theoretically aligns better with the goal of
isolating idiosyncratic risk, in practice it can require awkward or concentrated exposures.
For instance, beta neutrality might force one to hold a large short position in a high-beta
security while balancing it with multiple long positions in lower-beta securities, thereby
creating a different set of concentration risks.
In this paper, we adopt the perspective of beta neutrality, focusing on neutralizing exposure to certain factors:
X
i
Qiβij = 0
∀j ∈{1, 2, . . . , q},
where Qi is the dollar exposure in asset i, and βij is the loading of asset i on factor j.
The total number of factors is q.
1.2
Statistical Arbitrage
Statistical arbitrage is a category of market neutral strategies, where statistical relationships of constituents of a basket are exploited to make idiosyncratic bets on mean
reversion of relative performances. Another important feature of this type of strategy
5

would be that the bulk of returns should be factor neutral. This paper focuses on a specific subset of statistical arbitrage known as pairs trading. Pairs trading is simpler since
we restrict ourself to the price / returns space when looking for statistical relationships
to exploit among pairs.
1.3
Objective of Study and Value Added
We delve into the practical side of implementing the pairs trading method laid out by
Avellaneda (2008). While multiple studies exist that apply this approach to ETFs, few
explore the intricacies of using eigenportfolios as factor proxies. As noted above, eigenportfolios typically demand additional care in their interpretation and execution. This
paper clarifies those challenges and applies the methodology to cryptocurrency market.
In theory, there is no fundamental reason why the movements of cryptocurrency market
should be intrinsically tied to other asset classes. Unlike traditional financial instruments,
there is no universally accepted model for determining the intrinsic value of a cryptocurrency. As a result, the key drivers of the cryptocurrency market are highly dynamic,
shifting from one regime to another and evolving with changing narratives. Given this
inherent fluidity, it is logical to rely on statistical tools to analyze market behavior—this
is where techniques such as PCA can offer valuable insights into the ever-changing market
dynamics of cryptocurrencies.
Finally, We emphasize that the objective of the study is to replicate Avellaneda’s paper
and observe how the strategy proposed in his paper holds in the cryptocurrency markets.
Our hope is that this contribution helps researchers and practitioners gain deeper insight
into the strategy’s performance and associated complexities.
2
Literature Survey
We begin with a concise overview of several standard pairs trading strategies commonly
referenced in literature. Although these approaches do not necessarily represent the entire
space of possible strategies or the most up-to-date real-world practices, they serve as a
valuable point of reference for those beginning with pairs trading.
2.1
Distance Based Approach
The distance based approach, introduced by Gatev et al. (2006), is both intuitive and
straightforward.
It identifies pairs of assets whose sum of squared differences (SSD)
over a formation period is minimal, implying close historical movements. Practitioners
typically use Euclidean distance, though Manhattan or Chebyshev distances are also
6

possible. Although once successful, this method reportedly became less effective after
the early 2000s, likely due to increased popularity and market efficiency.
2.2
Cointegration Approach
First outlined by Vidyamurthy (2004), the cointegration approach checks whether two
(log) price series Pi and Pj, though individually I(1), can be linearly combined (e.g., Pi −
βPj) to form an I(0) stationary series. One commonly verifies this using a Cointegrated
Augmented Dickey-Fuller (CADF) test.
A notable subtlety is that if you regress the first variable on the second to estimate β, it
is not simply the inverse of the coefficient from the reversed regression. Thus, practical
cointegration strategies often run regressions in both directions, selecting the one that
yields the more negative ADF test statistic.
Cointegration can also be extended beyond pairs to baskets of assets. For instance, the
Johansen procedure allows you to identify one or more cointegrating relationships among
multiple time series. In this approach, one estimates a VAR(p) system:
yt = µ + A1yt−1 + A2yt−2 + · · · + Apyt−p + ϵt
(2.1)
• yt ∈Rd×1: Vector of endogenous variables at time t
• µ ∈Rd×1: Intercept (drift) vector
• Ai ∈Rd×d: Coefficient matrices for lag i
• ϵt ∈Rd×1: White noise error term
Applying the difference operator ∆and with some algebra we can get the error correction
form (VECM).
∆yt = µ + Πyt−1 +
p−1
X
i=1
Γi∆yt−i + ϵt
(2.2)
Π = −(I −A1 −A2 −· · · −Ap)
Γi = −(Ai+1 + · · · + Ap)
The matrix Π is called the error correction matrix and its rank tells us the number of
cointegrating relationships that we can form from linearly combining the d variables. If
a cointegrating relationship exists, we would like to see 0 < rank(Π) = r < d.
7

To determine the rank of Π, the Johansen cointegration test is employed.
This test
involves sequentially evaluating the null hypothesis:
H0 : rank(Π) ≤c
for
c = 0, 1, . . . , d −1
against the alternative hypothesis H1 : rank(Π) > c. The Johansen test can be carried
out with either the eigen statistic or the trace statistic. Once one verifies that the rank
is in between 0 and d, then we decompose the error correction matrix as below:
Π = αβ⊤
(2.3)
• α ∈Rd×r: Loading matrix (adjustment coefficients)
• β⊤∈Rr×d: Cointegrating matrix (long-run equilibrium relationships)
• r: Rank of Π, indicating the number of cointegrating relationships
The columns of matrix β contain the hedge ratios that produce the stationary portfolio.
Assuming the columns are arranged in descending order of eigenvalues, we take the first
column vector to form our stationary portfolio as it is generally considered “the most
stationary” portfolio (Chan, 2013).
2.3
Stochastic Residual Approach
Note that the aforementioned strategies work with price spreads. However, one may argue
that mean reversion is not only restricted to long-run price levels but also applies to the
relative performance of two securities. In other words, valid mean reversion strategies
can be formulated by studying the return spreads.
Do et al. (2006) were among the first researchers to formalize the theory of mean reversion
in return spreads. They proposed adopting a state-space model of the return spread,
where the true spread is treated as a latent state governed by a mean-reverting process
such as the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process, while the observed mispricing contains
Gaussian white noise.
An interesting aspect of the method suggested by Do et al. (2006) is their attempt to
integrate the Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT) framework to isolate the residual, which
serves as a proxy for mispricing or the disequilibrium component. We illustrate this with
a simple example. Consider the return series of stock A and stock B, modeled using a
one-factor model (market):
RA = Rf + βARM + eA
RB = Rf + βBRM + eB
8

• RA, RB: Returns of stocks A and B
• Rf: Risk-free rate
• βA, βB: Beta coefficients for stocks A and B, measuring sensitivity to the market
factor
• RM: Excess return of the market portfolio over the risk-free rate
• eA, eB: Error terms (idiosyncratic risks) associated with assets A and B, representing the part of the returns not explained by the market
One can then define the relative APT as:
RA = RB + ΓRM + e
(2.4)
where Γ = βA −βB is the vector of exposure differentials, and e is the residual noise term.
The authors further define the residual spread using the residual spread function Gt,
given by:
G(RA
t , RB
t , Ut) = RA
t −RB
t −ΓRM
t
(2.5)
Another point worth mentioning is that while the authors did not present a specific
trading strategy based on their model, they acknowledged that the execution of a mean
reversion strategy should depend on the accumulation of residual spread. That is, once a
persistent level of relative mispricing is observed over consecutive periods, one can open
a position to bet on the mean reversion of relative performance back to equilibrium. This
concept will be revisited briefly in the next section.
For details on the estimation procedure, please refer to the original paper by Do et al.
(2006).
2.4
Avellaneda and Lee (2008)
Avellaneda and Lee (2008) also employ a variant of the stochastic residual spread method.
Specifically, they develop two core approaches:
• Principal Component Analysis (PCA)-Based Strategies: Using PCA to
extract systematic risk factors from the correlation matrix of returns.
• ETF-Based Strategies: Using sector ETFs as proxies for systematic factors.
9

Both strategies aim to isolate the idiosyncratic (residual) components of stock returns,
which are assumed to follow mean-reverting processes. Trading signals are generated
when these residuals deviate significantly from their equilibrium levels, indicating potential contrarian trading opportunities.
Unlike Do et al. (2006), Avellaneda and Lee suggest using ETFs or statistical factors to
isolate the residual return. Moreover, they introduce what they call an auxiliary series,
defined as the cumulative sum of the residual returns:
Xi(t) = Xt,i =
t
X
s=1
ϵs,i
(2.6)
for asset i at time t. They proceed to model this auxiliary series using an OrnsteinUhlenbeck (OU) process. This differs from the approach of Do et al. (2006), where the
residual returns themselves are modeled as OU processes.
Trading signals are generated based on the s-score, a dimensionless variable defined by
the authors as:
st,i = Xi(t) −mi
σeq,i
(2.7)
where mi represents the long-run mean of auxiliary series for coin i, and σeq,i is the
equilibrium standard deviation of the auxiliary series. Intuitively, the s-score measures
how far the auxiliary series has deviated from its long-run mean in terms of standard
deviations. The authors use this measure to construct simple threshold-based trading
rules, as indicated below. The subscripts denote buy-to-open (bo), sell-to-close (sc), sellto-open (so), and buy-to-close (bc) signals, respectively:
sbo = −1.25,
ssc = −0.5,
sso = 1.25,
sbc = 0.5
Rationale of strategy is straightforward; if the dimensionless s-score deviates from the
long run mean mi, we either short or long the coin i and long or short the corresponding
eigenportfolios by their respective hedge ratios. We close the position once the s-score
reverts back to the long-run mean.
Performance results suggest that the strategy generated non-trivial excess returns over
the simulation period, regardless of whether ETFs or statistical factors were used.
However, the more recent performance of the strategy, particularly when applied to eigenportfolios, has not been well-documented. While some studies report strong in-sample
performance, we believe that such results do not accurately reflect the true efficacy of
the strategy. Therefore, our aim is to provide a robust evaluation of this strategy using
more rigorous methodologies.
10

2.4.1
Application in Crypto
Furthermore, this paper contributes to the literature by documenting the performance
of the strategy in the cryptocurrency markets. As a relatively nascent asset class, cryptocurrencies are characterized by high volatility and market inefficiencies, which create
abundant trading opportunities compared to the more mature public equity markets. As
we will see, both the methodology and the results are heavily influenced by the inherent
characteristics of cryptocurrencies, yielding unexpected yet interesting findings.
3
Methodology
In this section, we outline the specific methodology used to implement the mean reversion
strategy proposed by Avellaneda (2008). We also highlight key differences between our
approach and the original, which arise primarily from variations in market condition and
experimental choice.
3.1
Dynamic Trading Universe
Avellaneda’s original paper (2008) sets the trading universe to be the S&P 500, which
makes intuitive sense because the index has consistently captured a large share (at least
60%) of the U.S. equity market. However, for crypto assets, the situation is more nuanced.
The cryptocurrency market is highly concentrated around a few major coins
(notably Bitcoin and Ethereum), with Bitcoin alone capturing 40–60% of total market
capitalization. In many instances, the top ten coins collectively represent 60–80% of the
market cap at any given time.
Unlike the relatively stable composition of the S&P 500, the top coins in cryptocurrency
can change rapidly. A coin that ranked among the top ten last month may be displaced
within weeks, and new listings can quickly ascend to a top-ten position if they attract
sufficient inflows. This poses a challenge: our trading universe should be representative
of current market conditions (so that statistical factors remain relevant) but should not
be updated so frequently as to incur excessive rebalancing costs.
With this in mind, we developed a daily updating algorithm that seeks a balance between
capturing market reality and minimizing turnover. The following subsections detail the
filtering steps employed.
3.1.1
Special Coins
Certain cryptocurrencies neither reflect genuine market exposure nor exhibit typical tradable behavior. Two prime examples are:
11

• Stablecoins, whose prices are theoretically pegged to a fiat currency, so they do
not represent “true market dynamics”.
• Wrapped tokens or liquid staking derivatives, which simply mirror an underlying
coin. Including both the original and its wrapped version would double-count the
same exposure.
We therefore exclude any coin identified as stable or wrapped (or similarly pegged). This
step makes sure that we only include coins that truly reflect market consensus at any
point of time.
3.1.2
Exponential Weighted Moving Average and Market Cap
To ensure our universe reflects actively traded coins, we adopt a market-cap filter guided
by an exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA). The EWMA smooths the market
cap time series to reduce the impact of short-term fluctuations while still capturing longterm trends. Mathematically, the EWMA for the market capitalization of coin i at time
t is defined as:
EWMAt,i = λ · Mt,i + (1 −λ) · EWMAt−1,i
where:
• Mt,i is the raw market capitalization of coin i at time t,
• λ ∈(0, 1) is the smoothing parameter (decay factor), with higher values giving more
weight to recent observations,
• EWMAt−1,i is the EWMA of coin i from the previous time step.
The filtering process proceeds as follows:
1. Collect daily historical market capitalizations for each coin.
2. Apply EWMA smoothing to each coin’s raw market cap time series using a chosen
decay factor λ.
3. On each date t, sum these EWMA’d market caps across all coins, then rank the
coins in descending order of EWMA. A coin receives a “score” of 1 if it lies within,
for example, the top 80% of total EWMA market cap; otherwise, it is scored 0.
4. The dynamic universe on date t includes any coin scored 1. Thus, we capture the
top fraction of market cap without fixing a strict rank (e.g. top 50).
12

In addition, we impose the constraint to only include a coin in our trading universe if
a coin has achieved a score of 1 for x consecutive days. We apply a similar logic for
excluding a certain coin from our universe. This approach reduces turnover in the chosen
set, while still adapting to major shifts in coin valuations over time.
3.1.3
Median Trading Volume
Although market cap often correlates with liquidity, we also rely on trading volume to
ensure coins are sufficiently active. The simplest approach is to require that each coin’s
30-day median volume surpass a specified threshold. Alternatively, one might replicate
the above “EWMA and score” approach using volume data.
In both cases, the goal
is to exclude coins with negligible daily turnover that might generate liquidity risks or
excessive slippage in actual trading.
3.1.4
Negative Shock
Occasionally, coins experience catastrophic events (e.g. FTX’s collapse) or show deep,
sudden crashes that may not be reflected solely by the market cap filters. We therefore
incorporate an additional “negative shock” check by examining an EWMA of each coin’s
closing price:
1. For the 30 days preceding the current trading date, compute the EWMA of the
coin’s close.
2. Measure the percentage change in this EWMA across that 30-day window.
3. If the decline exceeds a chosen threshold (e.g. 70%), label it as having suffered a
severe shock and exclude it.
This step helps us avoid maintaining positions in assets whose fundamental viability may
have been irreparably damaged, thereby improving the reliability of the mean reversion
signals.
Note that the choice of the threshold (70%) is arbitrary. One may even choose to adopt
a relative shock filter, which would filter out coins whose relative performance within
a certain time period stands out among peers. We have chosen to adopt the absolute
performance threshold for simplicity.
On each day t, we would apply all the filters above to obtain our trading universe on day
t, denoted as TUt. The resulting daily universe adapts to market dynamics yet avoids
coins with minimal liquidity, questionable data integrity, or fundamental collapses. This
set of coins then forms the basis for PCA factor extraction and mean-reversion analysis,
which we detail in the following sections.
13

3.2
Statistical Factors via PCA
Suppose we have p assets and n time periods. Let
R ∈Rn×p
denote the matrix of returns: each of its p columns contains the n historical returns of
an asset. We write
R =

R1
R2
· · ·
Rp

,
where each Ri ∈Rn is the column-vector of returns for asset i (over n periods).
Then, denote by µi the sample mean return of asset i and by σi the sample standard
deviation. Define the standardized return matrix ˜R by
˜Ri = Ri −µi
σi
,
i = 1, . . . , p
Hence, each column of ˜R has mean 0 and standard deviation 1.
To extract statistical factors, we let
C = corr(R) = V Σ VT
be the (estimated) p × p correlation matrix of the returns.1 Here, V is the matrix whose
columns are eigenvectors of C, and Σ is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues (in descending
order). We pick only the top q ≪p eigenvectors:
˜V ∈Rp×q,
where each column of ˜V is one of the first q eigenvectors, corresponding to the largest q
eigenvalues.
Mathematically, these q new eigenvectors are known as the principal axes, and they
represent new directions in which the variance of our data is maximized.
Moreover,
each axis is orthogonal to each other, implying that the information retained along the
direction of each axis is original.
From a returns perspective, each eigenvector can be viewed as a portfolio weight vector (an “eigenportfolio”), and projecting the returns onto these directions gives us the
principal components (PC) or factor returns. However, before performing the matrix
multiplication, we follow the convention of Avellaneda (2008) to divide each element of
the eigenvector by the standard deviation of the asset’s return. That is:
1The reason we eigendecompose the correlation matrix and not the covariance matrix is that we don’t
want few volatile coins to deterimine the principal axes. Intuitively, suppose a very volatile small-cap
coin was included in our trading universe. Then, the generated principal component would indicate that
the systematic factor component captured by the returns of this volatile coin is more important than
that of other coins. Clearly, this is not what we want.
14

Q(j)
i
= v(j)
i
σi
The left hand side refers to the dollars invested in asset i of eigenportfolio j.
Since we have used the correlation matrix to extract statistical factors, our eigenportfolio weights do not take into consideration the variance of each asset; thus, dividing by
volatility ensures that our eigenportfolio is not too concentrated in a high-vol asset.
A subtle but non-trivial result of this normalization process is that true orthogonality
is not guaranteed, since we are not multiplying the normalizing constant to the column
vector but rather to the row vector of ˜V. In other words:
v(i)
σi
, v(j)
σj

=
1
σiσj

v(i), v(j)
= 0
∀i̸ = j
is not what is happening behind the scenes, but rather:
*


v(i)
1
σ1
v(i)
2
σ2...
v(i)
p
σp


,


v(j)
1
σ1
v(j)
2
σ2...
v(j)
p
σp


+̸
= 0
However, in practice, empirical correlation between these volatility-weighted eigenportfolios is close to zero, so we can safely assume that orthogonality is preserved.
To get the actual returns of the eigenportfolios, we define:
F = R Q ∈Rn×q
Row t of F (i.e. Ft,·) then gives the q-dimensional vector of factor returns on day t and
the column of F can be interpreted as the return series of a specific eigenportfolio.
In the context of factor models, this is equivalent to saying that our q statistical factors
explain a bulk of the variance of past returns, and each of the statistical factor in theory
has zero correlation to each other.
3.3
Trading the Idiosyncratic Return Component
Before discussing how to model the auxiliary series as defined by equation (2.6), we first
offer theoretical insights into why one would want to trade the “residuals” of such a factor
model.
15

First, partition the right singular vector matrix V of the standardized return matrix ˜R
into two blocks:
V =

V1
V2

with V1 ∈Rp×q representing the top q eigenvectors (q ≪p), and V2 ∈Rp×(p−q) the
remaining eigenvectors.
Define
Y = ˜R V
so that
Y =

Y1
Y2

where Y1 = ˜R V1 ∈Rn×q and Y2 = ˜R V2 ∈Rn×(p−q).
Notice that Y1 comprises
projected factor returns, but instead of using the original return matrix R and the volweighted eigenportfolio matrix Q, we substitute the standardized return matrix ˜R and
the truncated eigenvector matrix V1.
Since V is an orthogonal matrix, we can right-multiply by VT to Y and represent the
standardized return matrix as:
˜R = Y VT =

Y1
Y2
 VT
1
VT
2

= Y1 VT
1 + Y2 VT
2
Recall the original return matrix:
R = ˜R diag(σ) + µ
where µ is an n × p matrix whose rows are the mean return vectors, and diag(σ) is the
p × p diagonal matrix of return volatilities (σ1, . . . , σp).
Substituting ˜R = Y VT yields
R = µ +
 Y1 VT
1 + Y2 VT
2

diag(σ)
We interpret
Rsys = Y1 VT
1 diag(σ) = ˜Fβ
 where ˜F = Y1, β = VT
1 diag(σ)

as the systematic return component, and
ϵ = Y2 VT
2 diag(σ)
as the idiosyncratic component. Hence,
R = µ + ˜Fβ + ϵ
(3.1)
In practice, the first q principal components in Y1 typically represent the systematic
risk factors, while Y2 corresponds to smaller-variance directions in the data (residuals
or noise). Assuming that each idiosyncratic return component ϵi is well-behaved and
16

mean-reverting, one can conjecture that large deviations arising from noise should revert
to equilibrium.
This framework also illustrates why retaining too many eigenvectors is unwise: if we do
so, the idiosyncratic component’s variance becomes too small, so even if mean reversion
occurs, it may not overcome trading costs.
Because drift in the return space is often negligible, we can represent the residual return
of asset i by
ϵi = Ri −Fβi
(3.2)
where factor exposures βi are estimated by regressing the asset’s returns on the eigenportfolio returns.
Finally, actual trading signals are generated on the auxiliary series described in equation
(2.6).
3.4
Modeling with the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process
This section provides an overview of how we model each auxiliary series Xi(t) with an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process. We begin by introducing the standard continuous-time
formulation, then discuss two methods for discretely modeling and estimating parameters.
One is a naive (Euler-based) approach that approximates the SDE when ∆t is small,
and the other is an exact method derived from the closed-form OU solution, allowing
parameter recovery even if ∆t is not negligible.
We follow convention of Avellaneda
(2008) and use the latter approach.
3.4.1
Brief Exposition
We assume each auxiliary series Xi(t) follows
dXi(t) = κi
 mi −Xi(t)

dt + σi dWi(t)
(3.3)
where
Xi(t) = the mean-reverting series for asset i at time t,
κi > 0 = rate of mean reversion,
mi = long-run mean level,
σi = volatility of stochastic shocks,
Wi(t) = standard Wiener process for asset i at time t
The parameter κi controls how quickly Xi(t) pulls back toward mi. A larger κi implies
a faster return to equilibrium, while σi governs the amplitude of random fluctuations
around the mean.
In practice, we often observe Xi at discrete times t0, t1, . . . , spaced by ∆t. Let us take a
look at baisc methodologies for obtaining parameter estimates of the OU process.
17

3.4.2
Naive Approach: Euler Discretization
A simple approximation uses the Euler-Maruyama method. We write
Xh+1 −Xh = κi
 mi −Xh

∆t + σi
√
∆t ηh+1
where ηh+1 ∼N(0, 1). Hence,
Xh+1 = κi mi∆t + (1 −κi∆t)Xh + σi
√
∆t ηh+1
For ∆t small (so that κi∆t ≪1), this discrete model looks like an AR(1) process. Hence,
this provides motivation to fit a linear regression of Xh+1 on Xh directly and reverse
engineer the OU parameter estimates from the regression estimates. Note the quality of
approximation may degrade as ∆t grows (Gillespie, 1996). In practice, the next method
is preferable for precise parameter estimation.
3.4.3
Exact Approach: Closed-Form Discretization and Parameter Estimation
When ∆t is not negligible, we should use an exact update formula by solving the differential equation.
Introducing the integrating factor u(t) = Xi(t) eκit, we can solve for the exact solution:
Xi
 t0 + ∆t

= e−κi ∆t Xi(t0) +
 1 −e−κi ∆t
mi + σi
Z
t0+∆t
t0
e−κi
 (t0+∆t)−s

dWi(s)
In discrete form, for any integer h,
Xh+1 = e−κ ∆t Xh +
 1 −e−κ ∆t
m + σ
r
1 −e−2 κ ∆t
2 κ
ηh+1
with ηh+1 ∼N(0, 1). This leads naturally to an AR(1)-like regression:
Xh+1 =
 1 −e−κ ∆t
m
|
{z
}
a
+ e−κ ∆t
| {z }
b
Xh + ˜ζh+1
where Var
 ˜ζh+1

= σ2 1−e−2 κ ∆t
2 κ
. By fitting
Xh+1 = a + b Xh + ˜ζh+1
over h = 1, . . . , n −1, one obtains ˆa, ˆb, and d
Var(˜ζ). Substituting
b = e−κ ∆t,
a = m
 1 −b

,
Var
 ˜ζ

= σ2 1 −e−2 κ ∆t
2 κ
yields
ˆκ = −1
∆t ln(ˆb),
ˆm =
ˆa
1 −ˆb
,
ˆσ =
s
d
Var
 ˜ζ
  2 ˆκ

1 −e−2 ˆκ ∆t
One may also define ˆσeq =
q
d
Var(˜ζ)
1−ˆb2 as the “equilibrium” standard deviation of Xi(t). This
approach does not rely on κ ∆t ≪1 and is more accurate for moderate or large ∆t.
18

3.4.4
Mean reversion Time
A useful scalar is τi = 1/κi, denoted as the mean reversion time, which can be thought of
as a proxy for how long it takes Xi(t) to revert to its long-run mean mi. One may discard
series whose estimated τi greatly exceeds a chosen threshold, as the convergence may be
too slow to be profitable. Avellaneda advocates setting the threshold to be one-half of
the estimation period for the OU process (e.g., if sixty days of data are used to estimate
the OU parameters, then set τthreshold =
30
252).2
3.4.5
Signal Generation
After obtaining ˆκi, ˆmi, and ˆσi via the exact method, we can determine when the series
is “far” from ˆmi. Defining
ˆσeq, i =
v
u
u
td
Var
 ˜ζi

1 −ˆb2
i
and
si(t) = Xi(t) −ˆmi
ˆσeq, i
,
we can adopt threshold rules (e.g., ±2 standard deviations) for opening and closing
positions. These rules parallel the s-score approach originally proposed by Avellaneda
(2008).
3.5
Execution and Backtesting
3.5.1
Execution Nuance
The original paper by Avellaneda (2008) does not fully clarify how to implement the
backtest in practice, and most subsequent work applying Avellaneda’s framework focuses
on ETF-based strategies, which are simpler than those involving eigenportfolios.
To understand why eigenportfolios add complexity, consider how one would execute a
single trade on day t. Suppose we have:
1. Extracted new PCA factors from the correlation matrix,
2. Performed factor regressions to obtain residual returns and their corresponding
auxiliary series,
3. Estimated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) parameters,
2The denominator is the number of business days within a year. Since cryptocurrencies trade for all
365 days, the denominator in this case would be 365.
19

4. Filtered out coins whose mean reversion time τi exceeds a threshold τthreshold,
5. Formed a mean reversion list mrlt.
Next, for each coin i ∈mrlt, compute the daily s-score.
Suppose coin k triggers a
long signal (st <= sbo). Then, to remain factor neutral, we go long $1 in coin k and
short $βk,j in each eigenportfolio j = 1, . . . , q.3 By construction, this “hedged portfolio”
involves leverage of 1 + Pq
j=1 |βk,j
.
In practice, each eigenportfolio is itself a synthetic basket of all coins in TUt, including
coin k. Also, there are q different eigenportfolios, each formed from the same coin set.
Denoting
pt = #mrlt = the number of coins in the mean reversion list at time t,
we can have up to pt hedged positions. This raises questions about whether to treat each
hedged position separately (so each coin forms its own “mini-portfolio”) or whether to
aggregate weights across all coins and manage leverage at the aggregate level. For this
study, we chose to adopt the latter approach, which is operationally much simpler.
3.5.2
Drift in Dollar Weights
A second issue involves the daily rebalancing of weights to maintain hedge ratios derived
from factor regressions. Unlike a price-spread model, here the hedge ratios are in dollar
terms: if the portfolio return drifts relative to the security return, the initial weights also
drift. Maintaining factor neutrality requires frequent rebalancing to restore the desired
dollar weights, but such frequent trades can be costly.
To address this, we run several backtest variations:
• Maintaining a beta-neutral position daily via aggregated coin weights
• Rebalancing beta-neutrality weekly with aggregated coin weights
• Rebalancing daily but aggregating returns through residual series of hedged portfolio
Because actual trades require specifying the number of coin units to buy or sell, it is
crucial to have a clear method for updating the weight vector each day. Appendix A
provides further details on the rebalancing mechanism.
3We generate signals based on the closing price and assume to trade at the close as well. While this
may not reflect reality, we can take advantage of the fact that cryptocurrencies trade 24/7.
20

3.5.3
Dynamic Rebalancing of Statistical Factors
A key assumption in using statistical factors for hedging is that those factors remain
relevant throughout the trading horizon. In reality, however, financial relationships evolve
over time. Without rebalancing, our PCA-based factors could become outdated.
Hence, we implement dynamic rebalancing each month:
1. Recompute the trading universe TUt,
2. Extract q = 5 new PCA factors from the updated correlation matrix,
3. Use these updated factors for the subsequent trades.
We note that the the choice of q = 5 is arbitrary in the sense that any practitioner can
choose to adopt a different parameter value, given some appropriate justification. We
will discuss more about the standards used in Section 4.
Our empirical results (see Section 4) support the view that rebalancing improves stability,
as it helps ensure that the eigenportfolios track current market structure.
3.5.4
Walk-Forward Validation
Some replication reports focus solely on in-sample results for the PCA-based strategy, but
in our view, this can be misleading. Because PCA, by construction, explains the variance
of historical data, the in-sample auxiliary series may appear overly mean-reverting.
Instead, we split our data into:
• A sample period (2022-01-01 to 2022-07-01),
• A validation period (2022-07-01 to 2023-07-01),
• A test period (2023-07-01 to 2024-08-05).
On the validation set, we conduct a grid search (with constraints) to find the best sscore thresholds. We also test multiple backtest setups, as noted above. To simulate a
realistic trading environment, we use a walk-forward approach with a rolling window of
fixed length and a daily step. That is, each day we:
1. Re-estimate factor regression betas,
2. Recompute the auxiliary series and OU parameters,
3. Generate signals.
21

We then apply the parameter set (optimized from the validation phase) to out-of-sample
(OOS) data, ultimately reporting the performance on the test set.
It deserves to mention the reason for choosing the start of backtesting period to be 2022.
There are mainly two reasons. First, most replication studies of the paper written by
Avellaneda (2008) use data pre-2022. Hence, we decided to contribute to the literature
by testing on the most recent data. Second, with the benefit of hindsight, 2018 - 2021
can be considered as one large cycle and 2022 - present as another cycle.4 Thus, focusing
on data from 2022 onward allows us to investigate the performance of the strategy during
the more recent and distinct cycle, providing insights that complement earlier studies
based on the 2018–2021 market regime.
3.5.5
Parameter Choice
For this study, we use the following hyperparameters, primarily guided by both intuition
and preliminary empirical analysis:
• PCA Estimation: 180 days
• Factor Regression: 60 days
• OU Estimation: 60 days
• q : number of top eigenvectors retained = 5
• sthresholds : [-2.5 , -0.5, 2.5, 0.5] (from optimization)
• τthreshold :
60
365 (from optimization)
4
Results
In this section, we present the results of our experiment. In the first half, we show the
EDA results using constituents from TU20220701. In the second half, we present the results
from strategy backtesting.
4.1
EDA
4.1.1
Performance of Coins Over the Trading Period
Figure 1a shows how a hypothetical dollar invested in one of the coins from TU20220701
would have changed throughout the entire data collection period. As observed, the year
4This study was initiated in started in 2024-08-05, which was the end of the data collection period.
22

(a) Performance of all coins
(b) Performance of insignificant coins
Figure 1: Performance Over the Entire Period
2022 was unfavorable for most of the coins in our universe, with only a few coins managing
to reclaim their initial value by the end of the period (2024-08-05). Moreover, Figure
1b highlights coins whose final performance was below -80% by the end of the period,
supporting our hypothesis that the trading universe should be resampled periodically to
ensure the continued relevancy of our statistical factors.
4.1.2
PCA Results
An important question we must ask ourselves is: how many eigenportfolios should we
choose? In other words, what is the optimal number of eigenvectors to retain? Should
this number be static or dynamic? The answer to this question is nuanced, with many
studies attempting to address it using various methodologies. However, an intuitive way
to approach this is to include enough eigenvectors to capture all systematic factors while
avoiding the inclusion of “noise” eigenportfolios. As we observed in Section 3, including
too many eigenvectors can reduce the variance of the idiosyncratic (or residual) return,
making it less profitable for mean reversion strategies. Fortunately, the characteristics
of the cryptocurrency market allow us to select only a few eigenportfolios while still
capturing most of the variance within our trading universe.
The scree plot (Figure 2a) displays the eigenvalues in descending order, where the largest
eigenvalue corresponds to the first eigenvector, or Principal Component 1 (PC 1). Figure
2b illustrates the contribution of the top i eigenvectors to the total variance of the data,
∀i = 1, 2, . . . , p. Notably, over 60% of the total variance can be explained by the first
principal component. This contrasts with the equities market, where the first principal
component typically explains less than 40% of the variance.5 This again highlights the
5One may argue that this is a natural consequence of our investment universe consisting of fewer than
30 coins, compared to over 100 stocks in the public equity market. However, this is simply a consequence
of the highly concentrated nature of the cryptocurrency market.
23

(a) Scree Plot
(b) Cumulative Variance Explained by PCs
(c) Total Variance Explained by 5 PCs
Figure 2: PCA Results
higher concentration in the cryptocurrency market compared to the public equity market.
Figure 2c shows the total variance explained by the top five principal components over
the entire data collection period. Figure 2b corresponds to the first data point in Figure
2c.
The decline in explained variance coincides with the bear market period in the
cryptocurrency market, while the subsequent increase aligns with the Bitcoin-led bull
market that began in October of 2023. This pattern suggests that systematic factors
play a more dominant role during periods of high volatility (typically driven by a few
major coins) and become less significant during sideways market movements.
Based on this analysis, we can conclude that selecting five eigenportfolios effectively
represents a large portion of the variance in our data. Moreover, Figure 2c is generated
using TU20220701; since our strategy involves periodically updating the trading universe,
we can expect the explained variance to remain higher than that seen in Figure 2c over
time.
24

(a) Vol-weighted vs Naive-weighted Eigenportfolios
(b) Eigenportfolios, Bitcoin, and Ethereum
Figure 3: Eigenportfolio Performance
4.1.3
Performance of Eigenportfolios
Avellaneda (2008) employs a vol-weighting scheme to compute the eigenportfolio weights.
As shown in Figure 3a, both the vol-weighted and naive-weighted eigenportfolios (i.e., using the raw eigenvector as weights) exhibit similar performance, though the vol-weighted
eigenportfolio is relatively less volatile overall. Figure 3b compares the performance of
eigenportfolios with Bitcoin and Ethereum, with the initial value normalized to one. As
discussed in the original paper, the principal eigenportfolio (PC 1) behaves similarly to
a “market” portfolio. Interestingly, PC 1 “tracks” Ethereum more closely than Bitcoin,
suggesting that coins in our trading universe generally have a higher correlation with
Ethereum than Bitcoin.
An important observation is that our principal eigenportfolio, estimated using data from
six months prior to 2022-07-01, begins to diverge from Ethereum and Bitcoin starting in
late 2022. This indicates the need for periodic updates to the trading universe. However,
the principal eigenportfolio tracks Ethereum and Bitcoin well for almost four months
during the out-of-sample period, suggesting that an update frequency of less than three
months may be sufficient.
4.1.4
Stability of Hedge Ratios
One of the main properties of a robust factor is that its influence on securities remains
fairly consistent over a sufficiently long period of time. In other words, if we conduct a
rolling regression of the coin return on the factor return, the resulting regression beta
(hedge ratio) should not vary significantly over time. In particular, a change in sign
indicates an opposite direction of effect, so constant fluctuations in sign suggest that the
factor in question is unstable.
Figures 4a, 4b, and 4c display the rolling beta coefficients from regressing the coin returns
on the eigenportfolio returns. Except for the beta coefficient corresponding to the prin25

(a) Hedge Ratios for BTC
(b) Hedge Ratios for ETH
(c) Hedge Ratios for NEAR
(d) R2 Over Entire Period
Figure 4: Factor Regression Results
cipal eigenportfolio, the remaining betas exhibit non-trivial volatility, indicating that the
assumption of static statistical factors is overly simplistic. The implication of Figure 4d is
similar to that of Figure 2c; the explanatory power of statistical factors varies depending
on the market regime. Hence, instead of assuming that the statistical factors are static,
we ”calibrate” the statistical factors to the most recent data by conducting PCA every
few months and extracting new statistical factors.
4.1.5
Residual & Auxiliary Series
Even after subtracting the systematic component of return, which accounts for almost
80% of the variance, most of the auxiliary series do not appear to exhibit mean-reverting
behavior (Figure 5b). Another noteworthy observation is that the auxiliary series, which
is simply the cumulative sum of the residual series, does not converge to zero at the
end of the in-sample period.
Recall that the construction of the regression equation
enforces the sum of residuals to be zero; however, the residual series displayed in Figure
5a is computed without subtracting the drift (intercept) component.6 Therefore, we can
6Note that when we construct the hedged portfolio, we can only trade the coin and eigenportfolios.
Hence, drift is an uncontrollable component, so we do not account for it when computing the residuals.
The drift should be considered when generating the signal.
26

(a) Residual Series Over Entire Period
(b) Auxiliary Series Over Entire Period
Figure 5: Constructing the Idiosyncratic Component
conjecture that drift in returns may be non-trivial, unlike what is typically observed in
the equity space. In conclusion, the analyses presented in Sections 4.1.5 and 4.1.4 suggest
that the statistical arbitrage strategy proposed in Avellaneda’s paper (2008) may not be
effective in the crypto space.
4.2
Backtesting Results
For the analysis in this section, assume an initial equity amount of 10,000. For out-ofsample performance, a specific level of leverage is utilized such that the realized volatility
of the pairs trading strategy matches that of buy-and-hold Bitcoin. Trading cost and the
risk-free rate is assumed to be zero unless specified otherwise. τthreshold =
30
365 is used to
test the in-sample performance.
As mentioned in Section 3.5.3, we test several variations of the strategy proposed in
Avellaneda (2008). The different “versions” of the strategy are detailed below:
• Version 1 is essentially the in-sample backtest, where statistical factors based
on TU20220701 are used to construct auxiliary series and generate trading signals.
Regression betas, OU parameter estimates, and s-scores were computed daily, as in
Avellaneda’s paper (2008).
• Version 2 mirrors the strategy discussed in the original paper. However, unlike the
paper, statistical factors are extracted on a monthly basis to maintain relevancy.
Betas are re-estimated daily so that each trading day uses a fresh 60-day rolling
window of regressions to generate residuals, OU parameters, and signals. Positions
are closed at each monthly rebalance date.
• Version 3 performs monthly PCA recalculation as in Version 2, but betas are reestimated weekly. That is, the same hedge ratio is used for a week to compute
OU parameter estimates and s-scores. The objective of this version is to reduce
turnover resulting from restoring the dollar hedge ratios on a daily basis. Instead,
27

the hedged portfolio is allowed to “drift” for a week to see if performance can be
maintained while reducing trading costs.
• Version 4 adopts the same schedule as Version 2 for PCA and betas but adds an
“inclusion-exclusion” counter: a coin must appear in the mean reversion list for a
few consecutive days before opening a position, and positions are not immediately
closed if that coin briefly disappears from the mean reversion list. Instead, there is
a multi-day grace period before the position is forcibly exited. Again, the aim of
this version is to reduce trading costs from frequent rebalancing.
• Version 5 similarly recalculates PCA each month and re-estimates betas daily,
but it computes daily P&L directly from the residual returns rather than based on
aggregated coin weights.
To understand how subtle changes in execution and rebalancing can affect trading outcomes, we implemented four backtest versions (for out-of-sample data) that share a common framework of PCA-based factor extraction, factor-regression hedge ratios, and OU
mean reversion checks, yet differ in how frequently these steps are updated and how positions are managed. Contrary to our belief that reducing trading costs would be beneficial,
the results indicated that Version 2 was the most stable variation. That is, the original
strategy advocated by Avellaneda, with the added component of monthly rebalancing,
outperformed the more “complicated” versions designed to reduce trading costs.
Hence, we present out-of-sample (OOS) results using Version 2 only.
4.2.1
In-Sample
Our in-sample period corresponds to the estimation period of the residuals (a 60-day
period ending on 2022-07-01).
Figure 6: In-Sample Equity Curve of Strategy
28

When tested on the sample dataset, the strategy performs well, achieving a realized
Sharpe ratio of approximately 18.
However, this is an extremely biased result for a
variety of reasons, with two main contributing factors:
1. We used statistical factors extracted from TU20220701, but in practice, we cannot
use a trading universe based on a future date. This introduces a typical example of
look-forward bias.
2. Note that we have used statistical factors extracted from the future date; by definition, PCA selects new axes that maximize the variance of past data. Hence, it is
natural for the sample dataset, when subtracting the systematic return component,
to exhibit mean-reverting behavior. However, this does not imply that the statistical factors will effectively summarize the future systematic return component. This
represents a critical error due to look-forward bias.
Therefore, the above results should be disregarded as they do not provide meaningful
insights into how the strategy would perform in live trading. Instead, they simply indicate
that the strategy in theory would perform well if the statistical factors extracted from
past data indeed explain a significant portion of the future return data.
The next section provides a more “realistic” description of the strategy’s performance.
4.3
Walk-Forward Validation & Optimization
Figure 7: Distribution of Performance Metrics
Figure 7 shows the distribution of simulated performance metrics when we iterated over
a constrained set of s-score thresholds. Overall, the strategy’s out-of-sample performance
is quite poor compared to the in-sample performance; the histogram peaks around -1 for
the Sharpe ratio. Therefore, even if we adopt the most optimal parameter set retrieved
from our validation dataset, we remain skeptical about whether that set of thresholds is
truly robust.
29

In fact, when we evaluated the performance of the strategy using the optimal parameter
set, we found that there were a lot less trades generated during the second half of the
validation period (Figure 8). This is another indicator that the strategy is not robust.
Figure 8: Optimal Strategy Performance Over Validation Period
4.4
Testing Period
From optimizing on the validation dataset, the following parameter set is used.
• sthresholds : [-2.5 , -0.5 , 2.5 , 0.5]
• τthreshold :
60
365
(a) Vol-Targeting
(b) Vol-Targeting & 10bps Taker Fee
Figure 9: Test Set Performance
From observing trading performance in Figure 9, it is difficult to verify the statistical
significance of the above results, since there are not enough trades generated, with the
total number of independent signals being 14 over the entire test period.
30

Metric
Vol-Targeting
Vol-Targeting & 10bps Taker Fee
Cumulative Return
51.77%
31.87%
CAGR
29.93%
18.97%
Annualized Volatility
35.43%
35.33%
Sharpe Ratio
0.84
0.54
MDD
-36.37%
-38.17%
MDD Period
107 days
107 days
Table 1: Performance Metrics for Test Set
5
Discussion
5.1
Insufficient Number of Trades
The statistical arbitrage strategy explored relies on trading mean-reverting hedged portfolios, which are found via a filtering based on the τthreshold. However, setting a too small
τthreshold filters out most of the coins in the trading universe; this leaves with only a
few coins per day as possible mean-reverting candidates. Hence, while a small trading
universe allows estimating the population covariance matrix without suffering from the
typical issues regarding curse of dimensionality (Ledoit, 2003), there comes with the cost
of not enough signals being generated.
5.2
Persistence of Mean Reversion and Non-Mean Reversion
Figure 10: Coin Presence in mrlt Over Entire Period
An interesting observation from the daily mean reversion lists mrlt is that membership
tends to be sticky: once a coin consistently exhibits mean-reverting behavior, it often
remains classified as such for multiple successive days, and coins not deemed meanreverting tend to stay out of the list. Figure 10 (the heatmap of coin presence in mrlt)
31

visually highlights how individual names repeatedly reappear or remain absent, suggesting
that the process of “losing” or “gaining” mean reversion status is governed by more than
short-term noise. In practice, this means a coin that is excluded from mrlt today is likely
to be excluded for some stretch of time, and similarly, one that is included may continue
to appear for several days.
Such stickiness has direct implications for trading, especially for deciding how quickly to
close positions if a coin ceases to be mean-reverting. Although a conservative approach
might be to exit immediately whenever a coin disappears from mrlt, this can induce
excessive churn and transaction costs if a coin’s classification fluctuates briefly but remains
generally mean-reverting.
Conversely, waiting too long risks holding a position that
truly lost its stationarity.
Hence, a more nuanced approach—where we allow up to
ν consecutive days of exclusion before closing—can mitigate excessive turnover while
cutting losses on genuinely non-mean-reverting names. Determining the right threshold ν
largely depends on how strongly one values avoiding “false positives” (maintaining trades
in coins that no longer revert) versus “false negatives” (forgoing profitable trades in coins
that still revert). As the heatmap suggest, modeling these regime shifts with a carefully
chosen grace period may better align real execution with the observed persistence of mean
reversion status.
5.3
Mean Reversion Parameter: A Proxy for Stop Loss
As seen in Section 4.2, different variations of the strategy were explored, mostly aimed
to reduce trading costs from attempting to restore hedge ratios on a daily basis and
switching in and out of positions based on inclusion/exclusion from mrlt. However, all
of these variations failed to improve performance mainly due to their inability to get out
of losing trades before suffering a large drawdown. This was a critical performance drag;
however, using τthreshold as a daily filter enabled us to get out of positions that experienced
sudden spikes in price. In other words, if re-estimation of the series to fit the Ornstein
Uhlenbeck process results in mean reversion parameter κi to become small enough, this
acts as a stop loss, which in some cases act as a more reliable and logical stop loss than
using for instance, a typical hard stop loss.
5.4
Limitations and Improvements
5.4.1
Data
The daily price series of cryptocurrencies and related market data were scraped from the
CoinMarketCap API. Although the daily OHLCV data was mostly error-free, it does differ from data obtained directly from an exchange. Moreover, the test set consisted of data
spanning just over a year. During this period, the cryptocurrency market experienced
significant rallies, and mean reversion strategies generally underperform in such bullish
environments. Testing the strategy on datasets that encompass a wider range of market
32

regimes could yield more robust performance results.
Furthermore, for a more comprehensive study, one could test the strategy on intraday
datasets and expand the trading universe to include a larger set of cryptocurrencies. This
would help determine whether including smaller market cap coins improves the strategy’s
performance.
5.4.2
Too Many Hyperparameters
Admittedly, this strategy relies on many hyperparameters. For example:
• Selection of Trading Universe: EWMA parameter λ, negative shock threshold,
median volume threshold, and market cap threshold.
• Estimation Periods: PCA estimation period (180 days), factor regression estimation period (60 days), OU process estimation period (60 days).
• Eigenvectors to Retain: While we have used the top five principal components
for our eigenportfolios, this heuristic approach is not optimal in the strict sense.
• Trading Thresholds: τthreshold, sbo, ssc, sso, and sbc.
As more hyperparameters are introduced, the risk of overfitting the strategy to historical
data increases, reducing the strategy’s robustness and adding complexity that hampers
controllability.
5.4.3
Trading the Residual Using Other Approaches
The s-scores are used as “signal lines” for the trading strategy. However, were the signals
generated by these s-scores accurate in identifying entry points that led to mean reversion,
and were the exit signals appropriately timed?
Figure 11 presents a set of selected graphs displaying how the signals performed during
the out-of-sample period. For instance, Figure 11a illustrates a case where the signals
correctly captured moments of overvaluation and undervaluation, with trades executed
effectively. Note that the blue series represents “signal lines”, and the black series represents the performance of trades following execution.
Figure 11b demonstrates an example where trading based on the signal resulted in a
loss. Despite entering a short position in Shiba-Inu based on the s-score series, this trade
would have incurred an approximate 20% loss on the capital allocated to this coin.
Figure 11c showcases a case where no signal was generated.
However, reviewing the
auxiliary series with the benefit of hindsight, it appears that mean reversion strategies
33

(a) Dogecoin
(b) Shiba-Inu
(c) Solana
Figure 11: S-scores (on top) and Auxiliary Series (on bottom) with Signals
could have been effectively applied. This suggests that the methodology of generating
signals based solely on s-scores may not be optimal.
For instance, alternative approaches, such as using Bollinger Bands or z-scores, could
yield more frequent executions and potentially improve performance.
5.4.4
Idiosyncratic Component Does Not Mean-Revert
A more fundamental limitation of this strategy is the possibility that the idiosyncratic
component of cryptocurrency returns does not exhibit mean reversion. This could be
due to either: 1) The statistical factors estimated by PCA fail to eliminate all systematic
return components, or 2) Cryptocurrencies, as an asset class, have higher idiosyncratic
risk compared to publicly traded equities.
A potential solution to issue (1) is to incorporate fundamental factors that may better
capture the systematic return components of cryptocurrencies. However, unlike equities,
there is not a lot of evidence on robust factors for cryptocurrencies.
For issue (2), it is plausible that many cryptocurrencies experience sharp inflows and
outflows due to coin-specific factors, leading to events commonly referred to as “pumpand-dumps”. This phenomenon is particularly prevalent among small-cap coins.
5.5
Bonus Strategy: Integrating Cointegration with PCA
While the original approach proposed by Avellaneda (2008) did not yield outstanding
results, we believe that PCA can still be effectively utilized to develop profitable pairs
trading strategies. This section presents a brief discussion on how one can use the first
principal component, or the principal eigenportfolio, to construct a simple pairs trading
strategy based on cointegration.
Unlike equities, there is no widely accepted “market index” for cryptocurrencies. Bitcoin
34

and Ethereum often serve as market proxies, but their status as reliable benchmarks is
questionable. At times, these assets experience idiosyncratic inflows and outflows. For
instance, the late-2024 crypto bull market was primarily driven by Bitcoin, while most
altcoins failed to deliver strong performance.
There is substantial evidence in the literature suggesting that the principal eigenportfolio
can serve as a proxy for the market factor. This is reflected in Figure 12a, which shows the
normalized price movements of the principal eigenportfolio and major cryptocurrencies
over time. Given that the principal eigenportfolio can be actively traded using its volweighted eigenvector components, we explore whether it can be used to construct a pairs
trading strategy via cointegration analysis.
(a) Principal Eigenportfolio and mainstream
coins over a year
(b) Scatterplot of cumulative returns
Figure 12: Exploratory Data Analysis for Bonus Strategy
5.5.1
Methodology
1. Finding the Market Factor: Define an estimation period and an out-of-sample
period. PCA is conducted using 365 days of historical data to estimate the “market
factor.” The trading universe at the end of the formation period TU20230101 is used.
2. Cointegration Analysis: Conduct Engle-Granger cointegration regressions (in both
directions) between the constituents of TU20230101 and the first eigenportfolio.
3. Selection Criteria: Only select coins for trading if the p-value from ADF test for
cointegrating residuals is below 0.1 for both directions.
4. Trading Simulation: Allocate $1 of initial equity to each cointegrated pair in an
equally-weighted manner, and trade until the next rebalance date (2 months). The rolling
z-score strategy is applied for trading the spread.
5.
Rebalancing: At the next rebalance date, extract a new trading universe TUt,
perform PCA on the latest data, and conduct cointegration analysis. Select coins that
meet the cointegration criteria.
35

6. Equity Allocation: Set the new initial equity to the final equity value from previous
trading period and evenly distribute it among the new set of cointegrated pairs. Continue
trading for 2 months using betas from the regression analysis.
7. Repeat Until End of Data: The above process is repeated until the end of the
dataset.
5.5.2
Results
Table 2 summarizes the results of the cointegration analysis conducted using the trading
universe TU20230701. The selected coins for trading are Polkadot, Shiba-Inu, Solana, and
BNB. The regression beta obtained from the cointegration test serves as the hedge ratio.
A key assumption of this strategy is that fractional trading of coins is possible. While this
is often unrealistic in equity markets, it is feasible in the cryptocurrency market, where
fractional units can be traded. In practice, traders should ensure they have sufficient
equity to meet minimum order size requirements.
To trade the spread, a rolling z-score strategy is applied. A 20-day moving average is
used to de-trend the spread, and entry/exit points are defined using upper and lower
bands of ±2 standard deviations. These parameters can be optimized, as discussed in
Section 3.5.5.
Coin
ADF Stat 1
P-Value 1
ADF Stat 2
P-Value 2
Best ADF Stat
Best P-Value
Direction
Polkadot-New
-3.9540
0.0313
-4.8290
0.0017
-4.8290
0.0017
Coin →PC1
Shiba-Inu
-4.2059
0.0148
-4.3786
0.0085
-4.3786
0.0085
Coin →PC1
Solana
-3.7425
0.0553
-4.2410
0.0132
-4.2410
0.0132
Coin →PC1
BNB
-3.6530
0.0692
-3.9452
0.0321
-3.9452
0.0321
Coin →PC1
Table 2: Engle-Granger Test Results
(a) BNB
(b) Shiba-Inu
Figure 13: Examples of In-Sample Performance of Bonus Strategy
Figure 13 shows two example equity curves from testing the strategy using sample data.
As one can see, the in-sample performance all ended in a positive return during a period
when most cryptocurrencies decreased in price. While the in-sample performance does
36

not indicate future performance in any way, it can serve as a rough measure of how the
out-of-sample performance equity curve should look if the strategy works well.
As discussed in Section 3.5.4, it is important to select a new trading universe periodically
and compute new principal eigenportfolio to maintain relevancy and avoid trading “insignificant” coins. To motivate the adoption of rebalancing, we first present a set of OOS
performance results of the bonus strategy without using rebalancing. That is, the principal eigenportfolio estimated based on TU20230101 will be used for the entire out-of-sample
period (2023-01-01 ∼2024-08-05).
(a) BNB
(b) Shiba-Inu
(c) Solana
Figure 14: Out-of-Sample Performance of Bonus Strategy without Rebalancing
Figure 14 highlights the importance of rebalancing. As one can see, the strategy’s performance holds up for the first 2∼3 months but then starts to deteriorate rapidly as we
move further into the future. Hence, this motivates the usage of a rebalancing period of
2∼3 months. In our case, we have chosen to use 2 months as the rebalancing frequency.
Figure 15: Out-of-Sample Performance of Bonus Strategy with Rebalancing
The rebalanced strategy in Figure 15 shows a significant improvement compared to a nonrebalanced approach. While the overall performance is not exceptional, it is important to
note that this result was obtained from the first out-of-sample test without any parameter
optimization.
37

Metric
Bonus Strategy with Rebalancing
Cumulative Return
0.1091
CAGR
0.0459
Annualized Volatility
0.0898
Sharpe Ratio
0.5115
Maximum Drawdown (MDD)
-0.1099
MDD Period
11 days
Table 3: Performance Metrics for Bonus Strategy with Rebalancing
Additionally, the performance drop near the end of the period was due to trading only
a single cointegrated pair (Solana) from 2024-06-25 to 2024-08-05.
For other trading
periods, the strategy traded at least two pairs and at most seven pairs. Thus, to avoid
excessive concentration risk, one potential improvement would be to under-allocate capital when fewer pairs are available for trading.
In conclusion, PCA can be leveraged to construct meaningful pairs trading strategies,
and the principal eigenportfolio can serve as a reliable synthetic factor portfolio when
assets are grouped into meaningful groups.
6
Conclusion
In this study, we applied the PCA-based statistical arbitrage strategy of Avellaneda
(2008) to the cryptocurrency market, incorporating practical extensions such as adopting a dynamic trading universe and rebalancing periodically to extract new statistical
factors. Our initial expectation was that a factor-neutral approach would isolate sufficient idiosyncratic mean reversion to yield profitable trades. In reality, the results were
notably weaker than anticipated, highlighting that the idiosyncratic components in cryptocurrency returns may not consistently revert to a long-run mean.
Nonetheless, the findings offer several important insights that can inform practitioners
and researchers. First, we demonstrated how PCA can serve as a tool for extracting
underlying “market-like” factors in a domain where no canonical benchmark index exists.
While this is a widely known fact, there is no research that directly integrates the principal
eigenportfolio and cointegration approach to construct a pairs trading strategy. Second,
we showed that repeated rebalancing—updating both the trading universe and principal
factors—can help the model remain relevant in a rapidly changing environment.
Yet the study underscores key limitations. The need to specify numerous hyperparameters (e.g. thresholding for negative shocks, daily or monthly rebalancing windows, etc.)
introduces complexity and potential overfitting. Our reliance on daily data and a relatively short out-of-sample horizon also raises concerns about statistical power, given that
only a small number of trades were generated. Moreover, it remains an open question
whether the assumed mean-reversion property of auxiliary series is valid in cryptocurrency
38

markets, or whether alternative factor models—potentially integrating more fundamental
or on-chain data—might do a better job of capturing systematic behavior.
While this study is neither exhaustive nor groundbreaking, we hope it serves as a source
of curiosity, providing practitioners, academics, and students with both entertainment
and a glimpse of insight into this complex and evolving landscape.
39

Appendix
Appendix A: Rebalancing and Weighting Mechanism
This appendix provides a detailed description of the daily rebalancing logic and weightupdating scheme used in our PCA-based statistical arbitrage strategy.
A.1
Setup and Notation
Price and Return Matrices.
Let
P ∈R(n+1)×p
and
R ∈Rn×p
respectively, denote the daily close-price matrix and the simple-return matrix of p coins
observed over n + 1 days.
To be explicit, note that p = pts = #mrlts where ts ∈
{rebalance dates}.
In matrix form:
P =


P0,1
. . .
P0,p
P1,1
. . .
P1,p
...
...
...
Pn,1
. . .
Pn,p

,
R =


R1,1
. . .
R1,p
...
...
...
Rn,1
. . .
Rn,p

,
where
Rt,i = Pt,i −Pt−1,i
Pt−1,i
for
t = 1, . . . , n,
i = 1, . . . , p.
We index time t = 0 as the initial date, so t = n is the final date.
Factor Decomposition & Hedge Ratios.
Each coin i ∈{1, . . . , p} has a factorexposure vector βi =
 βi,1, . . . , βi,5
⊤relative to the top 5 PCA factors (eigenportfolios).
In a fully factor-neutral position, if we go $1 long (or short) in coin i, we must go βi,j
dollars short (or long) in factor j, for j = 1, . . . , 5. The eigenportfolios themselves are
linear combinations of the p coins, so the net result is a position in each of the p coins
(some possibly long, some short).
A.2
Constructing the (Daily) Weight Vector
Signal Generation.
On each trading day t, for coins in mrlt, we decide whether a
signal is generated for some coin k. The signal is discrete; +1 signifies undervaluation,
−1 overvaluation, and 0 neutral. Denoting this integer by signalk,t ∈{−1, 0, +1}, we
collect all coin signals into a vector sigt = [signal1,t, . . . , signalp,t]T.
40

Combining Coin + Factor Positions.
If signalk,t = +1, we take $1 long in coin k
plus $(−βk,j) in factor j. However, recall a factor itself is a basket of coins. Denote by
Qt =


w(1)
1,t
w(2)
1,t
. . .
w(5)
1,t
...
...
...
...
w(1)
p,t
w(2)
p,t
. . .
w(5)
p,t


the volatility-weighted matrix for the 5 eigenportfolios at day t. Each column corresponds
to an eigenportfolio; each row (i, ·) gives the fraction of dollar exposure on coin i. Then
shorting βk,j dollars of factor j translates to
−βk,j × column j = −βk,j


w(j)
1,t
...
w(j)
p,t


Summing over j = 1, . . . , 5 yields a position of:
5
X
j=1
−βk,j


w(j)
1,t
...
w(j)
p,t

= −Qt βk
which is a length-p vector specifying how many dollars are shorted (negative entry) or
longed (positive entry) in each coin i. Adding the $ + 1 long in coin k modifies the kth
entry by +1. This logic is reversed if signalk,t = −1 (short coin k, long factor). Since
we iterate this process for all coins i ∈{1, 2, . . . , p}, we will have at most p non-zero
vectors denoting the dollar position in each coin. Summing over all traded coins forms
the aggregate net-exposure vector
vt ∈Rp
with entries vt(i) denoting net dollar exposure to coin i.
Normalizing and Risk-Free Asset.
We scale vt so that its sum of absolute values
equals a chosen leverage L. Specifically,
v′
t =
vt
Pp
i=1
vt(i)
 × L
If Pp
i=1 |vt(i)| = 0 (i.e. no signals), we default to v′
t = 0. Next, we introduce a risk-free
(cash) component wrf,t = 1 −Pp
i=1 v′
t(i), ensuring that the net portfolio weights sum to
1 (if we prefer a fully invested approach). The final weight vector becomes
wt =


wrf,t
v′
t(1)
...
v′
t(p)

∈R(1+p)
41

A.3
Daily Portfolio Valuation, Transaction Cost, & Rebalancing
Portfolio Return.
Let wt−1 be the final weight vector chosen at day t −1. Over the
interval (t −1, t], each coin i realizes a return Rt,i. The total P&L for day t is
PnLt =

p
X
i=1
wt−1(i) Rt,i

× Et−1
where Et−1 is the equity at the close of day t−1, and wt−1(0) is the (risk-free) remainder
with zero return (assuming no interest). Then the equity at day t prior to transaction
costs is
E(pre)
t
= Et−1 + PnLt
Transaction Cost.
After computing PnLt, we impose a cost based on turnover whenever we shift from wt−1 to wt. Specifically, if the sum of absolute differences
turnovert =
p
X
i=1
 wt(i) −wt−1(i)

is nonzero, then we subtract
Costt = turnovert × E(pre)
t
× (bps/10,000)
where bps refers to taker fee in basis points. In this simplified model, market impact and
bid-ask spread is not considered. The net equity becomes
Et = E(pre)
t
−Costt.
Forced Closure on Rebalancing Days.
On specified rebalancing dates (e.g. monthly),
we forcibly set the old position to zero weight, realize the P&L, and pay transaction costs
on the full absolute exposure from wt−1. We then open new positions wt if the strategy
signals require it, incurring another cost. This ensures a “clean slate” each rebalance day
and is especially important if the set of tradable coins changes (due to dynamic filtering).
In summary, this rebalancing approach aims to preserve the “factor-neutral” property
of the strategy, even as individual coin returns drift.
Whenever new signals emerge
or rebalancing occurs, we recompute the final weight vector, aggregate all coin/factor
exposures, and debit the transaction cost from the daily equity.
42

References
[1] Avellaneda, Marco, and Jeong-Hyun Lee. Statistical Arbitrage in the U.S. Equities
Market. June 2008.
[2] Chan, Ernest P. Algorithmic Trading: Winning Strategies and Their Rationale.
Hoboken, N.J., John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2013.
[3] Do, Binh Huu, et al. “A New Approach to Modeling and Estimation for Pairs Trading.” Research Gate, Jan. 2006. www.researchgate.net/publication/267721035_
A_New_Approach_to_Modeling_and_Estimation_for_Pairs_Trading
[4] Gatev,
Evan,
et
al.
“Pairs
Trading:
Performance
of
a
Relative-Value
Arbitrage
Rule.”
Review
of
Financial
Studies,
vol.
19,
no.
3,
2006,
pp. 797–827. www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/~steele/Courses/434/434Context/
PairsTrading/PairsTradingGGR.pdf, https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhj020.
[5] Gillespie, Daniel T. “Exact Numerical Simulation of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process
and Its Integral.” Physical Review E, vol. 54, no. 2, 1 Aug. 1996, pp. 2084–2091.
pdfs.semanticscholar.org/57a2/3a111b40528af0cb1ba86f90d75e8d11a21d.
pdf, https://doi.org/10.1103/physreve.54.2084.
[6] Ledoit, Olivier, and Michael Wolf. “Honey, I Shrunk the Sample Covariance Matrix.”
The Journal of Portfolio Management, vol. 30, no. 4, 31 July 2004, pp. 110–119.
https://doi.org/10.3905/jpm.2004.110.
[7] Markwick, Dean. “Stat Arb - an Easy Walkthrough.” Dean Markwick, 15 July 2023.
dm13450.github.io/2023/07/15/Stat-Arb-Walkthrough.html.
[8] Shah, Agam, et al. “Principal Component Analysis Based Construction and Evaluation of Cryptocurrency Index.” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 163, Jan. 2021,
p. 113796. www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417420306151,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.113796.
[9] Shlens, Jonathon. A Tutorial on Principal Component Analysis. Apr. 2014. arxiv.
org/abs/1404.1100, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1404.1100.
[10] Soo, Carolyn, et al. MS&E448 Project Statistical Arbitrage. 11 June 2017. stanford.
edu/class/msande448/2017/Final/Reports/gr5.pdf.
[11] Vidyamurthy, Ganapathy. Pairs Trading. John Wiley & Sons, 2 Feb. 2011.
Disclaimer
This report is for informational and academic purposes only. It is not investment advice and does not constitute any offer or solicitation to offer or recommendation of any
43

investment product. Nothing contained in this report constitutes a solicitation, recommendation, endorsement, or offer by the author or any third-party service provider to buy
or sell any securities or other financial instruments in this or in any other jurisdiction
in which such solicitation or offer would be unlawful under the securities laws of such
jurisdiction. All content in this report is information of a general nature and does not
address the circumstances of any particular individual or entity. Nothing in the report
constitutes professional and/or financial advice, nor does any information in this report
constitute a comprehensive or complete statement of the matters discussed or the law
relating thereto. The author is not a fiduciary by virtue of any person’s use of or access
to this report. You alone assume the sole responsibility of evaluating the merits and risks
associated with the use of any information in this report before making any decisions
based on this report. In exchange for accessing this report, you agree not to hold the
author, its affiliates, or any third-party service provider liable for any possible claim for
damages arising from any decision you make based on information made available to you
through this report.
44
