Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2228945
Taming HFT in the multi-dealer FX market 
Anatoly B. Schmidt1) 
Financial Engineering Program, Stevens Institute of Technology  
 
 
It is argued that liquidity risk caused by high-frequency trading in the institutional FX market is a 
more important factor than volatility risk. For mitigating the former, it is suggested that multidealer FX platforms introduce the market maker status (MMS).  Those traders that have MMS 
would be required to maintain orders on both sides of the market with the bid/offer spread that 
does not exceed say 50% of the historical average. Those traders that do not have MMS would 
be prohibited from having orders on both sides of the market simultaneously. Also, the traders 
without MMS that have had transaction on one side of the market would be permitted to submit 
an order on the opposite side of the market only after a noticeable delay. These constraints are 
intended to increase adverse selection risk for traders that employ market making strategies but 
do not have MMS. 
 
 
Email address: alec.schmidt@stevens.edu 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2228945

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2228945
There has been ongoing discussion of the benefits and risks that high-frequency trading (HFT) 
has brought in the financial markets. HFT is a form of automated trading in which placing and 
cancellations of orders are controlled by computer algorithms. While there is no universally 
accepted definition of HFT, it is usually assumed that HFT is done on the millisecond to minute 
timescales (Gomber et al, 2011). 
Most studies of the HFT effects are focused on the equity markets. Brogaard (2010), Hasbrouck 
& Saar (2010), and Hendershott et al. (2011) find mostly positive effects of HFT. However, 
Jovanovic & Menkveld (2010), Zhang (2010), and Boehner (2011) indicate that HFT may 
increase market volatility. There has been also an opinion that HFT profit at the expense of 
ordinary investors (Popper & Leonard, 2012). 
Multi-dealer FX markets have two major customer groups. First, it’s manual traders (MT) who 
employ GUI-based access for order management. MT generally trade on behalf of banks. 
Another type of traders uses proprietary interface for automated trading (AT). AT mostly 
represents professional trading community (PTC), which includes hedge funds and proprietary 
trading firms. There are also bank AT including so-called aggregators. The latter facilitate 
submitting orders to various liquidity providers and may be operated by MT.  
Schmidt (2012) has offered a simple taxonomy for the FX HFT according to which HFT implies 
order submission volume that “mere humans” (MT) have never attained. Some PTC have order 
submission volumes several times higher than those of the bank AT. These PTC are called 
“ultra-HFT.” Chaboud et al (2009) discussed contributions of AT in the FX market during 20062007. They concluded, in particular, that AT do not increase the intraday volatility.  
I have two comments towards the discussion of the HFT effects on the FX market volatility. 
First, in recent years HFT have “crowded out” MT from the top of the order books (Schmidt, 
2012). Since volatility is usually calculated using the bid/offer mid-price, HFT in our days 
determine volatility rather than just affect it. Second, and more important, the HFT firms, most 
notably the ultra-HFT firms, may withdraw from the market during price jumps, particularly 
during national bank interventions (Schmidt, 2012). Hence HFT have become de-facto market 
makers in the multi-dealer FX platforms without bearing responsibility for the market liquidity. 
Thus, it is liquidity risk rather than volatility risk that should be the subject of our concern.    
What can be done for mitigating liquidity risk? I suggest that multi-dealer FX platforms 
introduce the market maker status (MMS).  Those traders that have MMS would be required to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2228945

maintain orders on both sides of the market with the bid/offer spread that does not exceed say 
50% of the historical average. Those traders that do not have MMS would be prohibited from 
having orders on both sides of the market simultaneously. Also, the traders without MMS that 
have had transaction on one side of the market would be permitted to submit an order on the 
opposite side of the market only after a noticeable delay. These constraints are intended to 
increase adverse selection risk for traders that employ market making strategies but do not have 
MMS. 
One may argue that introduction of MMS may force some AT to abandon market making, which 
in turn will lead to an increase of the bid/offer spreads. I don’t think this should be a great 
concern: the FX spreads in the “pre-AT” era (say in early 2000s) were practically as good as in 
our days.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2228945

References: 
 
Boehmer E., K. Fong, and J. Wu, 2011. International evidence of algorithmic trading. 
EDHEC Business School report. 
 
Brogaard, J., 2010. High Frequency Trading and its Impact on Market Quality, 
http://ssrn.com/paper=1641387. 
 
Chaboud, A, B Chiquoine, E Hjalmarsson and C Vega, 2009. “Rise of the machines: 
algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange market”, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers, no 980. 
 
Gomber, P., B. Arndt, L. Björn, M. Lutat, and T. Uhle, 2011. High-Frequency Trading 
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1858626. 
 
Hasbrouck J., and G. Saar, 2010, Low-Latency Trading, Johnson School Research Paper 
Series No. 35-2010. 
 
Hendershott T., C. M. Jones, and A. J. Menkveld, 2011, Does Algorithmic Trading Improve 
Liquidity?, Journal of Finance, 66, 1 - 33. 
 
Popper N. and C. Leonard, 2012. High-Speed Traders Profit at Expense of Ordinary Investors, a 
Study Says. The New York Times, Dec. 3. 
Schmidt A. B., 2012. Ecology of the Modern Institutional Spot FX: The EBS Market in 2011. 
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1984070 
 
Zhang F., 2010, High-Frequency Trading, Stock Volatility, and Price Discovery 
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1691679 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2228945
