 
 
 
 
 
The Effect of Algorithmic Trading on Management Guidance 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrew Stephan* 
Leeds School of Business 
University of Colorado Boulder 
andrew.stephan@colorado.edu 
 
 
July 11, 2023 
 
 
 
* I am grateful to Beverly Walther, my advisor, for her guidance and support. I thank Nikki Skinner for sharing 
conference call data and Mengjie Xu for sharing code to calculate the return variance decomposition. I also thank Ron 
Dye, Bob Korajczyk, Matthew Lyle, Bob Magee, Nathan Marshall, Tathagat Mukhopadhyay, James Naughton,  
Santhosh Ramalingegowda, Bryce Schonberger, Bobby Stoumbos, Clare Wang, Sarah Zechman, my fellow PhD 
students, the reviewers and discussants, and workshop participants at Emory University, George Washington 
University, Indiana University, Northwestern University, Southern Methodist University, the Trans-Atlantic Doctoral 
Conference, the University of Illinois at Chicago, the University of Colorado, the University of Minnesota, and the 
AAA Financial Accounting and Reporting Section meeting for their valuable comments and discussion. I thank the 
Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University and Leeds School of Business at the University of 
Colorado for financial support. I gratefully acknowledge Thomson Reuters for providing I/B/E/S analyst earnings 
forecast data.  Any errors are my own. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

 
 
 
 
The Effect of Algorithmic Trading on Management Guidance 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
I investigate whether algorithmic trading (AT) affects the provision of management guidance. 
Existing research finds that AT decreases fundamental information acquisition before earnings 
announcements and consequently reduces the informativeness of prices. To compensate for 
reduced information acquisition, I predict and find that managers at firms with more AT activity 
increase the quantity and quality of guidance issued at earnings announcements. Evidence is 
consistent with managers responding to reduced information acquisition, as opposed to changes in 
liquidity, and results suggest guidance in response to AT is effective at reducing information 
asymmetry. These findings identify a new channel through which AT affects stock price 
informativeness by documenting a link to managers’ disclosure decisions. 
 
Keywords: Algorithmic trading; high-frequency trading; voluntary disclosure; management 
forecasts 
JEL Classifications: G14, G19, G10 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

1 
 
1. Introduction 
Algorithmic trading (AT) uses computer programs to automate the submission and 
cancellation of orders in financial markets (Hendershott et al., 2011). Already comprising more 
than 50% of trading volume and with new investments in artificial intelligence expected to 
delegate more trading decisions to computers in the coming years (Goldstein et al., 2014; Market 
Makers, 2023), AT is fundamentally changing the acquisition, processing, and pricing of 
information in equity markets (Brogaard et al., 2014; Weller, 2018; Chordia & Miao, 2020). By 
changing what information is acquired and priced, AT potentially alters managers’ incentives to 
disclose information to the capital markets. In this study, I explore whether managers respond to 
AT activity with changes in their voluntary disclosures. 
Specifically, I examine whether AT in the quarter before an earnings announcement 
influences the voluntary guidance issued by managers around the announcement, finding managers 
increase guidance following pre-announcement AT. In light of evidence that AT leaves prices less 
informative by deterring investors from acquiring information before earnings announcements 
(Weller, 2018; Lee & Watts, 2021), identifying managers’ voluntary disclosures responses to AT 
is important for understanding whether firms can effectively address this information gap and 
provides crucial evidence on the broader question of how AT affects the informativeness of stock 
prices and quality of equity markets. I focus on management guidance as a disclosure response 
because it directly affects price informativeness and is increasingly bundled with earnings 
announcements, making it a natural disclosure to address pre-announcement AT activity (Han & 
Wild, 1991; Rogers & Van Buskirk, 2013). Moreover, as one of firms’ most informative 
disclosures, changes in guidance could make up for (or even surpass) the effects of AT on price 
informativeness through other channels (Beyer et al., 2010). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

2 
 
Pre-announcement AT could influence management guidance issued with earnings 
announcements (hereafter, “announcement guidance”) through three channels. The first channel 
operates through the information acquisition activities of investors (hereafter, the “information 
acquisition channel”). Evidence suggests that AT reduces investor information acquisition by 
competing for liquidity with informed traders (Weller, 2018; Korajczyk & Murphy, 2019). If 
managers observe a less informed market, they may issue more guidance to substitute for 
information lost from other sources (Balakrishnan et al., 2014). Alternatively, if decreased 
information acquisition makes managerial learning from prices less effective, managers may be 
less incentivized to issue disclosures to elicit market feedback (Jayaraman & Wu, 2020).     
The second channel operates through liquidity (hereafter, the “liquidity channel”). On 
average, AT narrows spreads and enhances liquidity (Hendershott et al., 2011). Because managers 
reduce disclosure following exogenous increases in liquidity (Hagenberg et al., 2021), managers 
may decrease guidance in response to pre-announcement AT. However, although AT improves 
liquidity on average, it may harm liquidity for large or informed traders by competing for liquidity 
(Korajczyk & Murphy, 2019). If managers care about liquidity for this particular group of traders, 
they may increase guidance in response. 
The third channel operates through market responses to firm disclosures (hereafter, the 
“market response channel”). Evidence consistently shows that AT helps prices reflect fundamental 
information in firms’ disclosures (Bhattacharya et al., 2020; Chakrabarty et al., 2022). If managers 
anticipate that the market will price their disclosures more efficiently when AT is high, they may 
issue more guidance (Fishman & Hagerty, 2003; Suijs, 2007). Considering credible arguments for 
both increases and decreases in management guidance, it is an empirical question of how preannouncement AT influences guidance around earnings announcements.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

3 
 
Using a sample of earnings announcements between 2012 and 2021, pre-announcement 
AT is positively associated with the likelihood of issuing guidance and the quantity of guidance 
issued in the three-day window centered on the earnings announcement. AT is calculated as the 
first principal component of the cancellation-to-trade ratio, the trade-to-order ratio, the odd-lotvolume ratio, and trade size measured over the period beginning five days following the prior 
earnings announcement to two days before the current earnings announcement (hereafter, the “preannouncement window”) (Weller, 2018). The results are robust to numerous specifications, 
including the addition of firm fixed effects, controls for price liquidity and historical guidance, and 
alternative measures of AT. The association is similar across both core (e.g., EPS and revenue) 
and non-core (e.g., capital expenditures and other) guidance measures, consistent with managers 
making substantial and pervasive changes to guidance (Abramova et al., 2020).  
Looking beyond the quantity of guidance issued, managers increase the informativeness of 
voluntary disclosures more broadly in response to pre-announcement AT. When managers issue 
guidance, pre-announcement AT is associated with more accurate and precise guidance. Exploring 
other voluntary disclosure channels, pre-announcement AT is positively associated with the 
likelihood of holding a conference call but not associated with voluntary 8-Ks or non-GAAP 
metrics. This result suggests managers add a rich disclosure channel instead of lean channels to 
better convey complex information in response to pre-announcement AT (Skinner, 2023). 
Next, I investigate the three channels through which AT may influence disclosure using 
cross-sectional tests and a path analysis approach. Cross-sectional tests are generally consistent 
with the information acquisition channel. The association between pre-announcement AT and 
guidance is weakest when information intermediaries can substitute for firm disclosures following 
decreased information acquisition. Likewise, the association is strongest for firms with investors 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

4 
 
who regularly engage in information acquisition activities and when managers hold negative news 
about future earnings, consistent with guidance filling a specific information gap to decrease 
litigation risk and walk down analyst expectations (Skinner, 1994; Cotter et al., 2006). To provide 
more direct evidence, I use a path analysis with proxies for the information acquisition, liquidity, 
and market response channels. The evidence is strongest for a path from AT to decreased 
information acquisition, followed by more disclosure, though there is moderate evidence of a path 
through decreased liquidity. 
Given the potential endogeneity between AT and firm disclosure, such that AT may be 
more active in firms with richer information environments and disclosure patterns, I utilize an 
instrumental variables analysis and two natural experiments to strengthen a causal interpretation 
of my results. First, following Weller (2018), I instrument for AT using the firm’s lagged stock 
price in a two-staged least squares regression and find a positive association between the 
instrumented AT and guidance. Second, I utilize the Tick Size Pilot (TSP) program as a plausibly 
exogenous decrease in AT, finding treated firms decrease guidance more than control firms posttreatment. Examining the information acquisition, liquidity, and market response channels in the 
TSP setting, I find evidence generally consistent with the information acquisition channel. Third, 
I utilize a technological upgrade at the Nasdaq Stock Exchange in 2010 that increased order 
processing and trade speed (Chordia & Miao, 2020). Nasdaq firms, which experience a plausibly 
exogenous increase in AT, issue relatively more guidance than NYSE-listed firms after the 
upgrade. All three identification settings corroborate the conclusions of my pooled regression 
design, providing support for a causal relation between AT and announcement guidance. 
My final set of analyses examines whether disclosure effectively addresses limited preannouncement information acquisition by investors. Guidance following high pre-announcement 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

5 
 
AT is associated with improved liquidity and returns that reflect relatively less information from 
external sources (i.e., market-wide and private information) over the post-announcement quarter 
(Brogaard et al., 2022). These tests suggest that guidance effectively levels the playing field by 
enriching the public information environment following pre-announcement AT.  
My study contributes to the literature in three ways. First, I contribute to the voluntary 
disclosure literature by documenting a positive association between pre-announcement AT and 
management guidance issued at earnings announcements. This evidence extends research 
examining how firms’ investors affect voluntary disclosure decisions by showing that an important 
characteristic of firms’ active traders, AT, affects the voluntary provision of guidance (Boone & 
White, 2015; Li & Zhang, 2015; Abramova et al., 2020). Because a substantial literature finds 
guidance has meaningful consequences for price informativeness, liquidity, and the cost of capital 
(see Beyer et al., 2010, for a review), evidence of managers’ voluntary disclosure responses to preannouncement AT has implications for our understanding of how AT affects the quality of capital 
markets more broadly. Moreover, by documenting that guidance has a stronger association with 
market quality following high pre-announcement AT, my study suggests that guidance in response 
to AT, in particular, is informative to investors and has significant capital market consequences. 
Second, I fill a gap in the AT literature by documenting that AT can affect price 
informativeness through a relation with managers’ voluntary disclosure decisions. Regulators, 
academics, and investors are concerned about whether the overwhelming presence of AT in equity 
markets has increased or decreased the informativeness of stock prices. Prior studies find that AT 
improves pricing efficiency for publicly available information (Brogaard et al., 2014; Bhattacharya 
et al., 2020; Chordia & Miao, 2020) but reduces the acquisition of new information and results in 
less informative stock prices before earnings announcements (Weller, 2018; Lee & Watts, 2021). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

6 
 
While Ahmed et al. (2020) document a negative association between AT and mandatory reporting 
quality, AT’s effect on managers’ voluntary disclosures remains unexplored. My results contrast 
those of Ahmed et al. (2020), finding a positive association between AT and the provision of 
management guidance. Because guidance is highly informative to prices (e.g., Beyer et al., 2010, 
find that management guidance accounts for 55.2% of accounting-related information incorporated 
into stock prices), our understanding of the broader relation between AT and price informativeness 
is incomplete without considering the effects of AT on voluntary guidance.  
Third, I provide compelling evidence that AT influences management guidance through a 
decrease in information acquisition. This finding contrasts with inferences drawn in prior studies. 
Specifically, using the TSP setting, Hope and Liu (2022) argue that increased tick sizes reduce 
liquidity and weaken market reactions to firm disclosures, prompting firms to issue less guidance. 
Because Lee and Watts (2021) provide strong evidence that the TSP decreased AT for treated 
firms, I re-examine the TSP results through the information acquisition, liquidity, and market 
response channels, finding evidence consistent with the information acquisition channel. These 
new analyses, combined with the other settings in my study, suggest AT influences disclosure by 
altering investors’ information acquisition activities. 
2. Background and Empirical Predictions  
2.1 Management guidance 
Management guidance consists of forecasts about future performance provided by firms to 
investors, analysts, and other stakeholders. As guidance is one of the most informative voluntary 
disclosures firms make, the accounting literature has a long history of examining why companies 
provide guidance, what determines its accuracy and optimism, how guidance affects mandatory 
financial reporting, and how the market responds to guidance (Beyer et al., 2010). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

7 
 
Beyer et al. (2010) summarize the literature on why managers disclose voluntarily. I 
highlight three stylized facts from that review. First, while the goal of voluntary disclosure is to 
reduce information asymmetries, the individual incentives that influence disclosure are numerous; 
managers will alter disclosure decisions when their compensation is tied to stock prices (Noe, 
1999), to avoid litigation (Skinner, 1994), to walk down analyst expectations (Cotter et al., 2006), 
to improve liquidity (Balakrishnan et al., 2014), in addition to others. I discuss specific disclosure 
incentives below as they relate to AT. Second, managers have incentives to release guidance 
containing both positive and negative news. For EPS guidance in my sample, about 58% of EPS 
forecasts are below and 42% at or above current expectations. It is an empirical question whether 
AT more strongly affects guidance containing positive or negative news. Third, managers 
increasingly release guidance bundled with earnings announcements, including over 80% of the 
guidance in my sample period (Rogers & Van Buskirk, 2013). I focus on guidance around earnings 
announcements because it reflects when the preponderance of management guidance is issued and 
when guidance is most responsive to changes in investor demands (Abramova et al., 2020).  
2.2 AT and management guidance 
 
In this subsection, I describe three channels through which pre-announcement AT may 
influence the decision to issue guidance around an earnings announcement. 
2.2.1 Information acquisition channel 
   
Prior literature suggests that AT reduces the amount of information traders acquire because 
order anticipation strategies predict incoming order flow and trade in the direction of expected 
orders.1 Whether executed by standalone algorithms or market makers to avoid adverse selection, 
 
1 When discussing the prior literature, I group studies examining high-frequency traders (HFTs), a sub-type of AT, 
with studies examining AT more broadly. HFTs are loosely defined by the following characteristics: 1) extraordinarily 
high-speed programs for generating, routing, and executing orders, 2) co-location, 3) short holding periods, 4) frequent 
submissions and cancellations of orders, and 5) ending the trading day in a flat position (Securities and Exchange 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

8 
 
theoretical studies predict that these strategies increase the cost of informed trading (Hoffman, 
2014; Menkveld & Zoican, 2017; Yang & Zhu, 2018). Recent empirical evidence supports these 
predictions. When large parent orders are split up into a series of smaller orders to improve 
execution, AT initially provides liquidity. After detecting the presence of a latent parent order, the 
AT strategy turns and competes for liquidity with the incoming orders. As a result, executing large 
orders becomes more expensive (Korazcjyk & Murphy, 2019; Van Kervel & Menkveld, 2019; 
Hirschey, 2021). Based on the evidence that AT decreases profits on informed trading, empirical 
studies test whether AT reduces investors’ propensity to acquire information. Using various 
settings, Weller (2018) and Lee and Watts (2021) find evidence consistent with AT decreasing 
information acquisition in the period leading up to earnings announcements. As a result, preannouncement prices are less informative, and earnings news is more informative. 
It is not evident whether a decrease in pre-announcement information acquisition will 
increase or decrease announcement guidance.2 The expectations-adjustment hypothesis states that 
managers disclose to align market expectations with the manager’s private information about firm 
value; when the misalignment between managers and the market is greater, the benefits of 
disclosing increase, and managers are more likely to do so. (Ajinkya and Gift, 1984).3 Empirical 
studies support that managers disclose more when stock prices reflect less fundamental 
 
Commission, 2010). I group high-frequency and non-high-frequency together for two reasons. First, non-highfrequency AT still trades at speeds substantially faster than humans, making the distinction between high-frequency 
and non-high-frequency AT somewhat arbitrary. Second, disclosure could be affected by high-frequency and nonhigh-frequency AT; examining the broader set of AT gives us a complete picture of how this new type of trading has 
affected voluntary disclosure.  
2 Section 4.2 discusses the possibility that managers alter their pre-announcement guidance in response to preannouncement AT. 
3 The theoretical model closest to this economic intuition is Verrecchia (1990). Verrecchia models a price maximizing 
manager that can disclose a private signal at some fixed cost.  If the manager discloses, the market updates the price 
based on the precision of the market’s prior and the precision of the signal from the manager. When the market’s 
precision about the value of the firm is high (low), a given disclosure will create less (more) of a change in the stock 
price and, therefore, will be less (more) likely to offset the cost of disclosure. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

9 
 
information (Sletten, 2011; Balakrishnan et al., 2014; Billings et al., 2015).4 Thus, preannouncement AT may increase guidance by decreasing information acquisition.  
However, lower information acquisition in response to pre-announcement AT could have 
the opposite effect and decrease announcement guidance. A stream of literature documents that 
prices aggregate information from dispersed traders. Managers both issue forecasts to elicit market 
feedback and adjust their forecasts in response to what they learn from prices (Zuo, 2016; 
Jayaraman & Wu, 2020). If decreased information acquisition in response to AT makes managerial 
learning from prices less effective, managers may be less incentivized to issue disclosures to elicit 
market feedback (Ye et al., 2023). Moreover, this literature highlights that investors’ and 
managers’ information sets do not fully overlap. If the information gap created when investors 
reduce information acquisition in response to AT cannot be filled by managers’ private information 
(i.e., the information lost does not overlap with managers’ private information), managers may not 
increase disclosures to “fill the gap.” As a result, pre-announcement AT may decrease (or have no 
effect on) guidance by reducing information acquisition. 
2.2.2 Liquidity channel 
The association between AT and liquidity is complex. Many studies find that AT improves 
traditional liquidity measures (e.g., spreads, price impact, etc.) (Hendershott et al., 2011; Conrad 
et al., 2015). However, recent studies have explored the dynamics of liquidity to reveal that AT 
competes for liquidity with informed traders when they break up large parent orders into a series 
 
4 In a related study, Ahmed et al. (2020) use the TSP as an exogenous decrease in AT to investigate financial reporting 
quality. Their findings indicate that treated firms, for whom AT declines and information acquisition increases, exhibit 
improved financial reporting quality for mandatory disclosures. The negative association between AT and financial 
reporting quality in Ahmed et al. (2020) may not apply to management guidance because the incentives and costs of 
voluntary disclosure differ from mandatory disclosure. Management guidance involves commitments by managers to 
meet specific benchmarks and carries significant costs. Once managers begin providing guidance, it often establishes 
a disclosure "policy" that may be challenging to halt without potential repercussions. The voluntary disclosure 
incentives discussed in sections 2.1 and 2.2 do not necessarily apply to mandatory reporting. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

10 
 
of smaller orders to improve execution (Korazcjyk & Murphy, 2019; Van Kervel & Menkveld, 
2019; Hirschey, 2021). These results imply that, while AT narrows bid-ask spreads and improves 
liquidity on average, realized liquidity depends on the liquidity taker's specific needs, e.g., how 
much volume they need to trade and how much time they have to trade it.5 
The literature suggests that managers disclose to reduce information asymmetries and 
improve liquidity and that these disclosures are effective at doing so (Diamond & Verrecchia, 
1991; Coller & Yohn, 1997; Balakrishnan et al., 2014; Schoenfeld, 2017). However, identifying 
whether liquidity shapes disclosure causally is a more recent inquiry. Balakrishnan et al. (2014) 
find that managers increase voluntary disclosures when analyst coverage and liquidity decline due 
to exogenous factors. Similarly, Hagenberg et al. (2021) show that an exogenous liquidity increase 
leads to reduced voluntary disclosure.6 Thus, if AT improves liquidity on average, I expect a 
negative association between pre-announcement AT and management guidance at the earnings 
announcement. If managers are concerned with liquidity declines for large or informed traders due 
to AT, I may observe a positive association between pre-announcement AT and guidance. 
2.2.3 Market response channel 
 
The prior literature consistently finds that AT improves the efficiency with which public 
information is priced. AT trades in response to the direction of insider trades (Rogers et al., 2017), 
 
5 The proposition that AT increases the cost of informed trading may appear at odds with prior studies suggesting AT 
improves liquidity. However, these studies are more consistent than they appear. Hendershott et al. (2011) state that 
“The narrower spreads are a result of a sharp decline in adverse selection, or equivalently a decrease in the amount of 
price discovery associated with trades.”p.3. Adverse selection is simultaneously a cost to market makers and a profit 
to informed traders. If AT reduces adverse selection and trade-related price discovery, inside quotes should improve, 
but information acquisition should decrease due to lower profits when trading on private information. 
6 Using the TSP, Hope and Liu (2022) find that treated firms, whose liquidity declines, decrease disclosure. These 
results are in contrast to Balakrishnan et al. (2014) and Hagenberg et al. (2021), who find that declines (improvements) 
in liquidity lead to greater (reduced) voluntary disclosure. A critical difference between these studies is that the TSP 
setting prevents voluntary disclosure from improving liquidity (i.e., treated firms in the TSP have a minimum tick size 
that cannot be improved by increased disclosure). This feature, unique to the TSP setting, removes one of managers’ 
primary disclosure incentives. In more generalized settings, I expect the associations in Balakrishnan et al. (2014) and 
Hagenberg et al. (2021) to hold. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

11 
 
earnings surprises (Bhattacharya et al., 2020), and macroeconomic news (Hu et al., 2017). More 
importantly, AT improves the efficiency with which the information event is priced. In the short 
term, AT trades in the direction of permanent price changes and opposite transitory price changes, 
resulting in prices that more closely resemble a random walk (Brogaard et al., 2014). Over the 
longer term, AT facilitates the pricing of earnings news and reduces post-announcement drift 
(Chordia & Miao, 2020; Chakrabarty et al., 2022). 
 
Theoretical studies suggest that when managers are more certain about the market response 
to their disclosures, they are more likely to disclose (Fishman & Hagerty, 2003; Suijs, 2007). 
Though not a direct test of these theories, Abramova et al. (2020) find that when institutional 
investors are inattentive, potentially increasing uncertainty about how the market will price firm 
news, managers issue less management guidance. If AT increases the efficiency, reliability, and 
predictability of the market response to management guidance, I expect managers will issue more 
guidance at earnings announcements. 
 
To summarize the predictions in section 2.2, I identify three channels through which preannouncement AT could influence the disclosure of management guidance at earnings 
announcements: the information acquisition channel, the liquidity channel, and the market 
response channel. These channels are not mutually exclusive and do not offer an obvious 
directional prediction on the relation between pre-announcement AT and announcement guidance. 
Therefore, it is an empirical question whether pre-announcement AT is positively or negatively 
associated with guidance at earnings announcements. 
2.3 Guidance characteristics and other voluntary disclosures 
In this subsection, I consider the broader menu of voluntary disclosure responses available 
to managers following pre-announcement AT. Considering guidance on the intensive margin, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

12 
 
managers can change the characteristics of guidance issued in addition to the quantity of guidance. 
If a manager intends to bring more (less) information to the market following pre-announcement 
AT, then we should observe more (less) accurate and precise forecasts and relatively longer 
(shorter) horizon forecasts (Li & Zhang, 2015; Chen et al., 2020). Managers can also change the 
specific measures they forecast. Abramova et al. (2020) define core guidance as earnings and 
revenue forecasts and secondary guidance as other forecasts. They find that managers respond to 
institutional distraction with changes in guidance for “secondary instead of core items.” In light of 
these results, changes to core guidance would be consistent with managers altering especially 
informative disclosures when pre-announcement AT is high. Alternatively, changes in guidance 
restricted to secondary measures suggest that guidance issued in response to pre-announcement 
AT will have limited effects on price informativeness and market quality.  
While guidance is an especially informative voluntary disclosure, it is not the only option 
available to managers. If pre-announcement AT induces managers to provide more (less) 
informative guidance disclosures, I expect similar effects in other disclosure channels. Considering 
voluntary 8-Ks, non-GAAP metrics, and conference calls, changes in these other disclosures can 
reveal the nature of the information managers try to convey in response to pre-announcement AT. 
Skinner (2023) finds that firms choose rich channels (e.g., conference calls) for complex 
information and lean channels (e.g., press releases) for less complex information. Because 
management guidance is forward-looking and may require additional context, I expect 
contemporaneous changes in rich disclosure channels instead of lean channels. 
2.4 Cross-sectional analyses 
This section discusses cross-sectional factors that moderate the relation between preannouncement AT and announcement guidance and provide initial evidence on the channel 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

13 
 
through which AT influences disclosure. I consider the role of information intermediaries, the 
firm’s investor base, and the characteristics of the private information held by managers. I expect 
information intermediaries, such as analysts, to weaken the association between pre-announcement 
AT and disclosure, regardless of the channel through which AT influences disclosure. By 
providing novel information to investors, analysts can substitute for firm disclosures when 
information acquisition declines in response to AT (Balakrishnan et al., 2014; Bradley et al., 2014). 
Additionally, by reducing information asymmetry, improving liquidity, and increasing the 
efficiency with which firm news is priced, analysts can reduce the influence of AT in these same 
areas and consequently weaken the association between AT and disclosure (i.e., analysts substitute 
for AT through the liquidity and market response channels) (Zhang, 2008; Schoenfeld, 2017).    
The firm’s investor base could also moderate the association between pre-announcement 
AT and guidance. If AT operates through the information acquisition channel, I expect institutional 
ownership to strengthen the association between pre-announcement AT and guidance because 
institutional owners are more likely to acquire value-relevant, private information (Drake et al., 
2020). As a result, AT should reduce information acquisition more when institutional ownership 
is high. If AT operates through the market response channel, institutional ownership should 
weaken the association between AT and guidance because institutional owners help price news 
more efficiently, substituting for the pricing benefits of AT (Ke & Ramalingegowda, 2005).  
Whether the manager possesses good or bad news guidance may affect the association 
between pre-announcement AT and announcement guidance. If AT operates through the market 
response channel, I expect a stronger relation between pre-announcement AT and guidance when 
the manager holds good news. Voluntarily disclosing good news benefits the manager when their 
stock compensation is tied to prices (e.g., Noe, 1999), and therefore the benefit only materializes 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

14 
 
if the information is incorporated into prices. However, disclosing bad news benefits the manager 
by reducing litigation risk and walking down analyst expectations (Skinner, 1994; Cotter et al., 
2006). While the manager may still care about efficient pricing for bad news, these additional, 
non-pricing incentives tilt the relative benefits of efficient pricing more towards good news than 
bad news. If AT operates through the liquidity channel, I do not expect the sign of the news to 
change the association between AT and guidance because the information asymmetry and liquidity 
improvements are symmetric for good and bad news. Lastly, if AT operates through the 
information acquisition channel by widening the information gap between investors and managers, 
it should strengthen whatever incentives the manager already holds. Because bad news guidance 
is moderately more common, I may observe a stronger association with bad news. 
3. Data and Research Design 
3.1 Sample 
I construct a sample of all earnings announcements listed on I/B/E/S between February 1, 
2012, and July 31, 2021.7 I merge these announcements with CRSP and Compustat, requiring a 
stock price greater than $5 and a market capitalization greater than $10 million. I remove 
observations if the I/B/E/S earnings announcement date differs from the Compustat date by more 
than one calendar day. I require the prior (subsequent) earnings announcement date to be between 
20 and 126 trading days before (following) the current earnings announcement for the AT 
measurement window to be sufficiently long. I retain 76,988 firm-quarter observations (3,587 
firms) over my sample period with available data. 
 
7 The SEC MIDAS data is available beginning January 1, 2012.  Eliminating earnings announcements before February 
1, 2012, allows at least 31 days of measurement for the AT proxies. The end date of the sample includes data available 
at the time of collection. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

15 
 
3.2 Measuring algorithmic trading 
The SEC’s Market Information Data Analytics System (MIDAS) dataset collects data from 
13 equity exchanges in the US through proprietary data feeds with microsecond timestamps. The 
SEC provides summary data for volume, orders, trades, and cancellations by firm and day.8 Using 
this data, I define four proxies for AT identified by the prior literature (Weller, 2018; Lee & Watts, 
2021). The odd-lot volume ratio (OddLotVolumeRatio) is the volume of trades executed in oddlot sizes divided by the total volume traded, where greater odd-lot trades are associated with more 
AT (O’Hara et al., 2014). The trade-to-order ratio (TradeToOrderRatio) is the total volume traded 
divided by the total volume of orders placed. The trade-to-order ratio is negatively correlated with 
AT because algorithms place and cancel high volumes of orders when executing trades 
(Hendershott et al., 2011). The cancellations-to-trades ratio (CancelToTradeRatio) is the number 
of orders canceled divided by the number of trades executed and is positively correlated with AT 
(Hasbrouck & Saar, 2013; Hendershott & Riordan, 2013). Trade size (TradeSize) is calculated as 
the total volume traded divided by the number of trades. Trade size is negatively correlated with 
AT, as algorithms execute more small orders for a given volume (O’Hara, 2015).9 
The proxies are measured daily by firm, averaged over the period beginning five days 
following the prior earnings announcement to two days before the current announcement (“preannouncement window,” see Appendix A), and logged. I choose this window because AT 
decreases information acquisition during this timeframe, and, therefore, it should be salient for 
managers when choosing whether to issue guidance at the announcement (Lee & Watts, 2021). 
The means for each measure, presented in Table 1, are consistent with prior literature (Weller, 
 
8 Data can be found at http://www.sec.gov/marketstructure/data. 
9 The NYSE and AMEX do not report cancellations to trades and odd lot volume.  These measures are appropriately 
adjusted such that bias is not expected. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

16 
 
2018). The AT proxy (AT) is the first principal component of the OddLotVolumeRatio, 
TradeToOrderRatio, CancelToTradeRatio, and TradeSize, with an eigenvalue of 2.28. In Table 2, 
AT is positively correlated with OddLotVolumeRatio and CancelToTradeRatio (0.86 and 0.58, 
respectively) and negatively correlated with TradeToOrderRatio and TradeSize as expected (-0.76 
and -0.72, respectively). 
3.3 Research design 
I use the following base model to test the effect of AT on voluntary disclosure:  
𝐺𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡= 𝛼+ 𝛽1𝐴𝑇𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽2𝑈𝐸𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽3𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑈𝐸𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽4𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑈𝐸𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽5𝑃𝑃𝑈𝐸𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽6𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑖,𝑡
+ 𝛽7𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽8𝑄4𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽9𝐿𝑛𝐶𝐴𝑅_𝑃𝑟𝑒𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽10𝑁𝑒𝑤𝑠𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡
+ 𝛽11𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽12𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽13𝐿𝑛𝑀𝑘𝑡𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖,𝑡
+ 𝛽14𝐴𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑦𝑠𝑡𝐹𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽15𝐼𝑂𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽16𝑇𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽17𝐸𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖,𝑡
+ +𝛽18𝑖𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽19𝐼𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐹𝐸 + 𝛽𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐹𝐸+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 
(1) 
 
𝐺𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡 represents the voluntary disclosure for firm 𝑖 released in the [-1,+1] trading day 
window around the earnings announcement (“announcement window,” see Appendix A) in quarter 
𝑡. Guidance is obtained from the I/B/E/S Guidance dataset, which records firm forecasts for 
earnings per share (EPS), sales, earnings before income taxes, depreciation, and amortization 
(EBITDA), EBITDA per share, capital expenditures, dividends per share, funds from operations, 
fully reported EPS, gross margin, net income, operating profit, pretax income, ROA, and ROE. I 
measure guidance as the log of one plus the count of guidance issued (LnGuideCount) and an 
indicator equal to one if the firm issues any guidance in the announcement window (Guider). 
Firms issue guidance during the announcement window in 67% of firm-quarters (see Table 
1). The mean (median) of LnGuideCount issued is 0.874 (1.099), commensurate with a raw 
guidance count of 1.4 (2). When considering the announcement window, I find 803 firms (8,928 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

17 
 
observations) never issue guidance, 585 firms (14,359 observations) always issue guidance, and 
the remaining 2,199 firms (53,701 observations) issue at least one forecast in one quarter and zero 
forecasts in at least one quarter. Of the 803 firms that never issue guidance around earnings 
announcements, only 50 (1,130 observations) issue management guidance between earnings 
announcements at least once across the sample period. 
𝐴𝑇𝑖,𝑡 is the proxy for AT as defined in section 3.2. The remaining covariates follow the 
voluntary disclosure models in Rogers and Van Buskirk (2013) and Billings et al. (2015). Variable 
definitions are provided in Appendix B. I control for earnings news using unexpected earnings 
(𝑈𝐸𝑖,𝑡), positive and negative earnings surprise indicators (𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑈𝐸𝑖,𝑡 and 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑈𝐸𝑖,𝑡, respectively), 
the proportion of historical positive earnings surprises (𝑃𝑃𝑈𝐸𝑖,𝑡), a loss indicator (𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑖,𝑡), and 
sales growth (𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑖,𝑡). To account for news and performance in the pre-announcement 
window (when AT is measured), I control for abnormal returns (𝐿𝑛𝐶𝐴𝑅_𝑃𝑟𝑒𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑖,𝑡), the number 
of unique news events (𝑁𝑒𝑤𝑠𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡), and net insider sales (𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑖,𝑡). I control for the 
firm’s information environment with analyst forecast dispersion (𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖,𝑡), firm size 
(𝐿𝑛𝑀𝑘𝑡𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖,𝑡), analyst following (𝐴𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑦𝑠𝑡𝐹𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑡), and institutional ownership (𝐼𝑂𝑖,𝑡). I 
also include controls for market quality that may influence disclosure. I calculate share turnover 
(𝑇𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖,𝑡), intraday effective spreads (𝐸𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖,𝑡), intraday price volatility (𝑖𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑡), and 
open-to-close Amihud illiquidity (𝐼𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖,𝑡) (Amihud, 2002; Barardehi et al., 2021). AT 
likely causes changes in turnover, spreads, volatility, and liquidity, and therefore I calculate these 
controls before the measurement of AT over the [-126,+5] trading day period around the prior 
quarter’s earnings announcement (“market control window,” see Appendix A). Last, time 
(quarterly) and firm fixed effects are included to account for changes in disclosure levels over time 
or unobservable firm-level factors that may be correlated with AT.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

18 
 
I present summary statistics for the above variables in Table 1. 61% of firms have positive 
earnings surprises, while 27% report a loss. The median analyst coverage for my sample is nine 
analysts. Median sales growth is 6%, and median returns in the quarter before an announcement 
are slightly negative. These descriptive statistics are generally consistent with the prior literature. 
In the regression analyses, the independent variables are normalized with a mean of zero and a 
standard deviation of one for a more straightforward interpretation of coefficient estimates. 
Continuous variables are winsorized at 1% to reduce the influence of outliers.10  
4. Main Results 
4.1 Pooled regression results 
Table 3 presents regressions of announcement window guidance (LnGuideCount and 
Guider) on pre-announcement AT (AT). Columns 1 and 2 present results without control variables, 
columns 3 and 4 with the control variables in equation (1), and columns 5 and 6 include firm fixed 
effects.11 AT is positively associated with LnGuideCount and Guider in all models (p-values < 0.05 
in columns 1-3 and p-values < 0.01 in columns 4-6). A one standard deviation increase in AT is 
associated with a 3.3% increase in the count of guidance issued and a 2.4 percentage point (3.6% 
of the sample mean) increase in the likelihood of issuing guidance (coefficients of 0.033 and 0.024 
on AT in columns 5 and 6, respectively). Given that guidance is often a persistent disclosure, these 
estimates align with the magnitudes of other factors influencing disclosure (e.g., the coefficient 
estimates on institutional ownership, IO, are 0.042 and 0.023 in the same regression). 
 
10 Main results are robust to measures without winsorization. 
11 All models use OLS estimation. For models with binary dependent variables, I use OLS rather than probit or logit 
estimation because the specification includes extensive fixed effects, and OLS does not suffer from the incidental 
parameter problem that is well-known for probit and logit models with fixed effects (Greene, 2012, p. 721). The main 
results are robust to using a logit model for binary dependent variables. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

19 
 
In Table 3, Panel B, I tabulate additional analyses to address the risk of reverse causality. 
Specifically, high disclosure quality (such as management guidance) could improve liquidity, 
consequently attracting AT (Schoenfeld, 2017). In columns 1 and 2, I recalculate the market 
quality variables (Turnover, ESpread, iVol, and Illiquidity) contemporaneously with AT over the 
pre-announcement window. In columns 3 and 4, I include controls for guidance issued over the 
pre-announcement window (LnGuideCount_PreAnn) and the four prior earnings announcements 
(LnGuideCount_EALag1 through LnGuideCount_EALag4). The coefficient estimates on AT are 
similar in magnitude to those in Panel A, suggesting that, as long as these variables are correlated 
with unobservable liquidity and disclosure quality, these constructs are unlikely to be the cause of 
my results (Oster, 2019).12,13 
Chordia 
and 
Miao 
(2020) 
raise 
concerns 
that 
the 
CancelToTradeRatio 
(TradeToOrderRatio) is positively (negatively) correlated with bid-ask spreads and negatively 
(positively) correlated with their measure of low-latency trading (LLT), both of which are 
unexpected given results in the prior literature. A critical difference between the LLT measure in 
Chordia and Miao (2020) and the AT proxies used here is that Chordia and Miao’s measure is 
 
12 I perform multiple robustness tests (untabulated) on the fixed effects model in Table 3, Panel A. First, I use the 
individual AT proxies instead of the principal component, finding they are individually associated with disclosure as 
predicted. Second, I execute a first differences model and find consistent results. Third, my result is robust over both 
the first and second halves of my sample period, suggesting the association is unrelated to a singular event or period. 
Fourth, I drop always-guiding and never-guiding firms and find no changes in the results. 
13 In robustness tests (untabulated), I examine whether pre-announcement AT is associated with guidance issued 
between earnings announcements. There is no significant association between pre-announcement AT and guidance 
issued in the post-announcement window. This result is robust to controlling for announcement window guidance or 
using a subsample of firm-quarters with no announcement window guidance. I also examine whether preannouncement AT is associated with pre-announcement guidance (i.e., guidance and AT are measured 
contemporaneously). The coefficients on AT are negative and significant for both LnGuideCount and Guider. Because 
the contemporaneous measurement of AT and guidance raises concerns about reverse causality, I examine preannouncement guidance using my causal inference settings (discussed in section 5). I test LnGuideCount and Guider 
across the stock price instrumental variables analysis, the TSP experimental setting, and Nasdaq technological 
upgrade. The coefficients of interest are not statistically significant in five of the six regressions. Using the stock price 
instrument, AT is negatively associated with Guider (p-value < 0.05). The evidence is relatively weak that preannouncement AT reduces pre-announcement guidance. However, if this relationship exists, firms may be delaying 
guidance from the pre-announcement period to the earnings announcement when AT is high. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

20 
 
unscaled – it counts the number of high-frequency order placement-cancellation runs. The MIDAS 
AT proxies measure cancellations relative to executions (e.g., the denominator in the 
CancelToTradeRatio is the number of orders executed). The unexpected correlation with bid-ask 
spreads is potentially due to large bid-ask spreads decreasing trading volume proportionally more 
than 
cancellation 
volume, 
which 
increases 
(decreases) 
the 
CancelToTradeRatio 
(TradeToOrderRatio). If this hypothesis is true, my controls for contemporaneous spreads in Table 
3, Panel B should leave the remaining variation in the MIDAS proxy to capture differences in AT 
based on the prior literature discussed in section 3.2. As such, the MIDAS variables should be 
reasonable proxies for AT when paired with a robust set of controls. 
I take two approaches to alleviate these concerns further. First, I use multiple identification 
strategies that provide quasi-exogenous variation in AT (see section 5). The positive association 
between AT and announcement guidance persists across three natural experiments and one 
instrumental variables analysis. Second, in untabulated robustness tests, I use alternative measures 
of AT that more closely align with Chordia and Miao’s (2020) LLT measure. Using the log of the 
number and volume of cancellations, without scaling by trading activity, I find both are negatively 
correlated with spreads, as expected. Moreover, both are positively associated with announcement 
guidance, similar to my pooled regression results in Table 3. The results persist after controlling 
for the contemporaneous number of trades or volume executed. 
4.2 Characteristics of guidance and other voluntary disclosures 
 
Table 4, Panel A tests whether the characteristics of guidance change in response to preannouncement AT. The sample contains all EPS forecasts issued in the announcement window 
over my sample period, where each observation is an individual forecast. Accuracy is the absolute 
value of the difference between forecasted and actual EPS, scaled by stock price and multiplied by 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

21 
 
negative one. AbsFrcstRange is the absolute difference between the upper and lower bounds 
forecasted by managers, scaled by stock price (measured for closed-range forecasts only). 
Specificity equals one if the forecast is an open range (above or below a given value), two if it is a 
closed range, and three if it is a point forecast. Horizon is the log of the days between the guidance 
release date and the forecasted quarter-end date. Pre-announcement AT is positively associated 
with forecast accuracy (column 1, p-value < 0.05) and negatively associated with the absolute 
value of forecast range (column 2, p-value < 0.01). Pre-announcement AT is not significantly 
associated with forecast specificity or horizon (columns 3 and 4, respectively). This evidence 
suggests that managers provide more informative guidance to investors when pre-announcement 
AT is high, consistent with the increased quantity disclosed. The evidence is inconsistent with 
managers learning less from stock prices when AT reduces investor information acquisition and 
suggests some overlap exists between the type of information investors stop acquiring and private 
information held by managers (Zuo, 2016). 
Table 4, Panel B examines which measures of announcement guidance are associated with 
pre-announcement AT. I measure LnGuideCount for core items (EPS and revenue forecasts) in 
columns 1 and 2, respectively. I also test capital expenditure forecasts (column 3) because they are 
the most likely to be issued to elicit feedback from the market (Jayaraman & Wu, 2020). All other 
forecasts are combined in column 4. I find pre-announcement AT is positively associated with EPS 
(p-value < 0.01), revenue (p-value < 0.01), capital expenditure (p-value < 0.10), and other guidance 
(p-value < 0.05). The consistent association across guidance measures suggests that the effects of 
AT are relatively strong; managers adjust both core and secondary measures and forecast both 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

22 
 
performance and investment. Moreover, the loss in managerial learning from stock prices does not 
deter managers from issuing more capital expenditure forecasts (Ye et al., 2023).14 
Table 4, Panel C examines other voluntary disclosure choices available to managers. I 
measure the log of one plus the number of voluntary 8-Ks issued in the announcement window 
(Ln8Ks) and an indicator for whether the firm issues a non-GAAP EPS disclosure bundled with 
the earnings announcement (NonGAAP) (Bentley et al., 2018).15 For conference calls, I define an 
indicator for whether the firm holds a conference call (ConfCall) and measure the length of the 
conference call as the log of the number of audio seconds of the call (LnConfCall_Seconds). Preannouncement AT is not significantly associated with 8-Ks and non-GAAP disclosure (columns 1 
and 2, respectively). However, I find the coefficient on AT is positive and significant for ConfCall 
(p-value < 0.01, column 3) and negative and significant for LnConfCall_Seconds (p-value < 0.01, 
column 4). A greater likelihood of holding a conference call is consistent with managers 
responding to AT with more informative disclosures. If call participation by investors is a form of 
information acquisition, shorter call lengths may be explained by AT driving away information 
acquisition. Finding that managers respond to pre-announcement AT through the conference call 
channel, instead of 8-Ks or non-GAAP disclosures, suggests managers are conveying complex 
information through a rich channel (Skinner, 2023). 
4.3 Cross-sectional analyses 
 
Table 5 tests the cross-sectional predictions from section 2.4 for information 
intermediaries, the firm’s investor base, and the sign of the manager’s private information.16 
 
14 Tables 4 and 5 present results using LnGuideCount for brevity. Results using Guider are similar in magnitude and 
statistical significance. 
15 Following prior literature, I define voluntary 8-Ks as those issued under code 7.01 (Reg FD disclosures) and 8.01 
(Other Events) (Segal and Segal, 2016). 
16 In robustness tests (untabulated), I perform descriptive cross-sectional tests on variation in firm size, liquidity, and 
the magnitude of the manager’s private information (i.e., absolute future analyst forecast errors). The association is 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

23 
 
Continuous cross-sectional variables are divided into terciles to allow for nonlinearities in the 
relation. In column 1, I proxy for information intermediaries using analyst following 
(AnalystFollowing). The positive association between pre-announcement AT and guidance is 
decreasing in analyst coverage; I find a positive and significant (negative and not significant) 
coefficient on AT x AnalystFollowing_Low (AT x AnalystFollowing_High), and the difference is 
statistically significant (p-value < 0.05). This result is consistent with the prediction that analysts 
substitute for management guidance and/or weaken AT’s influence on liquidity and market 
responses to firm news.17 
In column 2, I examine cross-sectional variation based on institutional ownership (IO). The 
positive association between AT and guidance is weakest for firms in the lowest tercile of 
institutional ownership (i.e., a negative coefficient on AT x IO_Low, p-value < 0.01). This result is 
consistent with the information acquisition channel (i.e., institutions decrease information 
acquisition in response to AT, and managers increase guidance in response) but inconsistent with 
the market response channel (i.e., institutions substitute for the pricing efficiency benefits of AT).  
 
In column 3, I examine whether the sign of the manager’s private information affects the 
association between pre-announcement AT and announcement guidance. To proxy for the 
manager’s private information, I measure the analyst consensus EPS forecast for quarter t+1 
 
strongest for firms in the middle tercile of size, liquidity, and the magnitude of the manager’s private information. 
These results suggest that the association between pre-announcement AT and guidance exists for “average” firms and 
is not limited to a unique subset of firms driving the results. 
17 I examine cross-sectional variation with media coverage, a second information intermediary, in an untabulated 
robustness test. Like analysts, media coverage benefits liquidity and price discovery and thus may substitute for the 
effects of AT through the liquidity and market response channels (Twedt, 2016; Blankespoor et al., 2018). However, 
unlike analysts, media coverage likely provides less novel information to the market and is unlikely to substitute for 
firm disclosures (i.e., the information acquisition channel). The association between pre-announcement AT and 
guidance is weakest in the lowest tercile of media coverage, which is inconsistent with the analyst coverage results. 
Combined, the analyst and media coverage results suggest AT likely operates through the information acquisition 
channel, where analysts, but not media coverage, can substitute for firm disclosures and weaken the association 
between pre-announcement AT and guidance. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

24 
 
immediately before the quarter t earnings announcement. FutureBadNews is an indicator for 
whether the analyst consensus is higher than actual earnings eventually reported for t+1, 
representing whether the manager’s potential guidance contains negative news at the quarter t 
announcement. This measure assumes managers can reasonably predict t+1 earnings at the quarter 
t announcement. The association between pre-announcement AT and announcement guidance is 
stronger when the manager holds bad news (i.e., a positive coefficient on AT x FutureBadNews, 
p-value < 0.10), which is inconsistent with the market response and liquidity channels. Overall, 
the cross-sectional tests most consistently align with the information acquisition channel. 
4.4 Channel tests 
 
To provide more direct evidence on the channel through which AT influences guidance, 
Table 6 presents a path analysis. A path analysis design tests whether pre-announcement AT is 
associated with announcement guidance through a mediating variable. A structural model 
simultaneously estimates the direct path from pre-announcement AT to guidance, the direct path 
from pre-announcement AT to the mediating variable, and the indirect path from AT to guidance 
through the mediating variable (Landsmen et al., 2012; Dambra et al., 2023).  
 
I use EDGAR downloads and analyst forecast updates as mediating variables for the 
information acquisition channel. LnEDGAR is the log of one plus the average daily non-robot 
EDGAR downloads over the pre-announcement window.18 AbsAnalystUpdates is the absolute 
value of the percentage change in the consensus analyst EPS forecast over the pre-announcement 
window for quarter t+1. This measure captures how much analysts learn about earnings for the 
subsequent quarter in the pre-announcement window.19 ESpread and Illiquidity, measured over the 
 
18 Data on EDGAR downloads are only available through mid-2017, and therefore the sample size is lower. 
19 Although analyst information acquisition is not a direct corollary for investor information acquisition, I consider it 
a reasonable proxy for this test because it represents what a group of intermediaries learns about future earnings over 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

25 
 
pre-announcement window contemporaneously with AT, serve as mediating variables for the 
liquidity channel. Because firm disclosures are rare over the pre-announcement window, I proxy 
for the market response channel using RavenPack news stories. For each news story over the preannouncement window, I measure the dollar trading volume in the minute the news story is 
released, scaled by the volume over that day. I assume that AT increases volume in the minute of 
the news release, whereas non-AT traders process the news story before trading. NewsResponse is 
the average ratio across all news stories in the pre-announcement period, where higher values of 
NewsResponse reflect stronger market responses to firm news attributable to AT. 
 
The path analysis in Table 6 includes controls from equation (1), quarter fixed effects, and 
the firm’s average LnGuideCount over the sample period.20,21 For the information acquisition 
channel in columns 1 and 2, I find AT is negatively associated with information acquisition 
(LnEDGAR and AbsAnalystUpdates), and the information acquisition proxies are negatively 
associated with LnGuideCount. The indirect path of AT to LnGuideCount is positive and 
significant for both mediating variables (p-values < 0.01), consistent with AT affecting guidance 
by decreasing information acquisition. In columns 3 and 4, I find the indirect path through the 
liquidity channel is positive and marginally significant for ESpread (p-value < 0.10) and not 
statistically significant for Illiquidity. This result is consistent with managers responding to 
liquidity declines for large traders. Lastly, I find the indirect path through NewsResponse is not 
statistically significant in column 5. These results are consistent with pre-announcement AT 
 
the pre-announcement period, and it is publicly observable to both managers and other investors. As such, the 
information is likely priced and known to managers when they make a guidance decision at the announcement. 
20 Because the earnings news is not disclosed during the pre-announcement window over which the mediating 
variables are measured, the earnings announcement controls (UE, PosUE, NegUE, Loss, and SalesGrowth) are only 
included in the model predicting LnGuideCount and not the model predicting the mediating variable. 
21 The structural model does not estimate with firm fixed effects, and therefore a continuous variable capturing the 
firm’s average LnGuideCount over the sample period approximates a firm fixed effect.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

26 
 
influencing guidance through the information acquisition and possibly the liquidity channel but 
are inconsistent with the market response channel. It is important to note that these tests are not 
causal but associations that depend upon the strength of the proxies for each channel. Moreover, 
these channels are not mutually exclusive. As such, these tests should be interpreted as initial 
evidence of the mechanism; they do not prove or disprove the existence of any individual channel. 
5. Assessing Identification 
 
In this section, I use an instrumental variable and two natural experiments to identify quasiexogenous variation in AT and address endogeneity concerns in the pooled regression.22 
5.1 Instrumental variables analysis 
In Table 7, I instrument for AT using the decile-ranked lagged stock price (LagPrice), 
where a higher stock price is associated with more AT. First used as an instrument for AT by 
Weller (2018), the rationale is that the cost of the minimum tick size is decreasing in stock price. 
In other words, a $0.01 minimum tick size only costs 0.01% of a $100 stock but 0.1% of a $10 
stock. AT strategies, which often involve providing small amounts of liquidity near the midpoint, 
incur lower costs when the tick size is relatively “cheap” in relation to the stock price. Therefore, 
AT is more active in higher-priced stocks. After controlling for spreads, institutional ownership, 
and other factors influencing disclosure and share prices, I expect the stock price to affect 
disclosure only through AT.23 In columns 1 and 2, I run a two-stage least squares regression and 
 
22 I use the NYSE Autoquote as a third natural experiment in untabulated analyses. In 2003, NYSE implemented 
Autoquote, a system allowing market makers to update inside quotes automatically. Hendershott et al. (2011) provide 
evidence that Autoquote exogenously increased AT for NYSE firms. Matching NYSE firms to untreated Nasdaq 
firms, I perform a difference-in-difference analysis around the implementation of Autoquote. After Autoquote is 
implemented, NYSE firms see a larger increase in the issuance of management guidance compared to Nasdaq firms. 
The strength of this setting is that it provides a clean shock to AT and has been used in multiple other studies 
(Hendershott et al., 2011; Chordia & Miao, 2020). I do not tabulate these results out of concerns for external validity, 
where AT was likely different in the early 2000s compared to my current sample period. 
23 The instrumental variables analysis is designed to identify cross-sectional variation in stock price across firms, and 
therefore I do not include firm fixed effects (consistent with Weller, 2018). Including firm fixed effects effectively 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

27 
 
find that the instrumented AT is positively associated with management guidance (p-value < 0.05 
and p-value < 0.10 for LnGuideCount and Guider, respectively).24  
5.2 Tick Size Pilot program 
 
The Tick Size Pilot (TSP) program was a controlled experiment where a randomized group 
of small-capitalization stocks had their minimum tick size increased for approximately two years 
beginning in October 2016. Following Lee and Watts (2021), who document that treated firms saw 
substantial decreases in AT, I utilize this randomly controlled experiment to examine whether 
exogenous decreases in AT lead to less management guidance. 
 
I obtain the TSP data from FINRA to identify treated and control firms (approximately 
2600 total firms, split evenly into treatment and control groups), dropping those that engage in 
M&A activity, delist during the sample period, or have a stock price drop below $1, and those in 
the financial services industry. The treatment began on October 3, 2016 (with a rollout over the 
month) and ended on October 3, 2018. I keep two years before the treatment start date, the twoyear treatment period, and two years after the program ended. I define Treated as an indicator 
equal to one for firms assigned to the treatment group (approximately 50.2% of my firm-quarters) 
and Post as an indicator equal to one if the firm’s earnings announcement falls after the 
implementation of the treatment (Nov. 1, 2016). PostCompletion is an indicator equal to one if the 
 
turns the stock price instrument into a proxy for recent performance (i.e., high prices follow periods of high returns, 
and low prices follow periods of low returns). 
24 One concern with the stock price instrument is that it may increase liquidity (absent AT) by lowering the cost of 
narrowing the spread. Hagenberg et al. (2021) find that liquidity increases reduce disclosure. Therefore the liquidity 
channel predicts results opposite to what I find in this setting (i.e., higher stock prices increase liquidity through 
cheaper tick sizes, which should reduce disclosure). To address this concern, I test whether the instrument is stronger 
over the second half of my sample when AT is more prevalent. Because AT increases over my sample period, the 
stock price’s effect on AT should be stronger in my sample’s later years than in the earlier years.  However, the stock 
price’s direct effect on liquidity should be the same across my sample period. I define a new variable, Late, equal to 
1 if the earnings announcement occurs in 2017 or later, and instrument for AT and AT x Late using LagPrice and 
LagPrice x Late, finding that the coefficient on the instrumented AT x Late is positive and significant for 
LnGuideCount (p-value < 0.10) and positive but not statistically significant for Guider. These results are consistent 
with the stock price instrument operating primarily through AT. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

28 
 
firm’s earnings announcement falls after the conclusion of the treatment period (Oct. 3, 2018). 
Hope and Liu (2022) document that, although the parallel trends assumption is not violated, there 
are different levels of guidance pre-treatment.25 In my analyses, I include controls from equation 
(1), their interactions with Treated, and firm and quarter fixed effects (Hope & Liu, 2022). 
Table 8, Panel A presents the main results of the TSP. Columns 1 and 2 include only the 
two pre-treatment and two treatment years, whereas columns 3 and 4 include the two years 
following the completion of the experiment. Treated x Post is negative and significant across all 
four models (p-values < 0.05 in columns 1 through 3, and p-value < 0.01 in column 4), consistent 
with treated firms reducing guidance when their tick size increases and AT falls during the 
treatment period. Treated x PostCompletion, which compares the post-experiment period to the 
treatment period, is not significantly different from zero. Management guidance remaining lower 
for treated firms after the experiment ends is consistent with guidance being a relatively “sticky” 
disclosure policy. Increasing guidance can be costly and commit firms to guide in future quarters, 
which may prevent the expected guidance recovery after the experiment ends. 
 
Hope and Liu (2022) also examine the TSP and its effects on management guidance. They 
propose that increased tick sizes reduce liquidity and weaken the market response to management 
guidance, and, as a result, firms issue less guidance. Expanding on their analyses, I test the three 
channels through which AT may affect management guidance in the TSP setting.26 I proxy for 
 
25 Following Hope and Liu (2022), I test the effects of the TSP on EPS guidance, though I measure it over earnings 
announcement windows, consistent with my research question. I replicate their result using guidance measured over 
full calendar quarters. Since most guidance is released with earnings announcements, restricting guidance to 
announcement windows has little effect on the results. I find similar results for tests of parallel trends but do not 
tabulate them for brevity. 
26 For the information acquisition channel, Lee and Watts (2021) provide strong evidence that the TSP reduced AT 
and increased information acquisition for treated firms. For the liquidity channel, Chung et al. (2020) find mixed 
effects of the TSP on liquidity – treated firms see worse liquidity for small trades but potentially improved liquidity 
for large trades. For the market response channel, treated firms have lower absolute returns and volume around 
earnings announcements (Lee & Watts, 2021; Hope & Liu, 2022).  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

29 
 
information acquisition using EDGAR downloads (LnEDGAR), liquidity using intraday effective 
spreads (ESpread), and market responses using the firm’s earnings response coefficient (ERC) (see 
Appendix B for variable definitions). Taking the average of each variable by firm over pretreatment and treatment periods, I redefine the treatment variable (Treated) using the change from 
the pre-treatment to treatment periods. Treated_High (Treated_Low) is an indicator for whether 
the firm has an above (below) median change in the mediating variable within the treatment group. 
 
In Panel B, the only statistically significant difference in the treatment effect is for the 
change in EDGAR downloads (p-values < 0.05, columns 1 and 2), where firms that experience 
relatively more growth in EDGAR downloads see larger declines in disclosure.27 This result is 
consistent with the information acquisition channel. The change in effective spreads is not 
statistically significant, but the ERC results are close (p-value = 0.13 and p-value = 0.28, columns 
5 and 6). This evidence, though relatively weak, is consistent with the market response channel.28 
While the results are consistent with the TSP operating through the information acquisition 
channel, they should be interpreted with care. Although the TSP treatment is exogenous, the 
change in the cross-sectional variables is not. The channel tests have endogeneity and reverse 
causality concerns and should be interpreted as associative evidence of the mechanism. 
 
27 Hope and Liu (2022) also perform a cross-sectional test on EDGAR search volume but do not find statistically 
significant results. Their research design splits the sample on raw increases or decreases in EDGAR search volume 
(e.g., there are 3,499 firm-quarters with decreases in search volume and 11,966 firm-quarters with increases in search 
volume). Finding a similar treatment effect in each subgroup, they conclude that search volume is not the channel 
through which the TSP operates. However, if the TSP causes search volume to increase (decrease) more (less) than 
the control group in the search volume increase (decrease) subsample, the TSP could operate through search volume 
and exist in both the search volume increase and decrease subsamples. In Table 8, Panel B, I divide the treatment 
sample into above and below-median changes in search volume, identifying relative differences within the treatment 
group. Because this is a difference-in-difference design, my research design choice identifies firms that are likely to 
have stronger or weaker responses to the TSP treatment compared to the control group. 
28 In an untabulated test, I find the change in AT does not significantly mediate the effect of the TSP treatment; the 
treatment group with above-median changes in AT (i.e., less of a decrease) have a weaker disclosure response, 
consistent with expectations, but the difference compared to the below-median change in AT group is not statistically 
significant. The lack of significance could result for several reasons: perhaps AT is not the channel through which the 
TSP operates, even small changes in AT could drive changes in information acquisition and disclosure, or the change 
in AT is endogenous with firm disclosure. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

30 
 
5.3 Nasdaq technological upgrade 
 
For my final identification setting, I use a technological upgrade at the Nasdaq Stock 
Exchange in April and May of 2010 that reduced order processing and implementation speeds 
from microseconds to nanoseconds. Assuming the speed upgrade exogenously increased AT more 
strongly for Nasdaq-listed firms compared to NYSE-listed firms, I define Nasdaq firms as my 
treatment group (Nasdaq) and NYSE firms as my control group. Following Chordia and Miao 
(2020), I use two years before and after the upgrade for a difference-in-difference design, matching 
treated firm-quarters to control firm-quarters on the controls from equation (1) and requiring exact 
matches on quarter, Fama-French 48 industry, and size decile. I define Post as an indicator equal 
to one for earnings announcements made after the upgrade in May 2010.29 
 
In Table 9, I regress LnGuideCount and Guider on Nasdaq, Post, and Nasdaq x Post, along 
with a suite of controls and fixed effects. The variable of interest, Nasdaq x Post, is positive in 
both regressions (p-value = 0.13 and p-value < 0.05 for LnGuideCount and Guider, respectively), 
consistent with Nasdaq firms issuing relatively more guidance compared to NYSE firms after the 
speed upgrade in 2010. These results are further evidence that increases in AT are causally 
associated with increases in guidance. 
6. AT and the Post-Guidance Information Environment 
 
My study provides evidence that managers issue more guidance around earnings 
announcements when pre-announcement AT reduces information acquisition by investors. In my 
final set of analyses, I consider whether announcement guidance substitutes for the decrease in 
 
29 I test the post-match covariate balance and pre-treatment parallel trends (untabulated). The covariate balance is 
improved compared to the unmatched sample. However, some statistically significant differences remain. After 
requiring exact matches on industry and size decile within quarter, linear controls are likely more effective at capturing 
minor differences between matched firms. I also test the parallel trends assumption over the pre-treatment period by 
regressing LnGuideCount and Guider on Nasdaq, a continuous variable capturing pre-treatment quarters 1-8 
(Quarters), and the interaction between Nasdaq x Quarters. The coefficient on Nasdaq x Quarters is not statistically 
significant in both regressions. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

31 
 
information acquisition and improves the firm’s information environment. Evidence suggests that 
investors rely more on firm disclosures for information when AT reduces information acquisition 
(e.g., price jumps at earnings announcements are larger following high pre-announcement AT) 
(Weller, 2018). If investors are more reliant on firm disclosures, I predict that pre-announcement 
AT will (1) increase the effectiveness of guidance at reducing information asymmetry and 
improving liquidity (Balakrishnan et al., 2014; Schoenfeld, 2017) and (2) decrease investors’ 
reliance on other sources of information for valuing the firm in the post-announcement quarter. 
In Table 10, Panel A, I proxy for information asymmetry and liquidity using spreads, 
illiquidity, and intraday volatility (ESpread, Illiquidity, and iVol) measured over the postannouncement quarter. The coefficients on AT x Guider are negative and significant across all 
three regressions (p-values < 0.01), consistent with guidance more effectively reducing 
information asymmetry and improving liquidity when pre-announcement AT is high.30 
 
In Panel B, I use the return variance decomposition from Brogaard et al. (2022). This 
measure uses a vector autoregression to estimate the percentage of daily return variance 
attributable to market-wide information (MktInfo), firm-specific public information (PublicInfo), 
firm-specific private information (PrivateInfo), and noise (Noise). I calculate these measures over 
the ninety days after the earnings announcement (see Brogaard et al., 2022, for details). I find the 
coefficients on AT x Guider are negative for MktInfo (p-value=0.12, column 1) and PrivateInfo (pvalue=0.28, column 3) and positive for PublicInfo (p-value=0.11, column 2) and Noise (pvalue=0.13, column 4). In columns 5 and 6, I combine return variance attributable to external 
information sources (MktInfo plus PrivateInfo) and variance not attributable to external 
 
30 In untabulated analyses, I find that guidance from “new guiders” (i.e., firms which did not issue guidance in the 
prior quarter) does not affect post-announcement market quality differentially compared to “consistent guiders” (i.e., 
firms which issued guidance at the prior announcement). The results are also robust to using LnGuideCount instead 
of Guider. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

32 
 
information (PublicInfo and Noise). The coefficient on AT x Guider is negative for external 
information (p-value < 0.05) and positive for firm-provided information and noise (p-value < 
0.05). These results suggest that post-announcement returns reflect relatively less external 
information after guidance is issued in response to pre-announcement AT. Overall, the results in 
Table 10 indicate that guidance effectively levels the playing field by enriching the public 
information environment, which limits the importance of private information in prices following 
the earnings announcement.  
7. Conclusion 
I investigate pre-announcement AT's influence on management guidance around earnings 
announcements. Pre-announcement AT is positively associated with the likelihood of issuing 
guidance and the quantity of guidance issued. The positive association between pre-announcement 
AT and guidance is consistent across various guidance measures, guidance issued is more accurate 
and precise, and managers also increase the likelihood of holding a conference call. Overall, the 
evidence indicates that managers provide more informative voluntary disclosures in response to 
pre-announcement AT.  
I identify three channels through which pre-announcement AT could affect management 
guidance: the information acquisition, liquidity, and market response channels. Evidence in the 
pooled regression path analysis and cross-sectional TSP tests is most consistent with AT reducing 
information acquisition and managers increasing disclosure to offset this information loss. 
However, because these channel tests are neither causal nor mutually exclusive, they should be 
interpreted with care. 
I contribute to the literature by providing evidence that AT increases managers’ voluntary 
disclosures. Prior literature examines how AT affects what information is acquired and how 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

33 
 
efficiently it is priced, finding that AT prices available information more efficiently but may deter 
investors from becoming informed (Weller, 2018; Chordia & Miao, 2020). My study considers 
whether these effects of AT on markets change the incentives for managers to disclose information 
voluntarily. Identifying a new pathway through which AT can affect price informativeness, 
increased guidance by managers could offset or surpass changes in price informativeness through 
other channels. Lastly, my results show that guidance is more effective at improving firms’ 
information environments when issued following high AT, demonstrating that managers can 
effectively respond to market quality changes brought about by AT.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

34 
 
REFERENCES 
Abramova, I., J.E. Core, and A. Sutherland. 2020. "Institutional investor attention and firm 
disclosure." The Accounting Review 95.6: 1-21. 
Ahmed, A.S., Y. Li, and N. Xu. 2020. "Tick size and financial reporting quality in small‐cap firms: 
Evidence from a natural experiment." Journal of Accounting Research 58(4): 869-914. 
Ajinkya, B.B., and M.J. Gift. 1984. “Corporate Managers’ Earnings Forecasts and Symmetrical 
Adjustments of Market Expectations.” Journal of Accounting Research 22 (2): 425–44. 
Amihud, Y.. 2002. “Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series Effects.” Journal of 
Financial Markets 5 (1): 31–56.  
Balakrishnan, K., M.B. Billings, B. Kelly, and A. Ljungqvist. 2014. “Shaping Liquidity: On the 
Causal Effects of Voluntary Disclosure.” The Journal of Finance 69 (5): 2237–78. 
Barardehi, Y.H., D.Bernhardt, T.G. Ruchti, and M. Weidenmier. 2021. "The night and day of 
Amihud’s (2002) liquidity measure." The Review of Asset Pricing Studies 11(2): 269-308. 
Bentley, J.W., T.E. Christensen, K.H. Gee, and B.C. Whipple. 2018. "Disentangling managers’ and 
analysts’ non‐GAAP reporting." Journal of Accounting Research 56(4): 1039-1081. 
Beyer, A., D.A. Cohen, T.Z. Lys, and B.R. Walther. 2010. “The Financial Reporting Environment: 
Review of the Recent Literature.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 50 (2–3): 296–343. 
Bhattacharya, N., B. Chakrabarty, and X. Wang. 2020. "High-frequency traders and price 
informativeness during earnings announcements." Review of Accounting Studies 25: 1156-1199. 
Billings, M.B., R. Jennings, and B. Lev. 2015. “On Guidance and Volatility.” Journal of Accounting 
and Economics 60 (2–3): 161–80.  
Blankespoor, E., E. deHaan, and C. Zhu. 2018. "Capital market effects of media synthesis and 
dissemination: Evidence from robo-journalism." Review of Accounting Studies 23: 1-36. 
Boone, A.L., and J.T. White. 2015. “The Effect of Institutional Ownership on Firm Transparency and 
Information Production.” Journal of Financial Economics 117 (3): 508–33.  
Bradley, D., J. Clarke, S. Lee, and C. Ornthanalai. 2014. "Are analysts’ recommendations 
informative? Intraday evidence on the impact of time stamp delays." The Journal of 
Finance 69(2): 645-673.  
Brogaard, J., T. Hendershott, and R. Riordan. 2014. “High-Frequency Trading and Price Discovery.” 
Review of Financial Studies 27 (8): 2267–2306.  
Brogaard, J., T.H. Nguyen, T.J. Putnins, and E. Wu. 2022. "What moves stock prices? The roles of 
news, noise, and information." The Review of Financial Studies 35, no. 9: 4341-4386. 
Chakrabarty, B., P.C. Moulton, and X.F. Wang. 2022. "Attention: How high-frequency trading 
improves price efficiency following earnings announcements." Journal of Financial Markets 57: 
100690. 
Chen, X., Q. Cheng, T. Luo, and H. Yue. 2020. "Short sellers and long‐run management 
forecasts." Contemporary Accounting Research 37 (2): 802-828. 
Chordia, T., and B. Miao. 2020. "Market efficiency in real time: Evidence from low latency activity 
around earnings announcements." Journal of Accounting and Economics 70.2-3. 
Chung, K.H., A.J. Lee, and D. Rösch. 2020. "Tick size, liquidity for small and large orders, and price 
informativeness: Evidence from the Tick Size Pilot Program." Journal of Financial 
Economics 136(3): 879-899. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

35 
 
Coller, M., and T.L. Yohn. 1997. "Management forecasts and information asymmetry: An 
examination of bid-ask spreads." Journal of Accounting Research 35(2): 181-191. 
Conrad, J., S. Wahal, and J. Xiang. 2015. “High-Frequency Quoting, Trading, and the Efficiency of 
Prices.” Journal of Financial Economics 116 (2): 271–91. 
Cotter, J., I. Tuna, and P.D. Wysocki. 2006. “Expectations management and beatable targets: How do 
analysts react to explicit earnings guidance?” Contemporary Accounting Research, 23(3): 593624. 
Dambra, M., B. Schonberger, and C. Wasley. 2023. "Creating visibility: Voluntary disclosure by 
private firms pursuing an initial public offering." Review of Accounting Studies: 1-50. 
Diamond, D.W., and R.E. Verrecchia. 1991. "Disclosure, liquidity, and the cost of capital." The 
Journal of Finance 46(4): 1325-1359. 
Drake, M.S., B.A. Johnson, D.T. Roulstone, and J.R. Thornock. 2020."Is there information content in 
information acquisition?." The Accounting Review 95(2): 113-139. 
Fishman, M.J., and K.M. Hagerty. 2003. "Mandatory versus voluntary disclosure in markets with 
informed and uninformed customers." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 19.1: 4563. 
Goldstein, M.A., P. Kumar, and F.C. Graves. 2014. “Computerized and High-Frequency Trading.” 
Financial Review 49 (2): 177–202. 
Greene, W.H. 2012. "Econometric analysis, 71e." Stern School of Business, New York University.  
Hagenberg, T.C., B.P. Miller, A. Sharma, and T.L. Yohn. 2021. "The impact of an SEC-induced 
increase to stock liquidity on voluntary disclosure." Available at SSRN 3761177.  
Han, J.C.Y., and J.J. Wild. 1991. "Stock price behavior associated with managers' earnings and 
revenue forecasts." Journal of Accounting Research (1991): 79-95. 
Hasbrouck, J., and G. Saar. 2013. “Low-Latency Trading.” Journal of Financial Markets 16 (4): 646–
79. 
Hendershott, T., C.M. Jones, and A.J. Menkveld. 2011. “Does Algorithmic Trading Improve 
Liquidity?” The Journal of Finance 66 (1): 1–33. 
Hendershott, T., and R. Riordan. 2013. “Algorithmic Trading and the Market for Liquidity.” Journal 
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48 (04): 1001–1024.  
Hirschey, N. 2021. "Do high-frequency traders anticipate buying and selling pressure?." Management 
Science 67(6): 3321-3345.  
Hoffmann, P. 2014. “A Dynamic Limit Order Market with Fast and Slow Traders.” Journal of 
Financial Economics 113 (1): 156–69. 
Hope, O., and J. Liu. 2022. "Does stock liquidity shape voluntary disclosure? Evidence from the SEC 
tick size pilot program." Review of Accounting Studies: 1-38. 
Hu, G.X., J. Pan, and J. Wang. 2017. “Early Peek Advantage? Efficient Price Discovery with Tiered 
Information Disclosure.” Journal of Financial Economics 126 (2): 399–421.  
Jayaraman, S., and J.S. Wu. 2020. "Should I stay or should I grow? Using voluntary disclosure to 
elicit market feedback." The Review of Financial Studies 33(8): 3854-3888. 
Ke, B., and S. Ramalingegowda. 2005. "Do institutional investors exploit the post-earnings 
announcement drift?." Journal of Accounting and Economics 39(1): 25-53.  
Korajczyk, R. A., and D. Murphy. 2019. “High-Frequency Market Making to Large Institutional 
Trades.” The Review of Financial Studies 32 (3): 1034–67. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

36 
 
Landsman, W.R., E.L. Maydew, and J.R. Thornock. 2012. "The information content of annual 
earnings announcements and mandatory adoption of IFRS." Journal of Accounting and 
Economics 53(1-2): 34-54. 
Lee, C.M.C, and E.M. Watts. 2021. "Tick size tolls: Can a trading slowdown improve earnings news 
discovery?." The Accounting Review 96.3: 373-401. 
Li, Y., and L. Zhang. 2015. “Short Selling Pressure, Stock Price Behavior, and Management Forecast 
Precision: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Accounting Research 53 (1): 79–
117. 
Market Makers. 2023. 9 Out Of 10 Hedge Fund Stars Will Use Ai In 2023. (New Market Makers 
Survey Revealed). PR Newswire, 17 January.  https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/9out-of-10-hedge-fund-stars-will-use-ai-in-2023-new-market-makers-survey-revealed301722699.html 
Menkveld, A.J., and M.A. Zoican. 2017. “Need for Speed? Exchange Latency and Liquidity.” The 
Review of Financial Studies 30 (4): 1188–1228.  
Noe, C.F. 1999. "Voluntary disclosures and insider transactions." Journal of Accounting and 
Economics 27 (3): 305-326.  
O’Hara, M.. 2015. “High Frequency Market Microstructure.” Journal of Financial Economics 116 
(2): 257–70. 
O’Hara, M., C. Yao, and M. Ye. 2014. “What’s Not There: Odd Lots and Market Data.” The Journal 
of Finance 69 (5): 2199–2236. 
Oster, E. 2019. "Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence." Journal of 
Business & Economic Statistics 37.2: 187-204. 
Rogers, J.L., and A. Van Buskirk. 2013. “Bundled Forecasts in Empirical Accounting Research.” 
Journal of Accounting and Economics 55 (1): 43–65.  
Rogers, J.L., D.J. Skinner, and S.L.C. Zechman. 2017. “Run EDGAR Run: SEC Dissemination in a 
High-Frequency World.” Journal of Accounting Research 55 (2): 459–505.  
Schoenfeld, J.. 2017. “The effect of voluntary disclosure on stock liquidity: New evidence from index 
funds.” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 63 (1): 51-74. 
Securities and Exchange Commission. 2010. “Securities Exchange Act Release No. 34-61358, 75 FR 
3594, 3606.” 
Segal, B., and D. Segal. 2016. “Are Managers Strategic in Reporting Non-Earnings News? Evidence 
on Timing and News Bundling.” Review of Accounting Studies 21 (4): 1203–44.  
Skinner, D.J. 1994. “Why Firms Voluntarily Disclose Bad News.” Journal of Accounting Research 32 
(1): 38–60. 
Skinner, A.N.. 2023. "Subject matter complexity and disclosure channel richness." Forthcoming at 
The Accounting Review. 
Sletten, E.. 2011. “The Effect of Stock Price on Discretionary Disclosure.” Review of Accounting 
Studies 17 (1): 96–133. 
Suijs, J.. 2007. "Voluntary disclosure of information when firms are uncertain of investor 
response." Journal of Accounting and Economics 43.2-3: 391-410. 
Twedt, B. 2016. "Spreading the word: Price discovery and newswire dissemination of management 
earnings guidance." The Accounting Review 91(1): 317-346. 
Van Kervel, V., and A.J. Menkveld. 2019. "High‐frequency trading around large institutional 
orders." The Journal of Finance 74(3): 1091-1137. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

37 
 
Verrecchia, R.E. 1990. “Information Quality and Discretionary Disclosure.” Journal of Accounting 
and Economics 12 (4): 365–80. 
Weller, B.M. 2018. “Does Algorithmic Trading Reduce Information Acquisition?” The Review of 
Financial Studies 31 (6): 2184–2226. 
Yang, L., and H. Zhu. 2018. "Back-running: Seeking and hiding fundamental information in order 
flows." Rotman School of Management Working Paper 2583915.  
Ye, M., M.Y. Zheng, and W. Zhu. 2023. "The effect of tick size on managerial learning from stock 
prices." Journal of Accounting and Economics 75(1): 101515. 
Zhang, Y. 2008. "Analyst responsiveness and the post-earnings-announcement drift." Journal of 
Accounting and Economics 46(1): 201-215. 
Zuo, Luo. "The informational feedback effect of stock prices on management forecasts." Journal of 
Accounting and Economics 61.2-3 (2016): 391-413. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

38 
 
APPENDIX A 
Variable Measurement Timeline 
 
Appendix A presents a timeline for variable construction. The announcement window is trading day [-1,+1] around the current earnings 
announcement (𝐸𝐴𝑡). LnGuideCount and Guider are measured within this window, along with control variables for the earnings surprise 
and firm characteristics (e.g., firm size). The post-announcement window begins two trading days after 𝐸𝐴𝑡 and ends two days before 
𝐸𝐴𝑡+1. AT is measured over the pre-announcement window, which begins six trading days following the prior earnings announcement 
(𝐸𝐴𝑡−1) and ends two trading days before the current earnings announcement (𝐸𝐴𝑡). The market control window is measured over 
trading days [-126,+5] around 𝐸𝐴𝑡−1. Market-based measures, such as share turnover, intraday spreads, illiquidity, and intraday 
volatility are measured over the market control window because they may be directly affected by AT.  
𝐸𝐴𝑡
𝐸𝐴𝑡−1
𝐸𝐴𝑡+1
Announcement
Window
Pre-Announcement
Window
Post-Announcement
Window
Market Control
Window
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

39 
 
APPENDIX B 
Variable Definitions 
Variable 
Definition 
AT Variables 
AT 
The first principal component of the OddLotVolumeRatio, TradeToOrderRatio, CancelToTradeRatio, and 
TradeSize. Multiplied by -1 such that the CancelToTradeRatio and OddLotVolumeRatio 
(TradeToOrderRatio and TradeSize) are positively (negatively) correlated with AT. 
CancelToTradeRatio 
Log of the number of cancellations divided by the number of trades executed. Measured daily and 
averaged over the pre-announcement window. 
OddLotVolumeRatio 
Log of the volume of trades executed in odd-lot sizes divided by the total volume traded. Measured daily 
and averaged over the pre-announcement window. 
TradeSize 
Log of the daily dollar volume traded divided by the number of trades executed. Measured daily and 
averaged over the pre-announcement window. 
TradeToOrderRatio 
Log of the total volume traded divided by the total volume of orders placed. Measured daily and averaged 
over the pre-announcement window. 
 
 
Disclosure Variables 
 
AbsFrcstRange 
Absolute difference between the upper and lower bounds for closed range management forecasts, scaled by 
stock price. 
Accuracy 
Absolute value of the difference between management forecasted EPS and actual EPS, scaled by stock 
price and multiplied by -1.  
ConfCall 
Indicator equal to one if the firm holds a conference call in the announcement window, zero otherwise. 
Guider 
Indicator equal to one if the firm releases guidance in the announcement window, zero otherwise. 
Horizon 
Log of one plus the number of days between the date the management guidance is released and the 
forecasted quarter end date. 
Ln8Ks 
Log of one plus the number of voluntary 8-Ks (issued under code 7.01 for Reg FD disclosures and 8.01 for 
Other Events) measured over the announcement window. 
LnConfCall_Seconds 
Log of the number of seconds in a conference call. 
LnGuideCount 
Log of one plus the number of pieces of guidance issued in the announcement window 
NonGAAP 
Indicator equal to one if the firm releases non-GAAP earnings in the announcement window, zero 
otherwise. 
Specificity 
A discrete measure that equals one if the management forecast projects EPS above or below a numerical 
value, two if it is a closed range forecast, and three if it is a point estimate. 
 
 
Other Variables 
 
AbsAnalystUpdates 
The absolute value of the percentage change in the analyst consensus forecast for quarter t+1 from the 
beginning to the end of the pre-announcement window. 
AnalystFollowing 
The number of unique analysts that issue a forecast for the firm in the pre-announcement or market control 
windows. 
Dispersion 
Standard deviation of the forecasts that make up the consensus earnings expectation as of two days before 
the earnings announcement. 
ERC 
Earnings response coefficient measured at the firm level. Calculated by regressing announcement window 
cumulative abnormal returns on UE in the pre-treatment and treatment windows of the Tick Size Pilot 
experiment. 
ESpread 
Difference between the trade price and midpoint, multiplied by two times a signed indicator for whether 
the trade is a buy (+1) or a sell (-1), scaled by the midpoint, averaged across all trades over the day. 
Measured daily and averaged over the market control window. Multiplied by 10,000 for presentation in 
basis points. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

40 
 
Variable 
Definition 
FutureBadNews 
Indicator equal to one if the analyst consensus forecast for quarter t+1 (measured immediately before the 
quarter t earnings announcement) is greater than reported earnings for quarter t+1, and zero otherwise. 
Illiquidity 
Absolute value of the return between the market open and market close, divided by the dollar volume 
traded on that day. Measured daily by firm and averaged over the market control window. Multiplied by 
1,000,000 for presentation. 
InsiderSales 
Net purchases and sales volume for officers and directors over the pre-announcement window, divided by 
the firm’s market value. 
IO 
Percentage of shares owned by institutions from 13-F filings. 
iVol 
Sum of squared returns by trade across a given day, scaled by the number of trades on that day. Measured 
daily and averaged over the market control window. Multiplied by 10,000 for presentation. 
LnCAR_PreAnn 
Log of one plus the cumulative abnormal return in the pre-announcement window, estimated from the 
Fama-French three-factor model. 
LnEDGAR 
Log of the number of non-robot EDGAR downloads measured daily and averaged over the preannouncement window. 
LagPrice 
The stock price at the end of the market control window, ranked into deciles. 
LnMktCap 
Log market value of equity, calculated as the share price times the common shares outstanding. 
Loss 
Indicator equal to one if the firm recorded negative earnings and zero otherwise. 
MktInfo 
Using the variance decomposition in Brogaard et al. (20220), the percentage of return variance attributable 
to market-wide news over the 90 days after the announcement window. 
NegUE 
Indicator equal to one if UE is less than -0.0001, zero otherwise. 
NewsResponse 
Dollar volume traded in the minute a news story is released, divided by the total volume traded on that day. 
Measured by news story and averaged across all news stories over the pre-announcement window. 
NewsEvents 
Number of unique event keys by firm from the Dow Jones Edition of RavenPack over the preannouncement window. 
Noise 
Using the variance decomposition in Brogaard et al. (20220), the percentage of return variance attributable 
to noise over the 90 days after the announcement window. 
Post 
Indicator equal to one if the earnings announcement occurs after the treatment begins for the Tick Size 
Pilot experiment (Nov. 1, 2016) or the Nasdaq technological upgrade (Jun. 1, 2010), zero otherwise. 
PostCompletion 
Indicator equal to one if the earnings announcement occurs after the treatment period ends for the Tick 
Size Pilot experiment (Oct. 3, 2018). 
PosUE 
Indicator equal to one if UE is greater than +0.0001, zero otherwise. 
PPUE 
Proportion of the prior four quarters for which the firm beat earnings expectations (i.e., the proportion for 
which PosUE equals one). 
PrivateInfo 
Using the variance decomposition in Brogaard et al. (20220), the percentage of return variance attributable 
to firm-specific, private information over the 90 days after the announcement window. 
PublicInfo 
Using the variance decomposition in Brogaard et al. (20220), the percentage of return variance attributable 
to firm-specific, public news over the 90 days after the announcement window. 
Q4 
Indicator equal to one if it is the firm's fourth fiscal quarter, zero otherwise. 
SalesGrowth 
Percentage change in sales compared to the prior quarter. 
Treated 
Indicator equal to one if the firm is a treatment firm in the Tick Size Pilot experiment, zero otherwise. 
Turnover 
Number of shares traded divided by the common shares outstanding. Measured daily and averaged over the 
market control window. 
UE 
Standardized unexpected earnings calculated as actual earnings per share less the mean consensus forecast, 
based on the most recent forecast from each analyst up to two trading days before the earnings 
announcement, scaled by the share price at the beginning of the pre-announcement window. The measure 
reflects the seasonal random walk earnings surprise if there is no analyst forecast. Ranked into deciles. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

41 
 
TABLES 
TABLE 1 
Summary Statistics (N=76,988) 
Table 1 presents summary statistics for select variables used in the empirical tests. See Appendix B for variable definitions. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Variable 
Mean 
StdDev 
P25 
Median 
P75 
AT Proxies 
 
 
 
 
 
AT 
-0.323 
1.357 
-1.196 
-0.315 
0.566 
OddLotVolumeRatio 
-1.870 
0.622 
-2.258 
-1.815 
-1.425 
TradeToOrderRatio 
-3.644 
0.485 
-3.939 
-3.593 
-3.298 
CancelToTradeRatio 
3.192 
0.495 
2.851 
3.130 
3.447 
TradeSize 
4.542 
0.426 
4.283 
4.558 
4.842 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Disclosure Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
Guider 
0.670 
0.470 
0.000 
1.000 
1.000 
LnGuideCount 
0.874 
0.722 
0.000 
1.099 
1.386 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
UE 
0.000 
0.016 
-0.001 
0.001 
0.002 
PosUE 
0.610 
0.488 
0.000 
1.000 
1.000 
NegUE 
0.333 
0.471 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
PPUE 
0.636 
0.306 
0.500 
0.750 
1.000 
Loss 
0.273 
0.445 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
SalesGrowth 
0.131 
0.488 
-0.027 
0.058 
0.175 
Q4 
0.258 
0.437 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
LnCAR_PreAnn 
-0.027 
0.206 
-0.110 
-0.008 
0.086 
NewsEvents 
14.315 
17.056 
0.000 
11.000 
21.000 
InsiderSales 
0.001 
0.003 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Dispersion 
0.102 
0.232 
0.020 
0.041 
0.090 
LnMktCap 
21.459 
1.632 
20.280 
21.327 
22.500 
AnalystFollowing 
10.869 
7.462 
5.000 
9.000 
15.000 
IO 
0.764 
0.243 
0.678 
0.841 
0.937 
Turnover 
0.010 
0.009 
0.005 
0.008 
0.012 
ESpread 
15.927 
23.473 
4.622 
9.018 
17.049 
iVol 
0.034 
0.133 
0.001 
0.004 
0.015 
Illiquidity 
0.010 
0.041 
0.000 
0.001 
0.004 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

42 
 
 
TABLE 2 
Correlation Matrix 
Table 2 presents the correlation matrix. See Appendix B for variable definitions. * indicates statistical significance at 1%. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) (14) (15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
(19) 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) (23) (24) (25) 
(1) AT 
1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) OddLotVolumeRatio 
0.86* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) TradeToOrderRatio 
-0.76* -0.36* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) CancelToTradeRatio 
0.58* 0.16* -0.79* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) TradeSize 
-0.72* -0.87* 0.15* 0.06* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) Guider 
0.01 -0.02* -0.05* -0.02* 0.00 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(7) LnGuideCount 
0.01* 0.00 -0.03* -0.04* -0.03* 0.85* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(8) UE 
0.06* 0.06* -0.04* 0.00 -0.06* 0.04* 0.05* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(9) PosUE 
0.05* 0.07* -0.02* -0.04* -0.08* 0.09* 0.12* 0.38* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) NegUE 
-0.07* -0.09* 0.03* 0.03* 0.10* -0.12* -0.16* -0.40* -0.88* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) PPUE 
0.08* 0.11* -0.04* -0.05* -0.12* 0.16* 0.22* 0.13* 0.25* -0.28* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12) Loss 
-0.21* -0.13* 0.24* -0.17* 0.08* -0.16* -0.13* -0.16* -0.16* 0.20* -0.20* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) SalesGrowth 
-0.05* -0.00 0.09* -0.07* -0.02* -0.09* -0.07* 0.06* 0.05* -0.05* -0.01 0.05* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(14) Q4 
-0.01 -0.00 0.01 -0.00 0.00 0.02* 0.02* -0.01 -0.01* 0.01* 0.00 0.02* 0.01* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(15) LnCAR_PreAnn 
-0.01 -0.03* -0.02* 0.03* 0.04* 0.04* 0.03* 0.03* 0.03* -0.03* -0.03* -0.05* -0.04* 0.02* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(16) NewsEvents 
-0.03* 0.01* 0.04* -0.14* -0.04* 0.09* 0.08* 0.03* 0.05* -0.09* 0.13* -0.12* -0.01 0.09* 0.01* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(17) InsiderSales 
0.03* 0.05* 0.00 -0.02* -0.06* -0.02* 0.01 0.02* 0.03* -0.03* 0.06* 0.03* 0.07* 0.11* -0.05* 0.05* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18) Dispersion 
-0.03* -0.01* 0.04* -0.06* -0.02* -0.13* -0.15* -0.19* -0.08* 0.11* -0.13* 0.17* 0.05* 0.01* -0.03* -0.03* -0.03* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(19) LnMktCap 
-0.02* 0.03* 0.00 -0.24* -0.08* 0.21* 0.18* 0.06* 0.10* -0.17* 0.24* -0.29* -0.05* -0.01 0.04* 0.51* -0.05* -0.03* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
 
(20) AnalystFollowing 
-0.23* -0.21* 0.12* -0.23* 0.14* 0.20* 0.18* 0.02* 0.05* -0.11* 0.16* -0.09* -0.01* 0.01 0.04* 0.37* -0.02* 0.02* 0.66* 1.00  
 
 
 
 
(21) IO 
0.14* 0.18* -0.07* -0.09* -0.21* 0.20* 0.20* 0.06* 0.06* -0.08* 0.12* -0.10* -0.06* -0.00 0.02* 0.11* 0.02* -0.08* 0.21* 0.17* 1.00  
 
 
 
(22) Turnover 
-0.31* -0.25* 0.24* -0.28* 0.15* 0.01 0.01 -0.00 0.01 0.01 -0.01 0.18* 0.09* -0.00 -0.05* 0.04* 0.07* 0.15* -0.00 0.26* 0.12* 1.00  
 
 
(23) ESpread 
0.09* 0.05* -0.02* 0.32* 0.04* -0.26* -0.24* -0.06* -0.08* 0.11* -0.18* 0.21* 0.07* -0.01 -0.04* -0.22* 0.01* 0.07* -0.58* -0.39* -0.36* -0.18* 1.00  
 
(24) iVol 
0.08* 0.05* -0.02* 0.26* 0.04* -0.18* -0.17* -0.04* -0.06* 0.07* -0.12* 0.14* 0.04* -0.00 -0.03* -0.11* -0.01 0.06* -0.35* -0.22* -0.27* -0.15* 0.88* 1.00  
(25) Illiquidity 
0.02* -0.02* 0.00 0.28* 0.12* -0.16* -0.15* -0.05* -0.06* 0.08* -0.13* 0.13* 0.02* 0.00 -0.01 -0.12* -0.02* 0.04* -0.38* -0.22* -0.28* -0.16* 0.85* 0.84* 1.00 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

43 
 
TABLE 3 
Guidance Frequency and Likelihood 
Table 3 presents regressions of announcement window guidance on pre-announcement AT. Panel A presents the primary analyses, 
where columns 1-2 present results with no controls, columns 3-4 with controls, and columns 5-6 with controls and firm fixed effects. 
Panel B presents models that include contemporaneous market controls and historical guidance. In columns 1-2 of Panel B, 
Turnover, ESpread, iVol, and Illiquidity are measured over the pre-announcement window, contemporaneously with AT. In columns 
3-4 of Panel B, regressions include controls of historical guidance, including the guidance count measured over the preannouncement window (LnGuideCount_PreAnn) and each of the four prior earnings announcement windows 
(LnGuideCount_EALag1 through LnGuideCount_EALag4). Independent variables are standardized with a mean of zero and 
standard deviation of one. See Appendix B for variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered by quarter and firm. *, **, 
and *** indicate significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively, based on a two-tailed test.  
Panel A: Pooled Regression Analyses 
  
No Controls 
  
Controls 
  
Firm Fixed Effects 
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
 
(1) 
(2) 
  
(3) 
(4) 
  
(5) 
(6) 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AT 
0.031** 
0.019** 
  
0.027** 
0.019*** 
  
0.033*** 
0.024*** 
  
(2.53) 
(2.50) 
  
(2.46) 
(2.82) 
  
(4.59) 
(4.89) 
UE 
  
  
  
-0.060*** 
-0.022*** 
  
-0.005 
0.002 
  
  
  
  
(-6.85) 
(-4.42) 
  
(-0.91) 
(0.57) 
PosUE 
  
  
  
0.038* 
0.023** 
  
0.015* 
0.011* 
  
  
  
  
(1.95) 
(2.30) 
  
(1.94) 
(1.78) 
NegUE 
  
  
  
-0.191*** 
-0.069*** 
  
-0.019* 
-0.001 
  
  
  
  
(-8.49) 
(-5.74) 
  
(-1.78) 
(-0.16) 
PPUE 
  
  
  
0.103*** 
0.036*** 
  
0.011*** 
0.004* 
  
  
  
  
(17.66) 
(10.66) 
  
(3.38) 
(1.75) 
Loss 
  
  
  
-0.012 
-0.043*** 
  
-0.020** 
-0.013* 
  
  
  
  
(-0.73) 
(-4.31) 
  
(-2.11) 
(-2.00) 
SalesGrowth 
  
  
  
-0.032*** 
-0.029*** 
  
0.004** 
0.002 
  
  
  
  
(-6.43) 
(-8.32) 
  
(2.11) 
(1.00) 
Q4 
  
  
  
0.029* 
0.013 
  
0.032*** 
0.013** 
  
  
  
  
(1.88) 
(1.34) 
  
(4.35) 
(2.36) 
LnCAR_PreAnn 
  
  
  
0.008* 
0.004 
  
0.001 
0.000 
  
  
  
  
(1.89) 
(1.23) 
  
(0.27) 
(0.04) 
NewsEvents 
  
  
  
0.002 
0.003 
  
0.006 
0.001 
  
  
  
  
(0.19) 
(0.35) 
  
(0.84) 
(0.30) 
InsiderSales 
  
  
  
0.001 
-0.007** 
  
0.001 
0.001 
  
  
  
  
(0.19) 
(-2.05) 
  
(0.60) 
(0.57) 
Dispersion 
  
  
  
-0.063*** 
-0.033*** 
  
-0.026*** 
-0.016*** 
  
  
  
  
(-8.73) 
(-6.15) 
  
(-4.93) 
(-4.31) 
LnMktCap 
  
  
  
-0.074*** 
-0.035*** 
  
0.056*** 
0.024** 
  
  
  
  
(-4.38) 
(-3.22) 
  
(3.31) 
(2.08) 
AnalystFollowing 
  
  
  
0.081*** 
0.053*** 
  
0.090*** 
0.063*** 
  
  
  
  
(5.91) 
(6.75) 
  
(6.43) 
(6.99) 
IO 
  
  
  
0.077*** 
0.047*** 
  
0.042*** 
0.023*** 
  
  
  
  
(6.85) 
(6.35) 
  
(5.54) 
(4.64) 
Turnover 
  
  
  
-0.016* 
-0.009* 
  
-0.014** 
-0.009** 
  
  
  
  
(-1.82) 
(-1.81) 
  
(-2.24) 
(-2.07) 
ESpread 
  
  
  
-0.264*** 
-0.185*** 
  
-0.080*** 
-0.054*** 
  
  
  
  
(-11.27) 
(-10.77) 
  
(-6.33) 
(-5.98) 
iVol 
  
  
  
0.074*** 
0.050*** 
  
0.026*** 
0.014** 
  
  
  
  
(5.66) 
(5.27) 
  
(3.60) 
(2.36) 
Illiquidity 
  
  
  
0.087*** 
0.061*** 
  
0.024*** 
0.018*** 
  
  
  
  
(7.76) 
(7.08) 
  
(3.85) 
(3.82) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

44 
 
TABLE 3, continued 
Guidance Frequency and Likelihood 
 Panel A: Pooled Regression Analyses, continued  
Firm FE 
N 
N 
  
N 
N 
  
Y 
Y 
Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
N 
76,988 
76,988 
  
76,988 
76,988 
  
76,988 
76,988 
R-Squared 
0.01 
0.02 
  
0.15 
0.15 
  
0.70 
0.61 
 
Panel B: Robustness Tests 
  
Contemporaneous Market Controls 
  
Past Guidance 
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
(3) 
(4) 
  
(5) 
(6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AT 
0.028*** 
0.019*** 
  
0.037*** 
0.026*** 
  
(3.54) 
(3.52) 
  
(7.66) 
(7.26) 
Turnover 
-0.018*** 
-0.013*** 
  
  
  
  
(-3.19) 
(-3.08) 
  
  
  
ESpread 
-0.044*** 
-0.031*** 
  
  
  
  
(-3.81) 
(-4.08) 
  
  
  
iVol 
0.018*** 
0.011** 
  
  
  
  
(3.17) 
(2.56) 
  
  
  
Illiquidity 
0.007 
0.006 
  
  
  
  
(1.45) 
(1.54) 
  
  
  
LnGuideCount_PreAnn 
  
  
  
0.031*** 
0.020*** 
  
  
  
  
(5.50) 
(4.75) 
LnGuideCount_EALag1 
  
  
  
0.357*** 
0.201*** 
  
  
  
  
(18.90) 
(18.16) 
LnGuideCount_EALag2 
  
  
  
0.108*** 
0.056*** 
  
  
  
  
(11.13) 
(8.29) 
LnGuideCount_EALag3 
  
  
  
0.012 
0.007 
  
  
  
  
(0.98) 
(1.00) 
LnGuideCount_EALag4 
  
  
  
0.099*** 
0.046*** 
  
  
  
  
(7.20) 
(6.13) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
N 
76,988 
76,988 
  
64,436 
64,436 
R-Squared 
0.70 
0.61 
  
0.76 
0.65 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

45 
 
TABLE  4 
Guidance Characteristics and Other Voluntary Disclosures 
Table 4 presents regressions of the characteristics of guidance and other voluntary disclosures on pre-announcement AT. Panel A 
examines the association between pre-announcement AT and the accuracy, precision, specificity, and horizon of guidance issued 
(columns 1-4, respectively). Panel B examines individual measures of guidance issued around earnings announcements, where 
LnGuideCount is measured specifically for EPS, revenue, capital expenditure, and other guidance (columns 1-4, respectively). Panel 
C examines other voluntary disclosures, including the number of voluntary 8-Ks, whether the firm releases a non-GAAP earnings 
metric, whether the firm holds a conference call, and the length in seconds of the conference call (columns 1-4, respectively). Controls 
are those tabulated in Table 3. Independent variables are standardized with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. See 
Appendix B for variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered by quarter and firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 
0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively, based on a two-tailed test.  
Panel A: Guidance Characteristics 
DEPVAR= 
Accuracy 
AbsFrcstRange 
Specificity 
Horizon 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
AT 
0.005** 
-0.002*** 
0.000 
-0.003 
  
(2.50) 
(-4.41) 
(0.04) 
(-0.30) 
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
33,786 
30,530 
37,813 
37,789 
R-Squared 
0.65 
0.58 
0.38 
0.36 
 
Panel B: Guidance Measures 
Guidance Type= 
EPS 
Revenue 
CapEx 
Other 
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
LnGuideCount 
LnGuideCount 
LnGuideCount 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
  
  
  
  
AT 
0.014*** 
0.020*** 
0.006* 
0.011** 
  
(3.85) 
(5.31) 
(1.99) 
(2.04) 
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
76,988 
76,988 
76,988 
76,988 
R-Squared 
0.75 
0.71 
0.57 
0.61 
 
Panel C: Other Voluntary Disclosures 
DEPVAR= 
Ln8Ks 
NonGAAP 
ConfCall 
LnConfCall_Seconds 
  
(1) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
 
 
 
 
 
AT 
-0.001 
-0.005 
0.025*** 
-0.012*** 
  
(-0.54) 
(-0.84) 
(6.47) 
(-3.87) 
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
76,980 
57,151 
76,988 
67,801 
R-Squared 
0.51 
0.63 
0.62 
0.66 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

46 
 
TABLE 5 
Cross-Sectional Tests 
Table 5 tests cross-sectional factors that moderate the association between pre-announcement AT and 
announcement guidance. The dependent variable is LnGuideCount. Column 1 tests analyst coverage, column 2 
institutional ownership, and column 3 whether the manager holds negative private information. Continuous crosssectional variables are ranked into terciles, and indicators are defined for the top and bottom tercile (CrossVar_High 
and CrossVar_Low, respectively). In column 3, the cross-sectional variable is an indicator (FutureBadNews) 
tabulated as CrossVar_High. Controls are those tabulated in Table 3. Independent variables are standardized with 
a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. See Appendix B for variable definitions. Standard errors are double 
clustered by quarter and firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively, based on a 
two-tailed test.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
CrossVar= 
AnalystFollowing 
  
IO 
  
FutureBadNews 
  
  
  
  
  
  
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
  
LnGuideCount 
  
LnGuideCount 
  
(1) 
  
(2) 
  
(3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. AT x CrossVar_High 
-0.013 
  
-0.006 
  
0.009* 
  
(-1.22) 
  
(-0.69) 
  
(1.85) 
II. AT x CrossVar_Low 
0.014* 
  
-0.023*** 
  
  
  
(1.75) 
  
(-2.82) 
  
  
CrossVar_High 
0.044*** 
  
0.023** 
  
-0.026*** 
  
(3.23) 
  
(2.33) 
  
(-4.96) 
CrossVar_Low 
-0.030*** 
  
-0.038*** 
  
  
  
(-2.74) 
  
(-2.95) 
  
  
AT 
0.031*** 
  
0.044*** 
  
0.028*** 
  
(3.28) 
  
(5.24) 
  
(3.97) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
I minus II: 
-0.027** 
  
0.017 
  
  
F-statistic 
5.46 
  
2.84 
  
  
P-value 
0.02 
  
0.10 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
  
Y 
  
Y 
Controls 
Y 
  
Y 
  
Y 
N 
76,988 
  
76,988 
  
76,988 
R-Squared 
0.70 
  
0.70 
  
0.70 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

47 
 
TABLE 6 
Path Analysis 
Table 6 presents a path analysis examining the channel through which pre-announcement AT is associated with announcement 
guidance. The information acquisition channel proxies are EDGAR downloads (LnEDGAR) and the absolute percentage change in 
the consensus analyst EPS forecast for quarter t+1 (AbsAnalystUpdates) over the pre-announcement window. The liquidity channel 
proxies are ESpread and Illiquidity measured over the pre-announcement window. NewsResponse is the proxy for the market 
response channel, calculated as the volume in the minute a news story is published scaled by volume for that trading day, averaged 
across all the news stories over the pre-announcement window. Controls are those tabulated in Table 3. Earnings announcement 
news variables (e.g., UE, NegUE, PosUE, Loss, SalesGrowth) are only included in the second stage regression that predicts 
LnGuideCount because they are not disclosed as of the measurement of the mediating variables. Independent variables are 
standardized with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. See Appendix B for variable definitions. Standard errors are double 
clustered by quarter and firm. T-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively, 
based on a two-tailed test.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Path Variable =  
LnEDGAR 
AbsAnalystUpdates 
ESpread 
Illiquidity 
NewsResponse 
  
  
  
  
  
  
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
LnGuideCount 
LnGuideCount 
LnGuideCount 
LnGuideCount 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Direct Path 
  
  
  
  
  
    ρ[AT, LnGuideCount] 
0.0170*** 
0.0033 
0.0040** 
0.0042** 
-0.0005 
  
(6.17) 
(1.61) 
(1.97) 
(2.07) 
(-0.02) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Mediated Path 
  
  
  
  
  
    I. ρ[AT, Path Variable] 
-0.0775*** 
-0.0786*** 
0.0433*** 
0.0271*** 
0.0556*** 
  
(-18.09) 
(-12.32) 
(14.69) 
(7.93) 
(6.39) 
    II. ρ[Path Variable, 
LnGuideCount] 
-0.0214*** 
-0.0136*** 
0.0064* 
0.0028 
0.0012 
  
(-2.87) 
(-6.84) 
(1.72) 
(1.17) 
(0.64) 
Indirect Effect (I x II) 
0.0017*** 
0.0011*** 
0.0003* 
0.0001 
0.0001 
  
(2.85) 
(5.98) 
(1.70) 
(1.15) 
(0.64) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
49,621 
75,909 
76,988 
76,988 
44,404 
Overall Model R2 
0.93 
0.70 
0.95 
0.92 
0.71 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

48 
 
TABLE 7 
Instrumental Variables Analysis 
Table 7 presents an instrumental variables analysis, where the decile of the firm's lagged stock price (LagPrice) instruments for AT. 
Columns 1 and 2 present the two-stage least squares regression results for the instrument with LnGuideCount and Guider as the 
dependent variables. Controls are those tabulated in Table 3.  Independent variables are standardized with a mean of zero and standard 
deviation of one. See Appendix B for variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered by quarter and firm. *, **, and *** 
indicate significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively, based on a two-tailed test.  
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
(1) 
(2) 
 
 
 
𝑨𝑻̂  
0.04** 
0.02* 
  
(2.59) 
(1.82) 
UE 
-0.06*** 
-0.02*** 
  
(-6.64) 
(-4.44) 
PosUE 
0.04* 
0.02** 
  
(1.99) 
(2.28) 
NegUE 
-0.19*** 
-0.07*** 
  
(-8.19) 
(-5.70) 
PPUE 
0.10*** 
0.04*** 
  
(17.45) 
(10.63) 
Loss 
-0.01 
-0.04*** 
  
(-0.36) 
(-4.28) 
SalesGrowth 
-0.03*** 
-0.03*** 
  
(-6.40) 
(-8.33) 
Q4 
0.03* 
0.01 
  
(1.87) 
(1.34) 
LnCAR_PreAnn 
0.01* 
0.00 
  
(1.89) 
(1.23) 
NewsEvents 
0.00 
0.00 
  
(0.24) 
(0.34) 
InsiderSales 
0.00 
-0.01** 
  
(0.16) 
(-2.04) 
Dispersion 
-0.06*** 
-0.03*** 
  
(-8.68) 
(-6.14) 
LnMktCap 
-0.07*** 
-0.03*** 
  
(-4.42) 
(-3.21) 
AnalystFollowing 
0.08*** 
0.05*** 
  
(6.09) 
(6.70) 
IO 
0.07*** 
0.05*** 
  
(6.73) 
(6.41) 
Turnover 
-0.01 
-0.01* 
  
(-1.31) 
(-1.77) 
ESpread 
-0.27*** 
-0.18*** 
  
(-11.24) 
(-10.77) 
iVol 
0.07*** 
0.05*** 
  
(5.60) 
(5.28) 
Illiquidity 
0.09*** 
0.06*** 
  
(7.93) 
(7.10) 
  
  
  
Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Controls (1st and 2nd stage) 
Y 
Y 
N 
76,988 
76,988 
R-Squared 
0.14 
0.13 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

49 
 
 
TABLE 8 
Tick Size Pilot Program 
Table 8 presents results for the Tick Size Pilot program, where treated firms receive an exogenous increase in tick size during the 
treatment period. The dependent variables are LnGuideCount and Guider, measured for EPS forecasts only. Panel A examines the 
effect of the tick size treatment on guidance, during the treatment period only (columns 1 and 2) and including the two years posttreatment (columns 3 and 4). Panel B examines the results cross-sectionally. Columns 1-2 use the change in EDGAR downloads 
(ΔLnEDGAR), columns 3-4 the change in effective spreads (ΔESpread), and columns 5-6 the change in earnings response coefficients 
(ΔERC) from the pre-treatment to treatment period to test the information acquisition, liquidity, market response channels, 
respectively. In Panel B, the treated firms are divided into above and below-median groups for the aforementioned cross-sectional 
variables. Controls are those tabulated in Table 3 (ESpread is excluded as a control in columns 3 and 4 of Panel B). Independent 
variables are standardized with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. See Appendix B for variable definitions. Standard 
errors are double clustered by quarter and firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively, based on a 
two-tailed test.  
Panel A: Main Results 
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
  
  
  
  
  
Treated x Post 
-0.023** 
-0.033** 
-0.023** 
-0.035*** 
  
(-1.98) 
(-2.52) 
(-2.05) 
(-2.71) 
Treated x PostCompletion 
  
  
0.003 
0.005 
  
  
  
(0.32) 
(0.39) 
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls x Treated 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
13,884 
13,884 
20,879 
20,879 
R-Squared 
0.82 
0.84 
0.76 
0.77 
 
Panel B: TSP Cross-Sectional Tests 
Cross-Sectional Variable =  
ΔLnEDGAR 
  
ΔESpread 
  
ΔERC 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
(1) 
(2) 
  
(3) 
(4) 
  
(5) 
(6) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
I. Treated_High x Post 
-0.038** 
-0.052*** 
  
-0.016 
-0.028* 
  
-0.010 
-0.023 
  
(-2.69) 
(-3.17) 
  
(-1.25) 
(-1.91) 
  
(-0.74) 
(-1.47) 
II. Treated_Low x Post 
-0.003 
-0.009 
  
-0.029* 
-0.034* 
  
-0.036** 
-0.043** 
  
(-0.26) 
(-0.61) 
  
(-1.78) 
(-1.87) 
  
(-2.46) 
(-2.58) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
I minus II: 
-0.035** 
-0.043** 
  
0.013 
0.006 
  
0.026 
0.02 
F-statistic 
4.86 
5.47 
  
0.58 
0.11 
  
2.58 
1.26 
P-value 
0.04 
0.03 
  
0.46 
0.75 
  
0.13 
0.28 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
Controls x Treated  
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
  
Y 
Y 
N 
13,786 
13,786 
  
13,798 
13,798 
  
13,837 
13,837 
R-Squared 
0.82 
0.84 
  
0.82 
0.84 
  
0.82 
0.84 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

50 
 
TABLE 9 
Nasdaq Technological Upgrade 
Table 9 presents results for the Nasdaq technological upgrade natural experiment in 2010. The dependent variables 
are LnGuideCount and Guider. Nasdaq is an indicator equal to one if the firm is listed on the Nasdaq exchange. 
Post is an indicator equal to one if the earnings announcement occurs after the upgrade in May 2010. The sample 
period comprises two years before and two years after the upgrade. Controls are those tabulated in Table 3. 
Independent variables are standardized with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. See Appendix B for 
variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered by quarter and firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance 
at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively, based on a two-tailed test.  
DEPVAR= 
LnGuideCount 
Guider 
  
(1) 
(2) 
  
  
  
Nasdaq x Post 
0.03 
0.02** 
  
(1.50) 
(1.96) 
Post 
0.03* 
0.01 
  
(1.72) 
(0.76) 
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Controls x Nasdaq 
Y 
Y 
N 
30,299 
30,299 
R-Squared 
0.78 
0.68 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558

51 
 
 
TABLE 10 
Post-Announcement Information Environment 
Table 10 presents regressions of the post-announcement information environment on pre-announcement AT (AT), an indicator for 
whether the firm issued guidance at the earnings announcement (Guider), and the interaction of the two (AT x Guider). In Panel A, 
the dependent variables are ESpread, Illiquidity, and iVol, measured over the post-announcement quarter. Panel B uses proxies for 
the percentage of daily return variance driven by market information (MktInfo), public firm-specific information (PublicInfo), firmspecific private information (PrivateInfo), and noise (Noise) (see Brogaard et al., 2022). External information sources (MktInfo plus 
PrivateInfo) are combined in column 5, and other information sources (PublicInfo plus Noise) in column 6. Controls are those 
tabulated in Table 3. Independent variables are standardized with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. See Appendix B for 
variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered by quarter and firm. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 
0.01, respectively, based on a two-tailed test.  
Panel A: Post-Announcement Liquidity and Volatility 
DEPVAR= 
ESpread 
Illiquidity 
iVol 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
  
  
  
  
AT 
0.078*** 
0.085*** 
0.100*** 
  
(5.48) 
(5.09) 
(6.22) 
Guider 
0.023 
0.016 
0.035 
  
(1.14) 
(0.57) 
(1.44) 
AT x Guider 
-0.040*** 
-0.031*** 
-0.038*** 
  
(-5.15) 
(-3.07) 
(-4.13) 
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls x Guider 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
74,978 
76,970 
74,978 
R-Squared 
0.85 
0.74 
0.73 
 
Panel B: Post-Announcement Return Variance Information Sources 
DEPVAR= 
MktInfo 
PublicInfo 
PrivateInfo 
Noise 
Mkt+Private 
Public+Noise 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AT 
0.014 
0.016 
-0.011 
-0.016 
0.003 
-0.000 
  
(0.95) 
(1.42) 
(-0.75) 
(-1.06) 
(0.18) 
(-0.03) 
Guider 
-0.054 
0.046 
0.015 
-0.007 
-0.039 
0.038 
  
(-1.32) 
(1.14) 
(0.32) 
(-0.17) 
(-0.82) 
(0.75) 
AT x Guider 
-0.020 
0.021 
-0.017 
0.018 
-0.037** 
0.039** 
  
(-1.57) 
(1.60) 
(-1.08) 
(1.51) 
(-2.45) 
(2.33) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Firm & Quarter FE 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Controls x Guider 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
76,323 
76,323 
76,323 
76,323 
76,323 
76,323 
R-Squared 
0.25 
0.10 
0.12 
0.08 
0.12 
0.11 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2836558
