Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546
1 
 
Pairs Trading on International ETFs  
 
 
 
Panagiotis Schizas*  Dimitrios D. Thomakos    and Tao Wang 
 
11/14/2011 
 
Abstract 
 
Pairs trading is a popular, market-neutral trading strategy among finance practitioners 
that has been recently evaluated in a number of papers. Since it is a successful trading 
strategy, allowing for multiple implementations of solid underlying ideas, it is interesting 
to further explore the underlying factors for its success. In this paper we do so using a 
large family of international exchange traded funds (ETFs), a recent instrument of choice 
among professionals. Using ETFs from across the world we examine the performance of 
the pairs trading strategy and the various potential sources of its profitability. Our results 
show that pair trading is a profitable strategy in the context of international ETFs. There 
is a clear difference between the long and short component of the pairs, maybe in 
contrast to the common perception on the profitability of long trades. Finally, we explore 
the sources of the strategy’s total profitability and find that it can be explained by a 
number of fundamentals, the most important being the earnings per share, the dividend 
yield and the unemployment rate.  
 
 
 
 
Keywords: convergence/divergence of prices, exchange traded funds, ETF, Fama-French, international 
asset pricing, long and short strategies, market neutral strategies, mean reversion.  
 
                                                 
* Corresponding author. Department of Economics, University of Peloponnese, 22 100, Greece. Email: 
pschizas@uop.gr, panagiotis.schizas@gmail.com.  
Corresponding author. Department of Economics, University of Peloponnese, 22 100, Greece. Email: 
thomakos@uop.gr, thomakos@gmail.com. Tel.: +30-2710-230128, Fax: +30-2710-230139. 
Corresponding author. Department of Economics, Queens College City University of Nerw York, US. 
Email:twang2000@gmail.com. Tel.: +1(718) 997-5445 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546
2 
 
1. Introduction 
Investors and finance professionals are always on the lookout for successful trading 
strategies that account for different aspects and assumptions about the markets. A family 
of strategies, that are relatively aggressive, is the one that uses assumptions and models 
about market timing: the ability to provide accurate signals of when to enter/exit the 
market and which way (long or short) to invest. 
 
However, market timing can also be casted in the context of market neutral strategies, 
where both a long and a short position are taken based on a timing signal. An example of 
such a strategy, much used in the industry but having received little attention in 
academia, is pairs trading. This particular strategy uses a number of underlying 
assumptions about the path that asset prices take; the most important ones are those of 
co-movement and mean reversion: prices of selected assets tend to move together and 
when they diverge this presents an investment opportunity that is exploited by taking a 
market neutral position. In a recent paper Gatev et al. (2006) report that the origins of 
pairs trading probably lies in the mid 1980s when Nunzio Tartaglia developed a high-end 
trading platform to implement it. In the early 1990s pairs trading strategy flourished as it 
was used by many individual and institutional investors, mostly hedge funds, in their 
attempt to reduce market exposure1. The pairs trading strategy exploits this with a 
number 
of 
statistical 
tools, 
such 
as 
the 
concept 
of 
distance 
and 
of 
convergence/divergence of prices based on this distance. In this paper we examine in 
detail the performance of pairs trading using a large family of international exchange 
traded funds (ETFs), a liquid instrument of choice among professionals. Besides making 
a few methodological innovations in the application of the strategy we examine in 
sufficient detail the probable underlying causes of the profitability of the strategy and its 
variations.  
 
Gatev, Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (2006, hereafter GGR) and Engleberg, Gao and 
Jagannathan (2008, hereafter EGJ) are the most authoritative recent studies and replicate 
the “original” pairs trading methodology, as discussed above. We have certain 
methodological deviations from their approach, which we describe. The EGJ paper 
works some of the implications of pairs trading profitability, especially in examining the 
factors that may be responsible for the success of the method. These two papers provide 
a rather thorough treatment of pairs trading for the US securities markets and this 
                                                 
1 According to Thomson Financial database (2010), pair trading covers around 27% of the total hedge 
funds strategies. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

3 
 
distinguishes their works from ours where we concentrate, for the first time in this 
literature, on international ETFs2.  
 
There is a limited number of, neutral and non-neutral, strategies that use pairs and 
distances for formulating combinations of long/short positions.  Jurek and Yang (2007) 
use the “Siamese twin formula” where a trading rule is formulated between two assets 
with common fundamentals and proposes a long position for an undervalued security 
and a short position for overvalued one. Here the fundamentals of a security take the 
place of price divergence. Nath (2003) applied an approach based on the (static) 
empirical distribution of returns. Now a record of the distance of pairs of different 
securities is being kept and a trade opens a trade when the difference exceeds the 15% 
percentile. At the same time positions that were already open are liquidated when the 
distance falls below the 5% percentile. There is also the literature that uses results on 
mean reversions but the strategies on this literature do not necessarily use pairs or are 
market neutral to be directly comparable to pairs trading.  
 
While we cannot account for all the variations of this strategy that have been applied by 
practitioners, there have been two recent studies that examine some of the mechanics of 
implementation of pairs trading in some detail. By focusing on the way that one enters 
into a trade, it appears that is more important to have a solid understanding of why and 
when to exit a trade. Since pairs trading requires to monitor convergence/divergence of 
prices one can have the situation that one stays into a trade “too long”. According to 
GGR (2006) no convergence means to leave the pairs to trade within the next 6 months 
and if they do not converge within this horizon to liquidate the trade. An alternative, and 
simultaneously shorter perspective, applied by EGJ (2008) is called “cream-skimming 
strategy” and limits the trade only to the first 10 days after a trade is initiated. One of the 
contributions of our paper is that it examines in detail the profitability implications of 
different forms of exiting from a trade. Related to this issue is the issue of number of 
eligible pairs to trade, as pairs are ranked and then one has to make a decision of which 
pairs will he/she be considering for monitoring and actually trading.  
 
As in the previous two papers who worked on pairs trading, we examine also in some 
detail the economic and other market factors that may explain profitability in pairs 
                                                 
2 ETFs are very popular in the implementation of trading strategies among the practitioners, to testify so 
according to ETF landscape global handbook providing by Blackrock,, at the beginning of June 2010 the 
global ETF industry had 2,218 ETFs with 4,478 listings, assets of $1,0441.1bn from 131 providers on 42 
exchanges around the world. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

4 
 
trading. In this paper, we attempt to provide an answer, checking one by one the pairs, 
on the source of profitability, under the question of: “What are the main factors that 
cause the prices of pairs to diverge and how that affects subsequent convergence?” and  
“Could we explain statistical strategies under any fundamental factors?” The significant 
difference in this exercise, compared to previous studies, is that we use a family of 
international assets and that, apart from the “traditional” set of variables (market and 
idiosyncratic factors) that that are usually used in assessing the causes of strategy 
profitability, we include macroeconomic factors for the first time in such an analysis. 
 
Finally, to face the potential problem of diminished profitability, because of “hedge fund 
overcrowding”, we make a modification of the trading algorithm from the sum of 
squares to absolute deviations; this leads to a more robust measure to capture smaller 
divergences, increasing the number of trades and as a result lead to higher profitability.   
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we discuss issues of arbitrage, 
liquidity and short sales constraints, as they relate to the pairs trading strategy. In section 
3 we detail our data and statistics related to our sample of ETFs. In section 4 we present 
our methodology with the proposed modifications while in section 5 we discuss our 
results for the performance of pairs trading. In section 6 we present results that relate 
this performance to various economic factors and in section 7 we offer some concluding 
remarks. 
 
2. Arbitrage, liquidity and short sale constraints   
Trading strategies are implicitly grounded on the presence of a (possibly time-varying) 
arbitrage mechanism that could create profitable trading opportunities. Pairs trading 
assumes that such opportunities arises either when there is “extreme” divergence 
between pairs of assets within a larger family. Whether arbitrage opportunities exist is, of 
course, a matter of continuous investigation.  
 
According to Shleifer and Vishny (1997) an arbitrage mechanism becomes ineffective 
when all arbitrageurs are fully invested and the profits have to be shared to a pool of 
participants. From such a pool of investors only a small incremental group of 
“specialists” could identify promptly abnormal returns and can utilize them. When the 
majority of investors realize these abnormalities, superior profits will diminish and 
investors will go long onto overpriced assets. It therefore becomes paramount to know 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

5 
 
when to enter a trade and when to exit from it, even when arbitrage opportunities exist 
and are acknowledged by investors. Risk aversion is a prime factor to be considered 
when taking trading positions. Empirical evidence shows that periods of high market 
volatility are considered significant by professionals in placing their trades: they tend to 
avoid extremely volatile arbitrage positions, even those positions which (ex post) are seen 
to terminate in excess returns. Thus, a high volatility environment will force investors to 
increase their redemptions and fund managers to exit the market, possibly with increased 
probability of having a loss. Extreme circumstances (such as the divergence that is used 
in pairs trading) do not reflect a direct consequence of fundamentals and macroeconomic 
risks but may simply reflect the arbitrageurs risk aversion. This is an important point to 
remember later when we discuss the factors of pairs trading profitability. 
 
Jurek and Yang (2006) confirm Shleifer and Vishny’s (1997) work, where arbitrageurs are 
reluctant to increase their allocation in a high volatility environment even when a 
mispricing opportunity has been detected. There is a trade-off between horizon and 
divergence risk, where after a crucial cut-off point any mispricing, even in the case of 
expanding divergence, leads to a smaller exposure to market positions. They argued that 
this trade-off creates a time-varying boundary, where outside the bounds even when the 
opportunity map increases rational arbitrageurs will diminish their exposure.  
 
Kondor (2008) confirmed the vital role of arbitrage in the success of a trading strategy 
under three perspectives: (1) competition among investors leads the prices out of their 
long run “equilibrium” and the predictability of the direction of change diminishes (2) 
such competition can lead to substantial losses in the majority of cases when an 
extremely short horizon is considered (3) the absence of arbitrage from the market helps 
prices to converge to their “equilibrium”.  
 
Jacob and Levy (2003), on the question of optimal time to exit, argued that statistical 
arbitrage opportunities and accurate forecasting of the time series of price or return 
spreads should be considered as the unique factor which affects profitability of a pair 
trading strategy.  
 
Do et al (2006), Jurek et al. (2006) and Kondor (2008) all also discussed the issue of the 
“convergence time”, i.e. the time to exit in pairs trading-like strategies. All agree that the 
decision of when to exit is among important factors that affect a strategies performance. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

6 
 
Based on this we are lead to investigate several different timing intervals and to crosscompare results on the decision of when to exit a trade from a pairs trading strategy in an 
attempt to shed some light on whether there is an “optimal trading horizon”. 
 
Beyond these issues there are two other ones that greatly affect the implementation and 
profitability of any trading strategy: liquidity and trading constraints, especially short 
selling. There are studies that provide evidence that mean-reversals, both on a short and 
long run, are driven by the level of liquidity, see Conrad, Hemmed and Niden (1994), and 
Cooper (1999).  Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996) and 
Brennan, Chordia, and Subrahmanyam (1998) argued that illiquid stocks give on average 
higher returns. Amihud (2002) and Jones (2001) model liquidity as an endogenous 
variable and show that there is a link between market liquidity and expected market 
returns. EWJ (2008), on the other hand, provide evidence that liquidity factors have 
limited power to explain pairs trading profits and this power further decline further as we 
shorten the time-to-exit from a trade. Llorente et al (2002) argued that short-term return 
reversals are driven by non-informational hedging trades where illiquid stocks are more 
vulnerable.  
 
Chordia et al. (2000) concentrate on aggregate spreads, depths and trading activity on US 
stocks, showing that on daily basis there is negative correlation between liquidity and 
trading activity. Liquidity collapses on bear markets and is positive correlated by long and 
short interest rates. Increasing market volatility has a direct negative effect in trading 
activity and spreads. Major macroeconomic announcements increase trading activity and 
depth just before their release. Knez and Ready (1997), under a different perspective, 
showed that the difference between quoted depth and order size is strongly correlated 
with conditional expected price, so the profits depends on the size of the positions.  
 
Short sale constraints prohibit the application of market neutral strategies and cancel the 
hedging ability that arbitrageurs and investors have to reduce their market risk. However, 
EGJ (2008) on their pairs trading implementation argued that short-sale constraints are 
not correlated with the risk and return of pair trading. In our analysis we find that short 
selling might be important in that it appears as a strong driving force of pairs trading 
profitability in the group of ETFs that we consider. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

7 
 
3. Data 
Our empirical analysis focuses on 22 international, passive ETFs. The ETFs come from 
both developed and developing economics. Our dataset’s primary listing is the American 
Stock Exchange3 The list of our series includes the following countries accompanied by 
their ticker: MSCI Australia (EWA), MSCI Belgium (EWK), MSCI Austria (EWO), 
MSCI Canada (EWC), MSCI France (EWQ), MSCI Germany (EWG), MSCI Hong–
Kong (EWH), MSCI Italy (EWI), MSCI Japan (EWJ), MSCI Malaysia (EWM), MSCI 
Mexico (EWW), MSCI Netherlands (EWN), MSCI Singapore (EWS), MSCI Spain 
(EWP), MSCI Sweden (EWD), MSCI Switzerland (EWL), MSCI Japan (EWJ), MSCI S. 
Korea (EWY), MSCI EMU4 (EZU), MSCI UK(EWU), MSCI BRAZIL (EWZ), MSCI 
TAIWAN (EWT) and S&P500 (SPY), the biggest ETF worldwide5.    
 
The majority of the ETF records starts on April, 01 19966. Exceptions are MSCI S. 
Korea, that started on 10/05/2000, MSCI Taiwan that started on 20/06/2000 and MSCI 
EMU that started on 25/07/2000. All ETF data end on 11/03/2009. Our analysis is 
based on daily observations including open, high, low and closing (dividend adjusted7) 
prices for each ETF series. All of the ETFs we use have futures contracts and some of 
them also have options8. Almost all of them can be traded, over the counter, to 
electronic platforms (ECN) at the AMEX trading hours.  
 
An important part of our analysis, which has not been considered in the previous papers, 
is to examine whether there is differential behaviour of pairs trading in developed against 
developing economies. For this we split the ETFs into two respective groups and 
perform a separate analysis on both. We also use segmentation for our ETFs, based on 
                                                 
3  The majority of the ETFs are provided by Barclays Global Investors - (Ishares). 
4 EMU corresponds to the performance of publicly traded securities in the European Monetary Union 
markets. 
5 We focus only to the aforementioned ETFs under the following criterion: We have selected all the 
international ETFs that have been launched before the 30/07/2000, which was our cut off date in order to 
have a sufficient number of observations. The included ETFs are a subsample of the broader group of 
international ETFs. International ETFs are a popular group among the practitioners (with high trading 
volumes and large market capitalization) since they embed distinctive properties in the implementation 
(event its beyond the scope of this paper its much more cheaper and easier to invest into Taiwan through 
ETF than directly to the local stock exchange). Among others Pennathur (2002) compared the 
performance of international ETFs with closed end funds of the objective country in means of 
diversification benefit, since country funds are determined in the US and NAVs in the home country. 
Engle et al (2002) compared domestic against international ETFs in means of premiums/discounts, for 4 
separate horizons, during a day, end of the day, minute by minute and intraday.    
6 It’s the first time that we apply pair trading including the period of the great credit crunch. 
7 Dividends may be responsible for the divergence of the prices.    
8 Options have the following ETFs: MSCI Australia, MSCI Brazil, MSCI Canada, MSCI Germany, MSCI 
Hong-Kong, MSCI Japan, MSCI UK, MSCI Taiwan, S&P500. Options increase the liquidity of the 
respective ETFs. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

8 
 
market capitalisation. This split allows examining the potential effects of liquidity on the 
pairs trading strategy in cross-comparison with the level of financial development of the 
underlying market.  
  
In addition to our full sample results we divided our sample into four different subperiods. The first sub-period covers April 1st 1996 to December 31st of 1999. The 
second sub-period starts on January 1st 2000 and goes until December 31st of 2002. The 
third sub-period covers the period from January 1st 2003 until the end of 2005, and the 
last period is extended from January 1st of 2006 till the end of our dataset. The idea 
behind these sample splits is to examine if there are any patterns that lead the strategy 
only on specific periods and to check the relation of pairs trading to different conditions 
of capital markets. Furthermore, note that the first sub-period corresponds to a bull 
market while the second sub-period corresponds to a bear market. The third sub-period 
is related to a “recovery” period for the markets while the last sub-period covers both the 
rally of recent years and part of the start of the recent crisis.   
 
Finally, two short comments on the suitability of our chosen dataset. First, the MSCI 
indices are free of survivor bias and are a very robust proxy of market performance for 
each country. In addition, when using such indices there is practically no bankruptcy risk, 
a factor that was discussed in GGR (2006) in connection with pairs trading performance. 
A characteristic example arises by the properties of “twin” stocks. A negative 
announcement on the first stock will have identical influence on both stocks but on 
different direction (positive for one and negative for the other): pairs trading between 
such “twin” stocks will be unsuccessful. Considering ETFs, bankruptcy risk alleviates, as 
implicitly are aggregate major indices of the stock exchanges with no survivor bias as we 
refer extensively on the previous paragraph.  
 
4. Methodology 
In this section we describe the empirical methodology for implementing pairs trading. 
We start off with some preliminaries and terminology. To apply the methodology we 
have to first make a selection of pairs. This has to be done on a specific (rolling) time 
segment called the “formation period”. During the formation period a specific rule is 
applied to find which pairs are eligible for trading. Then we have the actual trading 
period, whose length has to also be pre-selected as was done for the length of the 
formation period. During the trading period another rule is applied to monitor whether a 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

9 
 
trade should be terminated; all trades are exited at the end of the trading period. Then 
another formation period is considered and so on. Note that trading periods do not 
overlap while there is a partial overlap to the formation periods. To avoid the pitfalls of 
(excess) data mining we fix the formation period to 120 trading days throughout our 
analysis and experiment with different lengths for the trading period. Our approach relies 
on a shorter formation period when compared with GGR (2006) and EWJ (2008) but we 
have the advantage of non-overlapping trading periods. During the formation period we 
apply a rule similar, but not identical, to the one used in GGR (2006) and EWJ (2008). 
Our approach is as follows.  
 
During the 120 days of each formation period we record the price of all ETFs in the 
group we are using. From these prices we compute normalized cumulative price indices 
which are comparable across the ETFs in the group. Divergence is based on these 
indices that are given as: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (1) 
 
where 
 is the simple return of the ath ETF and the index i runs as a 
sequence of the form  to create the partially overlapping rolling formation periods (note 
that these exclude the 20-day trading period) and similarly for other lengths of the 
trading period. Next, for each formation period we compute the average absolute 
distance among all pairs in the group we are considering as: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (2) 
 
and we rank the distances from largest to smallest to identify trading opportunities, 
where these distances are larger than a pre-specified threshold. The use of absolute 
distances allows us to have more of trading opportunities and, as usual when compared 
to a sum-of-squares measure, is more robust to sudden large discrepancies that quickly 
disappear. It is interesting to note that the use of the absolute value instead of the square 
in computing distances, as in the previous papers, changes the way we use the threshold c 
for getting into and out of a trade (see below). However, it is well known that there is a 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

10 
 
relationship between the mean absolute deviation and the variance in many distributions 
so that the two approaches are statistically equivalent (although they may differ in trading 
performance). As an example, for the normal distribution the relationship between the 
mean absolute deviation MAD and the standard deviation SD is given by MAD = 0.798 
SD. Similar results hold for other distributions. Note that the MAD in the above 
example is smaller than the corresponding value of the SD, that is computed using the 
sum of squares.  
 
Suppose now that we consider the top L pairs, i.e. the pairs that have the L largest  
 
values during the formation period. For each of the 20 days of the trading period we 
compute the 120-day normalized cumulative price indices and compare them to a 
fraction of the 
formation value for each pair; if the absolute difference of the price 
indices is greater than this fraction then a trade is initiated as: 
 
 
 
 
 
  (3) 
 
for some constant c (we experiment with c = 0.5, 1 and 2.) When a position is initialized 
we go long in the asset with the lowest price index and short in the asset with the highest 
one, say if 
 then we go long on 
 and short on
. Then, we check that 
each day in the trading period the same sign is maintained otherwise the trade is 
terminated and the associated return of the trade is computed and stored. We thus have: 
 
  (4) 
 
 
The above procedure is repeated for all L pairs and the strategy’s return is then 
computed. Since we have both a long and a short position across L pairs we need to find 
the return for each long/short position and the total return across all L positions. First, 
we compute the return for a single pair as:   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (5) 
 
and then we compute the return for the “portfolio” of L pairs as a weighted sum of the 
form: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

11 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
              (6) 
 
where the weights are computed based on the previously accumulated wealth as in: 
 
 
 
The above describe our basic methodology for pairs trading. An important issue that we 
do not put into equation format is whether a trade is executed on the signal day or the 
following day (a one-day delay); we experiment with both scenarios as do GGR (2006) 
and EWJ (2008). Other variations and robustness checks are presented and discussed in 
the results section that follows. 
 
5. Empirical results 
5.1. 
Choice of trading horizon 
The pairs trading methodology relies on certain user-defined conditions, such as the 
choice of c and the choice of the trading horizon. We therefore start our discussion with 
empirical results on the choice of a 20-day trading horizon. In Figure 1 we present the 
mean return of the pairs trading strategy for three different values of c and a sequence of 
trading horizons k=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 20, ... , 120 days for L=5 (using the first five pairs). 
Within the maximum horizon of 120 business days, the optimal trading period roughly 
corresponds to 20 days, irrespective of the choice of c. We can see a rather clear peak at 
the 20-day trading horizon. While it is possible to let the pairs trading strategy run until 
the price indices have converged we can clearly see that there is an increasing risk 
associated with this approach.         
 
5.2. 
Properties of trading 
Using the 20-day horizon we next compute some summary measures for the actual 
trading activity and report them in Table 1. In Panel A of the table we report some 
statistics on the time and duration of pairs trading across different values of L. The 
interesting results are that (a) there is, on average, one-round trip per pair across all L 
combinations and (b) almost all pairs open for trading with the 20-day horizon. 
However, not all pairs convergence and the trade is terminated within the 20-days. As we 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

12 
 
can see from Panel B of Table 1 to have about 50% of the pairs to converge we require a 
trading horizon of about 40 days. This is an interesting result of practical significance that 
can partially explain the success of the pairs trading method: if one waits long enough for 
all the trades to converge will essentially gain nothing from this strategy; there appears to 
be an issue of underlying “timing” at work here, a horizon after which you will not be 
making much of a profit. Taking any profits that may arise using the signals of the 
strategy appears to be a suitable way to go.  
 
 
5.3. 
Stochastic dominance 
There is considerable literature that uses the notion of “stochastic dominance” in 
evaluating the performance of strategies and the ranking of assets (e.g. mutual funds) and 
types of portfolios. Here we use the methodology proposed by Cho et al. (2007) for a 
quick (but comprehensive) way to assess the overall performance of the pairs trading 
strategy we implemented.9 In an early paper, Jarrow (1986) examined the existence of 
arbitrage opportunities incorporating first order stochastic dominance and argued that 
“The condition is that the price of a particular contingent claim, defined in terms of the distribution 
involving the stochastically dominated assets, is non positive. These conditions are both necessary and 
sufficient in complete markets for the existence of an arbitrage opportunity”. Fong et al (2005) find 
evidence for international momentum strategies. They strongly argue that the nonparametric nature of stochastic dominance tests allows clearly deciding between profits 
and losses and the knowledge of the utility function is adequate for the investors to 
decide, without to be aware of the distribution of the returns. Post (2003) compared the 
power of stochastic dominance efficiency into a portfolio. In his tests, Fama and French 
market portfolio is insignificant compared to portfolios based on market capitalization 
and book-to-market ratio (referring extensively in section 7). 
 
We will not digress into many details of the methodological and computational aspects of 
the tests we performed, as they are given in the Cho et al. (2007) paper, but proceed 
directly to the hypotheses of interest and the results.10 The null hypothesis is that a 
particular strategy is dominated by the benchmark. Here this is formulated (along with 
the alternative) as: 
 
                                                 
9 We make no attempt to review the large literature on stochastic dominance here. The paper by Cho et al. 
(2007) contains many references up to that date. 
10 Details on the methodology and computational details are available on request.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

13 
 
Ho: pairs profitability stochastically dominated by S&P500 profitability  
H1: pairs profitability stochastically dominates S&P500 profitability   
 
Table 2, has the results according to first through third order stochastic dominance. 
These concepts are basically saying that the average utility (of unknown form) of the 
returns is higher for the better strategy and that the cumulative distribution function of 
the better strategy’s returns is everywhere lower than the distribution function of the 
competing strategy (i.e., there is lower cumulative probability of smaller returns, for any 
given return value, for the better strategy). For all the cases examined, the p-values reject 
the null hypothesis showing that pair trading returns dominate the distribution of 
S&P500 returns. Under utility function/decision making framework, a rational investor 
who chooses to invest on a net exposure to the market will prefer to invest in pair 
trading strategy rather than to the buy and hold strategy on S&P500. 
 
5.4. 
Omega Function 
Another approach for a non-parametric, “total” performance measure is that based on 
the (so-called) omega function or omega ratio developed by Keating and Shadwick 
(2002) and further detailed and explained in Kazemi et al. (2004). This is a statistic that is 
based on the use of the distribution function of returns and it compares the cumulative 
probabilities between two sections of the distribution function. As re-iterated in Bertrand 
and Prigent (2010) the omega ratio is defined as “the probability weighted ratio of gains 
to losses relative to a return threshold”. The formula for the omega ratio is given by: 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
  (7) 
 
where F(r)  is the cumulative distribution of the return defined in the interval (a,b) and L 
is the is the return threshold (we use L = 0 in our analysis). Anything above the 
threshold is considered a gain and anything below it a loss. From this definition we can 
see that a larger omega ratio is preferable to a smaller one. There is a nice interpretation, 
provided by Kazemi et al. (2004), as the ratio of expectations of gains above the 
threshold to expectations of losses below the threshold. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

14 
 
 
Figure 5, exhibits the results of omega ratio under the segmentation between positive 
returns. The results represent the best 5 eligible pairs for the main pairs trading strategy 
in relative comparison with the long and short components, the S&P500 and an equally 
weighted portfolio (the latter constructed by the long and short components). The results 
here are not favourable to the pairs trading strategy since they exhibit that the upside 
mean is limited for pair trading, however, one should note that the S&P500 and an 
equally weighted portfolio exhibit a steepest curve about zero returns.      
 
5.5. 
Profitability of pairs trading: baseline results 
Pairs’ trading is, in general, a profitable strategy as can be seen from the broad summary 
measures of the previous sections. The extent of the profitability results that we obtain 
of course varies, depending on the number of pairs L used, the groupings based on 
market origin or capitalization and sub-samples in time. But it will be seen that the 
profitability results are robust across all these categories.  
 
Before discussing the results let us overview the exact methodological parameters on 
which they are based. The back testing starts on September, 23 1996 with the first 19 
available ETFs. At June, 20 2000 we add the latest ETF. The number of pairs used in 
constructing the portfolio returns are set to L = 2, 5, 10 and 20. The formation period is 
120 and the trading period is 20 days; results based on a 60-day trading period are also 
available but not discussed here. The threshold parameter is set to c = 0.5 throughout. 
Finally, a trade is initiated at the closing prices of the day after a signal is given (one-day 
waiting) and, for comparison, we also provide results when a trade is initiated at the 
closing prices of the signal (“event” in the tables) day.   
 
Table 3 presents the baseline results of our application of pairs trading. Panel A has the 
results based on the event day and Panel B has the results with one-day waiting. We 
present various summary measures and we discuss them in turn. Terminal wealth of the 
portfolio is affected by the size of L: using half or more of our universe of pairs results in 
deterioration of performance based on terminal wealth, especially when one uses the 
(more realistic) one-day waiting approach. Therefore, a smaller size of pairs, in our case 
that of about 10% to 25%, appears to be best suited for the strategy at hand. Note that 
terminal wealth is cut in half or more when the one-day waiting approach is used 
although the other performance measures appear to be quite similar. The strategy’s 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

15 
 
skewness is always positive, a rather significant result when compared to the mildly 
negative skewness that most equity indices have.11 Next, note the difference in the risk of 
the L = 2 portfolio vs. the portfolios with L = 5 or more pairs: as expected, a larger L 
leads to a smaller standard deviation of the strategy but also to a smaller Sharpe ratio (for 
Panel B; in Panel A the Sharpe ratios are becoming larger with L but the practicality of 
the event-day strategy is rather limited). The use of L = 5 pairs appears to be giving the 
best overall performance throughout in Table 1; the annualized Sharpe ratio for the L = 
5 pairs portfolio for the one-day waiting period is about 1,86 (using 252 trading days per 
year). 
 
The results of the table also reveal that the timing abilities of this strategy are rather 
good: the mean positive excess return of the strategy is always larger than the mean 
negative excess return of the strategy. This implies that the successful trades are on 
average larger (they are slightly over 50%) than the negative ones but, more importantly, 
they tend to be more accurate in their timing. This is important for making an investor 
using this strategy accept the inherent risks. Finally, it’s also important to note that the 
strategy is almost unrelated to the returns of the S&P500 index (especially for L = 2 or L 
= 5); this reflects on either the international composition of our ETF group (which, 
nevertheless, includes the ETF for the S&P500) or on the timing ability of the strategy to 
correctly identify disequilibria in the price paths.  
 
The evolution the strategy’s wealth (cumulative return), corresponding to Panel B of 
Table 3, is given in Figure 2. There we plot the pairs trading performance, the S&P500 
and also the long and the short components of the strategy, all for L = 2, 5, 10 and 20 
pairs. There are some interesting features in the plots: first, the strategy’s performance 
during the boom years before 2000 is below that of S&P500 but it sharply picks up and 
outperforms the S&P500 after we go into the bear market; second, the strategy’s 
performance increases almost monotonically for all pairs except for L = 2, when we can 
see a large drawdown period after 2002; third, the apparent success of the strategy’s 
timing ability shows through the domination of the short component – this makes sense 
since the strategy’s performance starts going over the S&P500 when the bear market 
started; finally, this figure leaves open the question as to whether the strategy would 
                                                 
11 Goetzmann et al (2002) argued that evaluation results based on the Sharpe ratio can be misleading if the 
strategy’s return distribution exhibits negative skewness but this problem disappears when we observe 
positive skewness. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

16 
 
perform equally well if it was implemented from a different starting point. We return to 
this question later in our discussion.  
 
Before continuing we give a very brief comparison of performance of pairs trading 
between this paper and GGR (2006). For the top L = 5 eligible our asset selection and 
implementation gave an average monthly excess of 1.49% versus a 0.78% for GGR; for 
L = 20 the numbers are much more similar, being 0.93% and 0.81% respectively.  
 
The relative comparison between short 20days and long strategy 60days is given in Table 
4. 20days outperforms the 60days trading in means of mean return, while both the risk 
profile and the risk-return profile is improving as we let the trade open beyond 20days.  
 
Figure 4, illustrates the empirical distribution of the mean returns for the top 5 eligible 
pairs from the opening of the trade at day k=1,...,20, until the last day that we exit the 
trade. Panel A, demonstrate a spike between day 4 and 5. Panel B, demonstrate the risk 
of the distribution to be extremely volatile around k=10day. To sum up the results, 
confirm our empirical motivation of 20 days and the hypothesis that the profits are short 
lived and declines over time (EGJ).   
 
5.6. 
Results based on market capitalization  
Are the results we have seen so far affected by market size? After all our grouping is one 
that includes data on ETFs from different markets. We repeat our analysis by splitting 
the ETFs into “small” and “large” capitalization groups and examining the new results. 
In the context of their analysis, GGR (2006) argued that an examination of different 
levels of capitalization provides a robustness check against short-selling – and we have 
seen that the short component was pretty strong in driving the previous results. In the 
context of pairs trading and contrarian strategies, Avramov et al (2006) claim that large 
mean reversals are positively linked to illiquid stocks and higher turnover. Put differently, 
a low level of liquidity is more vulnerable to non-informational trades and Llorente et al 
(2002) argued that short-term reversals are correlated to non-information driven hedging 
trades.12  
       
                                                 
12 In the context of more “traditional” approaches that rely on market capitalization there is some evidence 
that across countries small capitalization might outperform large capitalization; see De Bondt et al (1989), 
Conrad et al (1989), Rouwenhorst (1998), Zarowin (1990), Richards (1997), Chan (1988) and Knez et al 
(1996). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

17 
 
For the size split we consider “large” capitalization to correspond to ETFs with market 
cap between 384 millions to 65 billion while “small” capitalization to correspond to 
ETFs with market cap from 330 million down to 59 millions. Accordingly, we have in 
the “large” cap category the ETFs for: Australia, Brazil Canada, EMU, Hong Kong, 
Japan, Singapore and South Korea, Taiwan, UK, S&P500; and on the “small” cap 
category the ETFs from Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Malaysia, Mexico, the 
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland  Table 5 has the related results.  
 
The most striking result from this split is that performance of the trading strategy is 
greatly reduced for both groups, in terms of terminal wealth, mean return and Sharpe 
ratio – although the strategy’s performance remains unrelated to the S&P500. However, 
we can also see that there are differences between the “large” and “small” ETFs. First, 
the performance appears to be slightly better for the “small” cap group in terms of 
terminal wealth and Sharpe ratio – now for L = 5 the annualized Sharpe ratio for the 
“small” cap group is 1.03 and for the “large” cap group is 0.87. Due to the diminished 
size of the universe of ETFs in each group we also see that better performance is for L = 
2 rather than L = 5 but with a lower Sharpe ratio. Second, the performance of the 
“small” cap group might be driven by the timing ability of the strategy in the smaller 
markets since we can see that the percentage of observations with positive returns is 
larger for this group than for the “large” cap group. Overall, the results here indicate that 
a blend large and small ETFs is better than either group alone – the strategy needs a 
larger, more diverse universe to be able to provide market timing results.  
 
EGJ (2008) split their sample into two portfolios based on average market capitalization 
and level of liquidity, however they do not find anything conclusive in terms of the 
interaction of market capitalization and profitability for their data. This suggests that the 
type of exposure (domestic vs. international) may also be a significant factor behind pairs 
trading performance.  
 
5.7. 
Results based on type of market (developed vs. emerging) 
Splitting the ETFs into “small” and “large” cap groups is useful but it mixes markets that 
are mature with markets that are still developing. Since emerging markets are always seen 
as potential opportunities it is of interest to separately analyze the performance of the 
strategy in developed and emerging markets. Bekaert et al. (2000) claim that to treat 
emerging markets as identical to developed markets could lead to wrong conclusions. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

18 
 
Due to the pronounced heterogeneity of this new split we have to make some changes in 
the way we run our backtesting. First, due to differences in inception dates the 
backtesting starts on June of 2000. Second, there are only five ETFs classified as 
“emerging” markets:13 Brazil, Malaysia, Mexico, Taiwan and South Korea; this limits the 
number of pairs to be considered to a max of L = 10.  
 
Our results from this split are given in Table 6. Emerging markets as expected 
outperform developed markets in means of mean return. However, the risk of trading in 
emerging markets is higher than these of developed markets. In means of Sharpe ratio 
developed markets achieved better. However, the crucial fact is the evidence of mean 
reversion in emerging markets. 
 
5.8. 
Results based on long and short components separately 
As we already discussed in the baseline results (see Figure 2), the short component in the 
pairs trading appear to be dominating the long component.14 In Table 7 we present more 
detailed results that document that indeed this is the cases (here we are again using all 
ETFs as in the baseline results). The better performance of the short component is 
evident across all L pairs but note that its effect diminishes as L increases. While there is 
a differences in terminal wealth, mean return and Sharpe ratio, it’s interesting to note that 
the differences in the standard deviations of the short and long components are rather 
small. Another interesting result in the table is that we can now see a pronounced, 
positive correlation of both the short and long component with the S&P500: this 
probably supports the timing ability of the strategy, since we require a positive 
correlation even when the S&P500 is falling so as to effect the short side of the trade. 
See that the correlation with the S&P500 is larger for the short component, thus 
supporting what we saw in Figure 2 (the strategy picking up in terms of performance 
when the S&P500 started falling in 2000). Our results are in contrary with those in GGR 
(2006). We should argue about that, probably has to do with the volatile environment 
during the crisis 2007-2009, or the narrow distance criterion. 
 
5.9. 
Results based on sub-samples: sensitivity analysis 
Does it matter when this (or any other trading strategy) starts? It should matter otherwise 
we would have a “universal” winner. To examine the sensitivity of our results so far we 
break the full sample into four sub-samples covering different periods of interest: first 
                                                 
13 We followed the MCSI classification for this. 
14 GGR (2006) argued about the necessity of examining separately these two components of the strategy. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

19 
 
sub-sample goes from April 1, 1996 until the end of 1999; the second sub-sample goes 
from January, 1 2000 and ends on 2002; the third sub-sample starts in 2003 and ends in 
2005 while the last sub-sample spans 2006 to March 2009. As we already noted in 
passing, the first period is one of a bull market, the second period has the bear market 
that followed, the third period can be thought of as the “recovery” period for global 
markets while the fourth and last period has a structural break in it (first going into a 
small uptrend and then getting into the subprime crisis and the ensued global financial 
turmoil).  
 
If pairs trading is a “true” market-neutral strategy we would expect to maintain its 
profitability even in bear markets where a significant downturn is occurring. We can 
examine whether this is the case by looking at the results in Table 8. The performance 
details during the second sub-sample immediately stand out: performance is increasing 
with L as does the positive correlation of the strategy with the S&P500. The annualized 
Sharpe ratio for L = 5 (for comparability with the baseline results) is now 2.06 
(compared to 1.86 in the baseline case), a value that falls in the range of practitioners’ 
interest. Then, note that the strategy’s performance is (obviously) best during trending 
markets, i.e. in the first or the second subsample, irrespective of the trend direction. 
During the “recovery” period of the third sub-sample the performance is worse among 
all four sub-samples considered. During the second and third sub-samples there appears 
to be increased “risk aversion”, and that a higher L gives better performance. On the 
fourth sub-period that contains both a positive trend and a break components we can see 
that performance has the same characteristics as in the first sub-sample although all 
measures are now smaller in magnitude; note that here we have, as in the second subsample, increased correlation with the S&P500.   
 
6. Pairs Trading Profitability and Economic Fundamentals 
Our discussion so far shows that, in GGR (2006) and EWJ (2008), pairs trading is a 
viable and profitable trading strategy that exploits price divergence among co-moving 
assets. However, where does its profitability come from? This question has been 
addressed in these two studies but here we have a different family of assets that we are 
working with. We therefore have to use not just the literature standards, such as the 
Fama and French factors, but also other economic and market variables that are suitable 
to the international aspect of our dataset.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

20 
 
We cannot possibly review the literature that relates to factors here in any degree of 
detail. We briefly go over some references that are related to the work that we discuss in 
this section. We can split the work on factors on three major categories, according to the 
purpose that the asset pricing model has been constructed. We have:  
(1) Firm–Level Characteristics (Idiosyncratic), as in Cavaglia, Brightman and 
Aked (2000), Carrieri, Errunza and Sarkissian (2005), Hou, Karolyi and Kho 
(2006) and EWJ (2008). 
(2) Market level characteristics (local and global markets), as in Fama and French 
(FF) (1993, 1996, 1998), Rouwenhorst (1998) and Griffin (2002). 
(3) Macro-economic or country characteristics, as in Chan, Chen and Hsieh 
(1985), Chan and Chen (1991), Cooper, Gulen and Vassalou (2001), Liew and 
Vasalou (2000), Vasalou (2003), Brennan, Wang and Xia (2004) and Petkova 
(2006).  
 
Financial practitioners have also employed several risk models including explanatory 
factors, the most popular being (according to Hou et al., 2006) the BARRA Integrated 
Global Equity Market Model (Stefek, 2002; Senechal, 2003), Northfield’s Global Equity 
Risk Model (Northfield, 2005), ITG’s Global Equity Risk Model (ITG, 2003) and 
Salomon Smith Barney’s Global Equity Risk Management (GRAM, Miller et al., 2002).   
6.1. 
Pairs trading against the FF-type factors 
Table 9 has the results of a regression of compounded monthly returns from our 
backtesting on the three FF factors and a momentum factor.15 For both the 20 and the 
60-day trading horizon we can see that there are significant excess returns that cannot be 
explained by any factor except the HML one, which is based on book-to-market. The 
estimates are negative and significant for all choices of L pairs. Our results reveal a 
different source of pairs trading profitability compared to GGR (2006) and EWJ (2008), 
which was expected due to the different composition of the universe of assets that we 
considered here.  
 
Performing the same analysis but in sub-samples, and adding two more momentum 
indicators, we can see a variety of interesting results at Table 10. First, note that the 
                                                 
15 The conversion to monthly returns was done for conformability with the earlier literature; results are 
available for a daily frequency as well. Moreover, all the estimations have been conducted with the long and 
short term reversal factor as they are presenting in Ken French site. However, their explanatory power was 
and we drop; results are available as well. We run the results using the rolling p-value in order to check; 
results are available on request. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

21 
 
significant excess returns now only appear in the first and second sub-sample of the 
bull/bear markets that goes until 2000 and 2002; this is in accordance of our earlier result 
that pairs trading appeared to worked strongly in trending markets. During these two 
sub-samples no factor appears to be statistically significant, except the short-term 
reversal indicator for the second sub-sample – which again validates the timing ability of 
the strategy. Second, for the third and fourth sub-samples it is difficult to discuss the 
explanatory ability of the factors since the excess returns are statistically zero. The 
significant coefficients appeared scattered with no discernible pattern.  
 
In Tables 11 and 12 we present results similar to Table 9 but using the ETF splits to 
emerging vs. developed markets and “small” vs. “large” capitalization – as we have done 
for the presentation of baseline results in Tables 5 and 6. For the split based on market 
development, in Table 11, we can see that excess returns are significant in both types of 
markets but profitability is explained by different factors. In the case of emerging 
markets the market and momentum factors loads negatively and significantly while in the 
case of developed markets the book-to-market factor leads negatively and significantly. 
These results are intuitive since the emerging markets could not possibly be explained by 
structural factors like book-to-market but rather by the leading U.S. market and the 
underlying momentum. Note that the R2 values from the emerging markets regressions 
are the highest so far, up to 17% for the top L = 5, 10 pairs. Turning next to the split 
based on capitalization, in Table 12, we can see that for the “large” cap portfolio we have 
significance excess returns and negative and significant the size factor – that was to be 
expected. For the “small” capitalization portfolio the excess returns are significant but 
not as significant as in the “large” cap case; no factor appears to be overall significant 
 
Finally, in Tables 13 and 14 we present results from a regression based on FF-type 
international factors, constructed from international indices that were weighted based on 
the MCSI EAFE index. The results of the full sample in Table 1316 show that we have 
excess returns that are significant and cannot be explained by any of these factors, maybe 
except the book-to-market factor for L = 2 – but then again this choice of L was not the 
most successful one in backtesting. On the other hand in Table 14, where we have the 
sub-samples that were discussed before, we can see some more interesting results. For 
the first sub-period the excess returns remain significant while there is some (limited) 
explanatory power to the earnings to price variable; for the second sub-period (the bear 
                                                 
16 We conduct the estimations with the earnings-to-price variable and dividend yield as they appear in Ken 
French website; Results are available on request. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

22 
 
market after 2000) no factor has any explanatory value – this is important as the strategy 
has a very good performance even during downturns and it’s interesting to know that 
this performance is unrelated to these international factors. However, the most 
interesting of all results in Table 14 are those for the last period, which is after 2006. 
Note here the magnitude of the R2 values, which ranges from 37% to 59% indicating that 
these international factors can explain a large percentage of variation for pairs trading 
during this period that includes the onset of the financial crisis. Two variables account 
for this percentage of explanatory power, earnings-to-price and dividend yield, especially 
the last one.  
 
6.2. 
What drives signals in pairs trading? Opening and duration of positions 
While it is clearly interesting to examine the potential factors that explain pairs trading 
profitability, it is also of interest to consider whether there are economic or financial 
variables that can explain the generation of signals in pairs trading. Is it then possible to 
identify if profitability can be linked to economic fundamentals, the emphasis now being 
that we are using international ETFs for the trades. Such an exercise requires that we 
track all individual trading signals and then associate them with, appropriately timealigned, variables. EWJ (2008) have done a similar exercise for their universe of U.S. 
stocks only in terms of idiosyncratic risk, while GGR (2006) have not considered it. 
Concentrating on the L = 5 top pairs portfolio and looking at the 20-day and 60-day 
trading horizon, we next discuss our approach and results for explaining signal 
generation. Note that we pool all signals from the top 5 pairs and form a “crosssectional” regression (in the sense that the time ordering of the signals is not used) where 
the explanatory variables are properly aligned with the time of the signals.  
 
To begin with, we have to define the variables that we will be using to explain signal 
generation and a method for model reduction. The variables that we use are both 
economic and financial and are listed and are detailed in the appendix. As for model 
reduction we follow the simplest possible approach that maintains a solid statistical 
foundation: all variables are entered in at the initial estimation stages and they are 
removed (one-at-a-time) based on their p-value; estimates with the largest p-value go off 
first. This approach maintains the appropriate level of significance at all times and we 
have found it to be robust against other variable selection methods, such as stepwise 
regression. This model reduction approach is used both on all set of explanatory 
variables and also on various sub-groups (macroeconomic, market, fundamentals). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

23 
 
Furthermore, it is important to note that we (a) use the long and short component of the 
strategy separately, in addition to using the full strategy results alone and (b) we pairwise 
align the explanatory variables in all regressions so that they correspond to each member 
of the pair: each time that a new pair is initiated for trading the explanatory variables 
change accordingly to the members of the pair.    
 
We thus estimate five (5) groups of regressions as follows:  
 The first group includes all variables. 
 The second group includes only the macroeconomic variables. 
 The third group includes the market variables. 
 The fourth group includes fundamental variables.  
 Finally, the fifth group contains the variables that survived model reduction from the 
above four groups.  
In Tables 15 and 16 we present results on the explanatory power of variables for the 
opening of a pair and for the duration that a trade stays open.17 For breity we discuss 
below the results from the first group. 
 
The short position is more volatile and risky than the long position and it is well known 
that the hedge funds suffer more to bear short positions in an uptrend market. As 
anticipated, the longer trading horizon can be explained with more factors that the 
20days trading. Regarding the significant factors we find that investors pay attention on 
the dividend yield, probably investors during the last ten years were driven by value 
equities instead of growth. The EPS forward factor is also significant and this result is of 
interest since it would imply that investors are taking under consideration (again, as 
anticipated) the forward looking outlook of the markets. Moreover, portfolio inflows also 
are found to have explanatory power to the divergence of the underlying assets. Turning 
next to the macroeconomics factors, unemployment is found to have more explanatory 
power instead of GDP – this accords well with recent market moves where 
unemployment is gauged as a more important indicator that can lead to substantially 
volatile movements in equity markets. Furthermore, turnover and volatility are also 
significant factors for the presented strategy as they contain momentum information for 
the capital flows and investors pay attention to them. Aggressive positions can be 
disclosed by these flows (heavy trading). It is well established that volatility creates 
                                                 
17 The results on Table 15 are from a standard binary data regression (logistic) on the event of a trade being 
opened for any of the top 5 pairs. The results on Table 16 are from a negative binomial regression on the 
duration of days that a trade stays opened. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

24 
 
divergence and consequently increases the opportunities for trading and arbitrage 
opportunities.   
 
Finally, in Table 17, we present results on the explanatory power of variables for the 
pairs returns of a pair. Regarding the 20-days trading, the factor EPS and dividend yield 
appeared to be significant while in 60-days trading, divergence is explained only with the 
short side of the components. Money market rates and country credit rating is also found 
to have explanatory power on the return of the pairs. As anticipated, the money market 
rates exhibits a positive effect, while the country credit rating exhibits a negative link with 
the pairs returns.   
 
7. Concluding remarks 
We examine in detail the performance of a popular and successful trading strategy, pairs 
trading, using international ETFs. Our study supports the existing literature on the 
profitability of this strategy and also brings forth some new insights, now in the context 
of the popular investment vehicle that are ETFs. Our results show that there is an 
asymmetric response between the long and the short component of the strategy which 
enhances overall profitability. We find that the strategy dominates the profitability of the 
S&P500 benchmark in a variety of parameter combinations and also that it has very small 
correlation with this benchmark. This profitability survives over different market periods 
and over different sub-samples on the composition of our ETF universe, such as based 
on market capitalization and market development. We then examine the sources of 
profitability of the strategy using the standard Fama-French factors and a variety of other 
variables. This analysis confirms the presence of excess returns, although the explanatory 
power of these variables is limited. Finally, we discuss the underlying drivers for initiating 
a trade and for the duration of the relevant position, both of which directly affect overall 
profitability. The combined results from this exercise suggest that the most important 
factors boil down to be earnings per share, dividend yields and the unemployment rate. 
All in all our analysis strongly supports the merits of pairs trading as an economically 
meaningful and practical investment approach.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

25 
 
References 
Amihud, Y., Mendelson, H., 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of 
Financial Economics 17, pp223-249. 
 
Amihud, Yahov, 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series 
Effects, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56. 
 
Abramov, D., Chordia, T., Goyal, A., 2006, Liquidity and autocorrelations in individual 
stock returns, Journal of Finance, 61, 2365-2394. 
 
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C., R., 2000, “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets”, 
Journal of Finance, 55, pp565-614. 
 
Bertrand, P., Prigent, J., L., 2010, “Omega performance measure and portfolio 
insurance” Journal of Banking and Finance, 35, 1811-1823   
Brennan, M.,J., Subrahmanyam, A., 1996, “Market microstructure and asset pricing: On 
the compensation for illiquidity in stock returns”, Journal of Financial Economics 
Volume 41, pp 441-464 
Brennan M., J., Cao, H., H., 1997, “International Investment Portfolio Inflows”, Journal 
of Finance, 52, pp1851-1880.  
 
Brennan, M., J., Chordia, T., Subrahmanyam, A., 1998, “Alternative Factor 
Specifications, Security Characteristics, and the Cross-Section of Expected Stock 
Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 345-373. 
 
Brennan, M., Ashley, J., Wang W., Xia, Y., 2004, "Estimation and Test of A Simple 
Model of Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing," Journal of Finance, 59, pp1743-1776. 
 
Carrieri, F., Vihang E., Sarkissian, S., 2005, “The Dynamics of Geographic Versus 
Sectoral Diversification: Is There a Link to the Real Economy?” McGill University 
working paper. 
 
Cavaglia, S., Brightman, C., Aked, M., 2000. "The Increasing Importance Of Industry 
Factors," Financial Analysts Journal, 56, pp41-54. 
 
Chan, L.,K.,C., 1988, “On the contrarian investment strategy,” Journal of Business 61, 
pp147-163. 
 
Chan, L., K., C., Chen, N.,F., Hsieh, D., A., 1985. “An Exploratory Investigation of The 
Firm Size Effect”, Journal of Financial Economics, 14, pp 451-471. 
 
Chan, L., K., C., Chen, N.F., 1991, “Structural and return characteristics of small and 
large firms”, The Journal of Finance 46, pp1467-1484. 
 
Chen, N., F., Roll R., Ross, S., A., 1986, “Economic forces and the stock market”, Journal 
of Business, 59, pp383-403. 
 
Chan, L., K., C., Karceski, J., Lakonishok, J., 1998, “The risk and return from factors”, 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 33, 159-188. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

26 
 
Cho, Y., H., Linton, O., Whang, Y., J., 2007, “Are there Monday effects in stock returns: 
A stochastic dominance approach”, Journal of Empirical Finance, 14, 736-755 
 
Chordia, T., Swaminathan, B., 2000, Trading Volume and Cross-Autocorrelations in 
Stock Returns, The Journal of Finance 55, pp913-935. 
 
Conrad, J., Kaul, G. 1989, ‘‘Mean Reversion in Short-horizon Expected Returns,’’ The 
Review of Financial Studies, 2, pp225–240. 
 
Conrad, J., Hemmed, A., and Niden C., 1994, Volume and autocovariances in shorthorizon individual security returns, Journal of finance, 49, 1305-1329 
 
Cooper, M., Gulen, H., Vassalou M., 2001, “Investing in size and book-to-market 
portfolios using information about the macroeconomy: some new trading rules”, 
working paper, Purdue University 
 
Cooper, M., 1999, “Filter rule based on price and volume in individual security 
overreaction”, Review of Financial Studies, 12, pp901-935. 
 
De Bondt Werner F.,M., Thaler H.,R., 1989, “Anomalies: A mean Reverting Walk Down 
Wall Street” The Journal Of Economic Perspectives, 3 pp 189-202 
 
Do, B., Faff., B,.R., Hamza, K., 2006, A New Approach to Modelling and Estimation for 
Pairs Trading In Proceedings of 2006 Financial Management Association European 
Conference, Stockholm 
 
Engelberg, J., Gao P., Jagannathan R., 2008, “An Anatomy of Pairs Trading: the role of 
idiosyncratic news, common information and liquidity,” working paper 
 
Engle, R., Sarkar, D., 2002, Pricing Exchange traded funds, working paper, New York 
University 
 
Fama, Eugene F., Kenneth R. French, 1993, “Common risk factors in the returns on 
stocks and bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33, pp3-56. 
 
Fama, Eugene F., Kenneth R. French, 1996, “Multifactor explanations of asset pricing 
anomalies,” Journal of Finance 51, pp55-84. 
 
Fama, Eugene F., Kenneth R. French, 1998. "Value Versus Growth: The International 
Evidence," Journal of Finance, 53, pp1975-1999. 
 
Ferson, W., E., Campbell, R., H., 1993, "The Risk and Predictability of International 
Equity Returns," Review of Financial Studies, 6, pp 527-566. 
 
Fong, W., M., Wong, W., K., Lean, H., H., 2005, International momentum strategies: a 
stochastic 
dominance 
approach, 
Journal 
of 
Financial 
Markets 
8, pp 89-109 
 
Froot, K., O’ Connell, P., and Seasholes, M., 2001, ‘‘The portfolio flows of international 
investors,’’ Journal of Financial Economics, 59, pp151–193. 
 
Gatev, E., W., Goetzmann, N., Rouwenhorst, K., G., 2006, “Pairs Trading: Performance 
of a Relative-Value Arbitrage,” Review of Financial Studies 19, pp 797 - 827. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

27 
 
 
Griffin J., M., 2002, “Are the Fama and French Factors Global or Country Specific?” 
Review of Financial Studies 5, pp 783-803 
 
Goetzmann W., Ingersoll, J., Spiegel, M., Welch, I., 2002, ‘‘Sharpening Sharpe Ratios,’’ 
working paper, Yale School of Management. 
 
Goh, J., C., Ederington L., H., 1993, “Is a Bond Rating Downgrade Bad News, Good 
News, or No News for Stockholders?”, Journal of Finance 48, pp. 2001-2008. 
 
Hou. K., Karolyi, G., A., Kho, B., C., 2006, What Factors Drive Global Stock Returns? 
Working paper 
 
Jacobs, B. Levy, K., 1993 “Long/Short Equity Investing”, Journal of Portfolio Management, 
20, pp.52-64 
 
Jarrow, R., 1986, “The Relationship between Arbitrage and First Order Stochastic 
Dominance” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 41, pp. 915-921 
 
Jones, C. M. 2001, A Century of Stock Market Liquidity and Trading Costs, Graduate 
School of Business, Columbia University 
 
Jurek, J.,W., Yang, H., 2006 Profiting from Mean-Reversion: Optimal Strategies in the 
Presence of Horizon and Divergence Risk, Working Paper, Harvard Business School 
 
Jurek, J.,W., Yang, H., 2007, Dynamic Portfolio Selection in Arbitrage, working Paper, 
Harvard University. 
 
Kazemi, H., Schneeweis, T., Gupta, R., 2004, “Omega as performance measure”, Journal 
of Performance Measurement, vol. 8, pp. 16–25. 
 
Khandani and Lo 2007, “What happened to the Quants in August 2007”, Journal of 
Investment Management, vol. 5, pp5-54. 
 
Keating, C., Shadwick, W.F., 2002, “A universal performance measure”, Journal of 
Performance Measurement, vol. 6, 59–84. 
 
Knez, P.,J., Ready, M., J., 1996, Estimating the Profits from Trading Strategies, The Review 
of Financial Studies, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 1121-1163 
 
Knez, P.,J., Ready, M., J., 1997, On the Robustness of Size and Book-to-Market in CrossSectional Regressions, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, No. 4 pp. 1355-1382 
 
Kondor, Peter, 2008, Risk in Dynamic Arbitrage: The Price Effects of Convergence, 
Journal of Finance, Forthcoming 
 
Liew, J., Vassalou, M., 2000. "Can Book-To-Market, Size And Momentum Be Risk 
Factors That Predict Economic Growth?," Journal of Financial Economics, 57, pp 221-245. 
 
Llorente, G., Michaely, R., Saar, G., Wang J., 2002, “Dynamic models of limit-order 
executions”, Journal of Financial Studies 3, pp175-205. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

28 
 
Nath, P., 2003, “High Frequency Pairs Trading with U.S. Treasury Securities: Risks and 
Rewards for Hedge Funds” working paper, London Business School. 
 
Pennathur, A., K., Delcoure, N., Anderson, D., 2002, “Diversification benefits of iShares 
and closed-end country funds,” Journal of Financial Research 25, 541–557. 
 
Petkova, R., 2006. “Do the Fama-French Factors Proxy for Innovations in Predictive 
Variables?” Journal of Finance, 61, pp582-613. 
 
Post, T., 2003, “Empirical Tests for Stochastic Dominance Efficiency”, The Journal of 
Finance, Vol. 58, pp. 1905-1931 
 
Richards A., J., 1997, “Winner-Loser Reversals in National Stock Market Indices: Can 
They be Explained?” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, pp. 2129-2144. 
 
Rouwenhorst, K.,G., 1998, “International Momentum Strategies” Journal of Finance, 53 pp 
267-284. 
 
Taylor, M., P.,  Sarno, L.,  1997, “Capital flows to developing countries: Long and shortterm determinants”, World Bank Economic Review, 11, pp451-470. 
 
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.,W., 1997, “The limits of arbitrage”, Journal of Finance 52, pp35-55. 
 
Vassalou, M,. 2003. “New Related To Future GDP Growth As A Risk Factor In Equity 
Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics, 68, pp47-73. 
 
Zarowin, P., 1990, “Size, Seasonality, and Stock Market Overreaction” The Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 25, pp. 113-125 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

29 
 
Tables and Figures 
 
 
 
Table 1 
Summary of Trading Statistics  
The table represents the trading statistics of the excess return portfolios. Due to different inception 
dates of dataset, I initiate the calculations with the first 19 ETFs and we add each separate ETF by 
its own inception date. The sample period is from April, 01 1996 to March, 11 2009 (3.140 
observations). The "top n" represents the "n" best eligible ranked pairs according to the historical 
distance of their mean price. On Panel A, we open the trade when the divergence between the 
pairs exceed 0.5 standard deviations, and if does not converge within the next 20 business days 
we stop the trade. The implementation of the strategy takes place the next business day of the 
divergence. Panel B, represents pairs that convergence according to different trading periods. 
Panel A: Trading Statistics 
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top 20 
 
 
 
 
 
Average Number of Round-Trips per pair 
0,952 
0,920 
0,857 
0,805 
Standard Deviation of Average Number of 
Round-Trips 
1,064 
1,042 
1,021 
0,997 
Average Number Pairs Open in 20days 
1,913 
4,772 
9,537 
18,969 
Standard Deviation of Average Number Pairs 
Open  
0,099 
0,161 
0,281 
0,472 
  
  
  
  
  
Panel B: Pairs that Convergence within N trading days 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading Horizon 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top 20 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Days 
26,8% 
26,9% 
25,6% 
25,5% 
10 Days 
33,5% 
33,2% 
31,9% 
31,6% 
20 Days 
42,7% 
41,3% 
40,4% 
40,9% 
40 Days 
57,7% 
53,3% 
52,1% 
51,8% 
60 Days 
69,2% 
65,4% 
61,5% 
60,7% 
120 Days 
80,8% 
74,6% 
72,3% 
72,1% 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

30 
 
 
 
Table 2 
Summary Statistics for Stochastic Dominance Test 
The table represents stochastic dominance test of the excess return portfolios. For 
definitions of pair trading refer to table 1. The sample period is from April, 01 1996 to 
March, 11 2009 (3.140 observations).  One day waiting estimations represents the 
implementation of the strategy the next business day. We implement three order 
stochastic dominance tests. Stochastic dominance test examines the order of 
dominance between two assets according to their distribution. The test refers to the 
null hypothesis that pair profitability is stochastically dominated S&P500 profitability 
Panel A: Event Day 
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top 20 
 
 
 
 
 
1st Order 
0,0000 
0,0000 
0,0000 
0,0000 
2nd Order 
0,0005 
0,0000 
0,0000 
0,0000 
3rd Order 
0,0042 
0,0037 
0,0096 
0,0101 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel B: One Day Waiting 
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top 20 
 
 
 
 
 
1st Order 
0,0000 
0,0000 
0,0000 
0,0000 
2nd Order 
0,0008 
0,0000 
0,0000 
0,0000 
3rd Order 
0,0043 
0,0042 
0,0050 
0,0056 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

31 
 
 
Table 3 
Summary Statistics of Daily Estimations of Baseline results 
The table represents the summary statistics in percentages of the excess return portfolios. 
Due to different inception dates of our dataset, we initiate the calculations with the first 19 
ETFs and we add each separate ETF by its own inception date. The sample period is from 
April, 01 1996 to March, 11 2009 (3.140 observations). The "top n" represents the "n" best 
eligible ranked pairs according to the historical distance of their mean price. We open the 
trade when the divergence between the pairs exceed 0.5 standard deviations and if does not 
converge within the next 20 business days we stop the trade. One day waiting estimations 
represents the implementation of the strategy the next business day. 
Panel A: Event day 
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top20 
Terminal Wealth 
18,284 
20,041 
13,786 
8,965 
Mean 
0,097 
0,098 
0,085 
0,071 
Standard Deviation 
0,887 
0,667 
0,551 
0,454 
Sharpe Ratio 
0,109 
0,147 
0,155 
0,156 
Maximum  
9,420 
8,860 
7,070 
4,720 
Minimum 
-7,450 
-7,780 
-6,030 
-4,080 
Skewness 
1,050 
1,340 
1,740 
1,400 
Kurtosis 
13,700 
26,800 
28,600 
16,700 
Correlation with S&P500 
0,065 
0,069 
0,101 
0,146 
Observations with Excess return>0 
52,55% 
54,14% 
55,41% 
55,73% 
Mean of Excess Return >0 
0,660 
0,502 
0,406 
0,344 
Mean of Excess Return <0 
-0,543 
-0,380 
-0,317 
-0,273 
Mean of top ten excess return 
5,778 
4,729 
4,099 
3,347 
Mean of bottom ten excess return 
-3,504 
-2,644 
-0,020 
-1,629 
Panel B: One day waiting 
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top20 
Terminal Wealth 
10,994 
9,769 
5,502 
4,183 
Mean 
0,080 
0,075 
0,056 
0,047 
Standard Deviation 
0,869 
0,637 
0,534 
0,448 
Sharpe Ratio 
0,092 
0,117 
0,104 
0,104 
Maximum  
6,150 
6,300 
7,060 
4,650 
Minimum 
-7,440 
-7,760 
-6,860 
-4,440 
Skewness 
0,637 
0,470 
0,822 
0,938 
Kurtosis 
10,200 
17,600 
27,000 
15,700 
Correlation with S&P500 
0,049 
0,070 
0,086 
0,128 
Observations with Excess return>0 
51,91% 
53,50% 
53,18% 
53,50% 
Mean of Excess Return >0 
0,647 
0,476 
0,387 
0,330 
Mean of Excess Return <0 
-0,552 
-0,389 
-0,323 
-0,279 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

32 
 
Mean of top ten excess return 
5,204 
4,035 
3,657 
3,038 
Mean of bottom ten excess return 
-3,582 
-2,798 
-2,329 
-1,957 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

33 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4 
Summary Statistics of  Relative Comparison between Two Trading Horizons 
The table represents the summary statistics in percentage basis of the excess return portfolios. Due to 
different inception dates of our dataset, we initiate the calculations with the first 19  ETFs and we add each 
separate ETF by its own inception date. The sample period is from April, 01 1996 to March, 11 2009 (3.140 
observations). The "top n" represents the "n" best eligible ranked pairs according to the historical distance of 
their mean price. We open the trade when the divergence between the pairs exceed 0.5 standard deviations, 
and if does not converge within the selected trading horizons we stop the trade. The selected trading horizons 
are 20 and 60 business days respectively. The implementation of the strategy occurs one day after the 
divergence. 
Trading Horizon 
20 days  
60 days  
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10
Top20
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10
Top20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Terminal Wealth 
10,994 
9,769 
5,502 
4,183 
5,744 
3,361 
2,471 
2,298 
Mean 
0,080 
0,075 
0,056 
0,047 
0,059 
0,040 
0,030 
0,028 
Standard Deviation 
0,869 
0,637 
0,534 
0,448 
0,814 
0,590 
0,468 
0,432 
Sharpe Ratio 
0,092 
0,117 
0,104 
0,104 
0,072 
0,068 
0,064 
0,064 
Maximum  
6,150 
6,300 
7,060 
4,650 
6,820 
3,110 
2,580 
3,090 
Minimum 
-7,440 
-7,760 
-6,860 
-4,440 
-3,250 
-3,340 
-2,360 
-3,130 
Skewness 
0,637 
0,470 
0,822 
0,938 
53,500 
15,400 
6,350 
24,800 
Kurtosis 
10,200 
17,600 
27,000 
15,700 
7,340 
5,310 
4,790 
7,740 
Correlation with S&P500 
0,049 
0,070 
0,086 
0,128 
0,028 
0,064 
0,051 
0,134 
Observations with Excess return>0 
51,91% 53,50% 53,18% 53,50% 50,96% 52,87% 51,91% 51,59% 
Mean of Excess Return >0 
0,647 
0,476 
0,387 
0,330 
0,624 
0,447 
0,361 
0,327 
Mean of Excess Return <0 
-0,552 
-0,389 
-0,323 
-0,279 
-0,543 
-0,419 
-0,329 
-0,294 
Mean of top ten excess return 
5,204 
4,035 
3,657 
3,038 
4,231 
2,564 
1,882 
2,177 
Mean of bottom ten excess return 
-3,582 
-2,798 
-2,329 
-1,957 
-2,933 
-2,270 
-1,711 
-1,949 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

34 
 
 
 
Table 5 
Summary Statistics of Daily Estimations between Large vs. Small Capitalization 
Portfolios  
The table represents the summary statistics in percentage basis of the excess return distribution 
including the segmentation of the data set into two portfolios according to their capitalization: The first 
portfolio includes the first 50% of the sample with the larger capitalization and the supplementary 50% 
included in the second portfolio. Due to different inception dates of the our dataset, we initiate the 
calculations with the first 19 ETFs and we add each separate ETF by its own inception date. The 
sample period is from April, 01 1996 to March, 11 2009 (3.140 observations). The "top n" represents 
the "n" best eligible ranked pairs according to the historical distance of their mean price. We open the 
trade when the divergence between the pairs exceed 0.5 standard deviations, and if does not converge 
within the next 20 business days we stop the trade. The implementation of the strategy occurs the 
next business day after the event of divergence occurs 
  
Large Capitalization Portfolio 
Small Capitalization Portfolio 
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top 20
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top 20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Terminal Wealth 
4,352 
3,511 
2,301 
2,000 
4,766 
3,197 
2,038 
1,873 
Mean 
0,052 
0,043 
0,029 
0,024 
0,053 
0,039 
0,024 
0,021 
Standard Deviation 
1,010 
0,785 
0,667 
0,647 
0,829 
0,595 
0,517 
0,447 
Sharpe Ratio 
0,051 
0,055 
0,043 
0,037 
0,064 
0,065 
0,046 
0,047 
Maximum 
8,300 
7,940 
6,260 
4,790 
4,400 
2,940 
3,340 
2,620 
Minimum 
-5,810 
-5,050 
-4,740 
-4,190 
-7,200 
-2,660 
-2,320 
-1,980 
Skewness 
0,385 
0,934 
0,679 
0,525 
0,009 
0,020 
0,133 
0,183 
Kurtosis 
7,260 
12,100 
11,000 
8,700 
7,180 
4,690 
5,280 
5,340 
Correlation with S&P500 
-0,022 
0,037 
0,066 
0,112 
0,094 
0,110 
0,135 
0,178 
Observations with Excess 
return>0 
50,32% 
50,32%
50,96%
51,27%
50,96%
53,18% 51,59%
51,91%
Mean of Excess Return >0 
0,767 
0,579 
0,485 
0,466 
0,628 
0,448 
0,393 
0,338 
Mean of Excess Return <0 
-0,693 
-0,504 
-0,444 
-0,440 
-0,565 
-0,427 
-0,369 
-0,320 
Mean of top ten excess 
return 
5,004 
5,078 
3,966 
3,690 
3,590 
2,327 
2,307 
2,061 
Mean of bottom ten excess 
return 
-4,222 
-3,128 
-2,943 
-2,698 
-3,614 
-2,225 
-1,944 
-1,698 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

35 
 
Table 6 
Summary Statistics of Daily Estimations of Developed vs. Emerging Countries 
The table represents the summary statistics in percentage basis of the excess return distribution including the 
segmentation of the data set into two different subsets: Developed and Emerging markets. Due to different inception 
dates of the dataset, we initiate the calculations for developed markets by its own inception date and we add 
additional ETFs based on developed markets by the inception date. The sample period is from April, 01 1996 to 
March, 11 2009 (3.140 observations). For emerging markets, we initiate the calculations, at June, 20 2000 where the 
last ETF on emerging market incepted (2.050 observations). The "top n" represents the "n" best eligible ranked pairs 
according to the historical distance of their mean price. We open the trade when the divergence between the pairs 
exceed 0.5 standard deviations, and if does not converge within the next 20 business days we stop the trade. The 
implementation of the strategy occurs the next business day that the event of divergence occurs 
  
Emerging Countries 
Developed Countries 
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top 10 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top 10 
Top 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mean 
0,063 
0,050 
0,764 
0,069 
0,056 
0,049 
0,047 
Standard Deviation 
1,320 
1,060 
0,709 
0,842 
0,603 
0,486 
0,415 
Sharpe Ratio 
0,048 
0,048 
1,078 
0,082 
0,093 
0,100 
0,113 
Maximum  
6,890 
8,050 
4,960 
6,050 
3,500 
2,580 
3,050 
Minimum 
-5,710 
-4,620 
0,001 
-4,480 
-2,900 
-1,900 
-2,020 
Skewness 
0,225 
0,813 
1,880 
0,386 
0,385 
0,206 
0,341 
Kurtosis 
6,050 
9,070 
8,190 
7,710 
5,670 
4,900 
6,060 
Correlation with S&P500 
0,075 
0,077 
0,061 
0,066 
0,087 
0,107 
0,129 
Observations with Excess return>0 
51,71% 
49,76% 
50,73% 
52,55% 
52,23% 
52,55% 
53,18% 
Mean of Excess Return >0 
0,983 
0,811 
0,764 
0,625 
0,472 
0,388 
0,327 
Mean of Excess Return <0 
-0,939 
-0,694 
-0,726 
-0,565 
-0,399 
-0,329 
-0,274 
Mean of top ten excess return 
5,886 
5,589 
4,168 
4,516 
2,849 
2,149 
1,920 
Mean of bottom ten excess return 
-5,079 
-3,741 
-3,489 
-3,571 
-2,281 
-1,695 
-1,681 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 
Summary Statistics of baseline results according to Long and Short decomposition 
The table represents the summary statistics in percentage basis of the excess return portfolios decomposed 
into long and short components. Due to different inception dates of the dataset, we initiate the calculations 
with the first 19 ETFs and we add each separate ETF by its own inception date. The sample period is from 
April, 01 1996 to March, 11 2009 (3.140 observations). The "top n" represents the "n" best eligible ranked 
pairs according to the historical distance of their mean price. We open the trade when the divergence 
between the pairs exceed 0.5 standard deviations and if does not converge within the next 20 business days 
we stop the trade. One day waiting estimations represents the implementation of the strategy the next 
business day 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top10 
Top20 
  
Long 
Short 
Long 
Short 
Long 
Short 
Long 
Short 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Terminal Wealth 
0,940 
10,722 
1,506 
6,424 
1,438 
3,810 
1,249 
3,464 
Mean 
0,005 
0,082 
0,016 
0,062 
0,013 
0,044 
0,008 
0,041 
Standard Deviation 
1,160 
1,150 
0,751 
0,781 
0,519 
0,560 
0,437 
0,472 
Sharpe Ratio 
0,004 
0,072 
0,021 
0,080 
0,025 
0,079 
0,018 
0,086 
Maximum 
16,000 
8,670 
7,810 
5,700 
3,640 
6,010 
3,400 
4,200 
Minimum 
-8,860 
-9,160 
-6,700 
-7,610 
-3,940 
-4,570 
-3,890 
-4,060 
Skewness 
0,709 
0,389 
0,174 
0,323 
-0,246 
0,911 
-0,248 
0,650 
Kurtosis 
21,700 
12,100 
16,700 
14,500 
9,960 
15,700 
12,900 
15,700 
Correlation with S&P500 
0,364 
0,379 
0,380 
0,439 
0,441 
0,531 
0,437 
0,503 
Observations with Excess 
return>0 
49,04% 
51,27% 
50,00% 
53,18% 
50,96% 
52,23% 
50,64% 
53,18% 
Mean of Excess Return >0 
0,742 
0,797 
0,502 
0,535 
0,361 
0,395 
0,292 
0,325 
Mean of Excess Return <0 
-0,755 
-0,722 
-0,473 
-0,476 
-0,352 
-0,339 
-0,286 
-0,282 
Mean of top ten excess 
return 
7,319 
6,834 
4,710 
4,915 
2,623 
3,707 
2,468 
3,033 
Mean of bottom ten excess 
return 
-6,316 
-6,171 
-4,639 
-4,535 
-2,883 
-2,748 
-2,553 
-2,603 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

37 
 
 
Sample Range:
Pair Portfolio
Top 2 Top 5 Top10 Top20 Top 2 Top 5 Top10 Top20 Top 2 Top 5 Top10 Top20 Top 2 Top 5 Top10 Top20
Mean
0,133
0,093
0,077
0,044
0,061
0,087
0,081
0,083
-0,002
0,018
0,019
0,023
0,033
0,031
0,032
0,022
Standard Deviation
1,070
0,682
0,524
0,465
0,923
0,669
0,564
0,494
0,513
0,367
0,284
0,261
0,524
0,434
0,389
0,333
Sharpe ratio
0,124
0,137
0,146
0,094
0,066
0,130
0,144
0,167
-0,004
0,050
0,066
0,089
0,062
0,070
0,083
0,065
Maximum 
6,050
3,230
2,340
3,560
4,220
3,760
2,450
1,730
2,070
1,360
1,210
1,030
4,790
3,580
3,140
2,300
Minimum
-3,740
-2,470
-1,480
-2,540
-3,350
-2,340
-1,510
-1,520
-3,200
-1,980
-0,961
-0,817
-1,940
-1,820
-1,330
-1,300
Skewness
0,457
0,231
0,189
0,445
0,351
0,264
0,337
0,154
-0,550
0,090
0,187
0,297
1,390
1,610
1,350
0,988
Kurtosis
5,540
3,910
3,470
7,910
5,510
4,710
3,880
3,630
6,510
5,200
4,630
3,650
15,000
15,300
12,600
9,650
Correlation with S&P500
0,050
0,014
0,007
0,042
0,203
0,185
0,201
0,253
0,045
0,047
0,053
0,057
0,183
0,155
0,210
0,190
Observations with Excess return>0 52,36% 54,66% 54,17% 53,81% 51,35% 55,31% 55,63% 54,99% 49,13% 51,34% 49,92% 52,28% 50,37% 51,84% 52,13% 52,72%
Mean of Excess Return >0
0,896
0,575
0,454
0,368
0,718
0,547
0,464
0,426
0,378
0,283
0,220
0,199
0,381
0,310
0,282
0,240
Mean of Excess Return <0
-0,749
-0,490
-0,369
-0,334
-0,648
-0,482
-0,398
-0,337
-0,379
-0,262
-0,201
-0,176
-0,329
-0,271
-0,241
-0,223
Mean of top ten excess return
3,851
2,201
1,562
1,605
3,267
2,146
1,840
1,527
1,345
1,150
0,889
0,737
2,069
1,920
1,736
1,339
Mean of bottom ten excess return
-2,867
-1,755
-1,320
-1,233
-2,602
-1,656
-1,253
-1,238
-1,731
-1,031
-0,812
-0,556
2,069
-1,198
-1,045
-0,923
2006:01-2009:03
The table represents the summary statistics in percentage basis of the excess return portfolios. Due to different inception dates of the our dataset, we initiate the
calculations with the first 19 ETFs and we add each separate ETF by its own inception date. The sample period is from April, 01 1996 to March, 11 2009 (3.140
observations). The sample period has been divided into 4 subsamples: The first period is from April, 01 1996 to December, 31 1999 (827 observations), the second
period is from January, 1 2000 to December 31 2002 (631 observations). The third period is from January 1 2003 to December, 31 2005 (635 observations) and the
last period is from January 1 2006, to March 11 2009 (681 observations). The "top n" represents the "n" best eligible ranked pairs according to the historical distance of 
their mean price. We open the trade when the divergence between the pairs exceed 0.5 standard deviations, and if does not converge within the next 20 business
days we stop the trade. One day waiting estimations represents the implementation of the strategy the next business day.
Table 8
Summary Statistics of Daily Estimations of Subsamples Portfolios
 1996:04-1999:12
2000:01-2002:12
2003:01-2005:12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 9 
Profitability of Pair Trading Strategies 
The table represents the results of monthly excess log returns from pair trading portfolios where the 
independent variables are 6 risk factors as represented by Fama and French. The implementation of the 
strategy occurs the next business day of the divergence and the trading horizon is constant 20 days. Daily 
returns are compounded to calculate monthly returns. The independent variables are: Value weighted 
market excess return (MARKET), a size portfolio based on small equities minus big equities (SMB), a 
book-to market portfolio of high minus low stocks (HML), a portfolio of year long winners minus year long 
losers (MOMENTUM). The corresponding p-values are reported for each separate variables and statistics 
are corrected for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity using the Newey-West estimator with 4 lags. The 
sample period is from September 1996 to February 2009. The p-values and R2 from each time-series 
regression are reported in nominal form. 
Trading Horizon 
20 days 
60 days 
Monthly Pairs Portfolio 
Top 2 Top 5 
Top 10 
Top 20 
Top 2 Top 5 
Top 10 
Top 20 
Intercept 
 
0,016 
0,016 
0,012 
0,009 
0,012 
0,009 
0,007 
0,006 
 
0,000 
0,000 
0,000 
0,000 
0,004 
0,001 
0,000 
0,000 
Market  
 
-0,049 
0,004 
-0,014 
-0,019 
-0,068 
-0,005 
-0,012 
0,010 
 
 
0,454 
0,949 
0,763 
0,660 
0,540 
0,941 
0,727 
0,805 
HML  
 
-0,206 
-0,183 
-0,188 
-0,107 
-0,248 
-0,108 
-0,097 
-0,091 
 
 
0,005 
0,008 
0,001 
0,047 
0,023 
0,103 
0,041 
0,035 
SMB  
 
-0,031 
-0,031 
0,048 
0,038 
-0,031 
0,054 
0,021 
-0,013 
 
 
0,817 
0,708 
0,429 
0,500 
0,778 
0,335 
0,568 
0,724 
Momentum 
 
0,076 
0,074 
0,025 
0,059 
0,042 
0,012 
-0,001 
-0,006 
  
  
0,211 
0,157 
0,527 
0,130 
0,410 
0,739 
0,950 
0,821 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations 
 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
R2 
  
0,039 
0,062 
0,115 
0,086 
0,049 
0,046 
0,050 
0,047 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

39 
 
Period:
Pair Portfolio
Top 2
Top 5
Top10
Top20
Top 2
Top 5
Top10
Top20
Top 2
Top 5
Top10
Top20
Top 2
Top 5
Top10
Top20
Intercept
0,024
0,017
0,017
0,011
0,010
0,016
0,019
0,024
-0,005
0,002
0,003
0,003
0,004
0,004
0,006
0,003
0,081
0,078
0,003
0,016
0,205
0,068
0,003
0,000
0,263
0,347
0,221
0,307
0,338
0,126
0,009
0,120
Market 
0,024
0,018
0,030
0,041
0,101
0,204
0,129
0,256
0,574
0,302
0,214
0,092
-0,167
-0,127
-0,077
-0,103
0,924
0,919
0,795
0,715
0,593
0,150
0,262
0,055
0,041
0,049
0,114
0,414
0,341
0,422
0,262
0,014
HML 
-0,180
-0,215
0,006
0,047
0,020
0,210
0,019
0,031
-0,051
-0,181
-0,053
0,121
-0,089
-0,164
-0,126
-0,145
0,733
0,506
0,979
0,827
0,921
0,247
0,876
0,789
0,821
0,462
0,718
0,390
0,522
0,198
0,138
0,015
SMB 
-0,473
-0,057
0,144
0,148
0,016
0,085
-0,009
-0,071
-0,815
-0,325
-0,291
-0,082
-0,106
0,133
-0,245
-0,106
0,250
0,833
0,410
0,311
0,945
0,539
0,936
0,436
0,062
0,216
0,093
0,527
0,650
0,561
0,067
0,337
Long Term Reversal
0,282
-0,006
-0,201
-0,333
0,225
-0,042
-0,041
-0,271
-0,536
-0,078
0,029
0,096
0,222
0,242
0,070
0,039
0,677
0,989
0,397
0,089
0,412
0,803
0,798
0,066
0,063
0,640
0,843
0,524
0,266
0,181
0,413
0,419
Short Term Reversal
-0,030
0,041
-0,054
-0,069
0,057
0,028
-0,013
-0,067
0,160
0,125
0,172
0,043
0,102
0,114
0,078
0,054
0,919
0,845
0,685
0,519
0,540
0,698
0,799
0,130
0,581
0,508
0,189
0,684
0,514
0,439
0,186
0,106
Momentum
-0,125
-0,047
-0,059
-0,032
-0,129
-0,023
0,002
0,104
0,238
0,096
0,052
-0,013
0,143
0,155
0,030
-0,012
0,674
0,742
0,571
0,726
0,209
0,605
0,975
0,072
0,279
0,565
0,711
0,895
0,248
0,190
0,656
0,794
Observations
40
40
40
40
31
31
31
31
31
31
31
31
33
33
33
33
R2
0,053
0,044
0,064
0,125
0,138
0,129
0,079
0,320
0,315
0,143
0,182
0,120
0,192
0,230
0,289
0,377
2006:01-2009:02
 1996:04-1999:12
Regression of Monthly Returns of the Subsamples Estimations
Table 10
2003:01-2005:12
2000:01-2002:12
The table represents the results of monthly excess return from pair trading portfolios segment by regions of emerging and developed markets where the independent
variables are 6 risk factors as represented by Fama and French. The implementation of the strategy occurs the next business day of the divergence and the trading
horizon is constant 20days. Daily returns are compounded to calculate monthly returns. The independent variables are: the value weighted market excess return
(MARKET), a size portfolio based on small equities minus big equities (SMB), a book-to-market portfolio of high minus low stocks (HML), a portfolio of year long winners
minus a year long losers (MOMENTUM), a portfolio of last month losers minus last month winners (SHORT TERM REVERSAL) and finally a portfolio of 4 year long winners
minus 4year long losers(LONG TERM REVERSAL). The corresponding p-values are reported for each separate variable and statistics are corrected for autocorrelation and
heteroscedasticity using Newey-West estimator with 3 lags. The p-values and R2 are reported in nominal form. The sample period has been divided into 4 subsamples.
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

40 
 
 
Table 11 
Profitability of Pair Trading between Developed and 
Emerging Countries  
The table represents the results of monthly excess return from pair trading 
portfolios segment by regions of emerging and developed markets where 
the independent variables are 6 risk factors as represented by Fama and 
French. The implementation of the strategy occurs the next business day of 
the divergence and the trading horizon is constant 20days. Daily returns 
are compounded to calculate monthly returns. The independent variables 
are: Value weighted market excess return (MARKET), a size portfolio based 
on small equities minus big equities (SMB), a book-to-market portfolio of 
high minus low stocks (HML), a portfolio of year long winners minus a year 
long losers (MOMENTUM). The corresponding p-values are reported for 
each separate variable and statistic are corrected for autocorrelation and 
heteroscedasticity using Newey-West estimator with 4 lags for developed 
and 3 lags for emerging markets. The sample period extended from 
September 1996 to February 2009. The p-values and R2 from each timeseries regression are reported in nominal form.  
  
Emerging markets 
Developed markets 
Monthly Pairs 
Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top 
10 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top 10 
Intercept 
0,012 
0,010 
0,005 
0,014 
0,013 
0,010 
 
0,037 
0,025 
0,146 
0,000 
0,000 
0,000 
Market  
-0,345 
-0,494 
-0,419 
-0,025 
-0,015 
-0,022 
 
0,155 
0,027 
0,014 
0,709 
0,808 
0,602 
HML  
-0,099 
-0,184 
0,006 
-0,173 
-0,250 
-0,075 
 
0,727 
0,502 
0,976 
0,020 
0,002 
0,253 
SMB  
-0,011 
0,024 
0,028 
-0,191 
-0,096 
-0,031 
 
0,953 
0,911 
0,877 
0,088 
0,136 
0,546 
Momentum 
-0,214 
-0,242 
-0,276 
0,063 
-0,010 
0,042 
  
0,118 
0,002 
0,002 
0,269 
0,784 
0,175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations 
98 
98 
98 
150 
150 
150 
R2 
0,060 
0,166 
0,170 
0,046 
0,088 
0,037 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

41 
 
 
Table 12 
Profitability according to Market Capitalization 
The table represents the results of monthly excess return from pair trading portfolios segment by 
regions of emerging and developed markets where the independent variables are 6 risk factors as 
represented by Fama and French. The implementation of the strategy occurs the next business day of 
the divergence and the trading horizon is constant 20days. Daily returns are compounded to calculate 
monthly returns. The independent variables are: the value weighted market excess return (MARKET), a 
size portfolio based on small equities minus big equities (SMB), a book-to-market portfolio of high minus 
low stocks (HML), a portfolio of year long winners minus a year long losers (MOMENTUM). The 
corresponding p-values are reported for each separate variable, and statistics are corrected for 
autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity using Newey-West estimator with 4 lags. The sample period 
extended from September 1996 to February 2009. The p-values and R2 from each time-series 
regression are reported in nominal form.  
  
Large Capitalization Portfolio 
Small Capitalization Portfolio 
Monthly Pairs 
Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top 10 
Top 20 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top 10 
Top 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intercept 
0,013 
0,009 
0,005 
0,005 
0,010 
0,008 
0,005 
0,005 
 
0,000 
0,000 
0,001 
0,001 
0,018 
0,016 
0,033 
0,055 
Market  
-0,005 
0,043 
0,081 
0,021 
0,000 
-0,133 
-0,061 
-0,030 
 
0,943 
0,405 
0,044 
0,527 
0,999 
0,175 
0,265 
0,584 
HML  
-0,276 
-0,072 
0,051 
0,015 
-0,068 
-0,071 
-0,011 
-0,059 
 
0,000 
0,250 
0,237 
0,711 
0,490 
0,559 
0,897 
0,526 
SMB  
-0,193 
-0,175 
-0,085 
-0,066 
0,250 
0,027 
0,032 
0,036 
 
0,027 
0,006 
0,069 
0,122 
0,037 
0,791 
0,712 
0,659 
Momentum 
-0,060 
-0,014 
-0,018 
-0,055 
0,027 
0,065 
0,072 
-0,003 
  
0,096 
0,775 
0,571 
0,063 
0,789 
0,323 
0,196 
0,952 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
R2 
0,074 
0,070 
0,070 
0,059 
0,056 
0,049 
0,037 
0,012 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

42 
 
 
Table 13 
Profitability of Pair Trading Strategy against to International Factors  
The table represents the results of monthly excess log returns from pair trading portfolios where the 
independent variables are 4 risk factors as represented by Fama and French constructed from 
international indices where the weighted is according to the weights of MSCI EAFE. The 
implementation of the strategy occurs the next business day of the divergence and the trading 
horizon is divided into two periods of 20 and 60 days. Daily returns are compounded to calculate 
monthly returns. The table reports loadings on 5 factors market excess return (MKT), book-to-market 
(B/M), cash earnings to price (CE/P). The corresponding p-values are reported for each separate 
regression and statistics are corrected for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity using the NeweyWest estimator with 4 lags. The sample period is from September 1996 to December 2007. The pvalues and R2 from each time-series regression are reported in nominal form. 
Trading Horizon 
20 days 
60 days 
Monthly Pairs 
Portfolio 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top 10 
Top 20 
Top 2 
Top 5 
Top 10 
Top 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intercept 
0,018 
0,016 
0,012 
0,010 
0,013 
0,007 
0,006 
0,006 
 
0,000 
0,000 
0,000 
0,000 
0,009 
0,010 
0,001 
0,000 
 Market 
0,011 
0,052 
0,023 
-0,011 
0,102 
0,117 
0,036 
0,041 
 
0,869 
0,294 
0,618 
0,842 
0,354 
0,119 
0,328 
0,384 
B/M 
0,068 
0,174 
0,142 
0,081 
0,034 
-0,131 
-0,101 
-0,122 
 
0,825 
0,403 
0,314 
0,476 
0,868 
0,300 
0,234 
0,075 
 CE/P 
-0,200 
-0,184 
-0,199 
-0,124 
-0,362
0,030 
-0,016 
0,014 
  
0,406 
0,233 
0,109 
0,237 
0,068 
0,816 
0,843 
0,858 
Observations 
136 
136 
136 
136 
136 
136 
136 
136 
R2 
0,009 
0,015 
0,021 
0,010 
0,068 
0,048 
0,041 
0,047 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

43 
 
Period:
Pair Portfolio
Top 2
Top 5
Top10 Top20
Top 2
Top 5
Top10
Top20
Top 2
Top 5
Top10
Top20
Top 2
Top 5
Top10
Top20
Intercept
0,026
0,018
0,016
0,008
0,034
0,033
0,024
0,022
0,010
0,010
0,008
0,008
0,008
0,006
0,006
0,004
0,027
0,023
0,010
0,082
0,005
0,001
0,002
0,002
0,032
0,013
0,007
0,014
0,039
0,009
0,014
0,038
 Market
0,114
0,125
0,046
0,115
0,135
0,230
0,152
0,048
-0,311
-0,112
-0,167
-0,174
-0,010
0,109
-0,016
-0,077
0,421
0,294
0,667
0,216
0,182
0,009
0,070
0,599
0,102
0,348
0,136
0,076
0,931
0,280
0,906
0,168
B/M
0,501
0,439
0,295
0,218
0,274
0,515
0,407
0,135
-0,448
-0,159
-0,040
0,049
0,214
-0,122
-0,024
0,113
0,348
0,054
0,094
0,057
0,696
0,416
0,405
0,728
0,211
0,384
0,750
0,697
0,486
0,571
0,912
0,136
 CE/P
-0,610
-0,580
-0,333
-0,345
-0,468
-0,451
-0,485
-0,212
0,473
0,001
0,147
0,078
-0,088
-0,108
-0,159
-0,088
0,300
0,053
0,092
0,025
0,278
0,298
0,210
0,544
0,249
0,995
0,281
0,522
0,669
0,531
0,400
0,381
Observations
40
40
40
40
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
24
24
24
24
R2
0,037
0,103
0,064
0,141
0,067
0,100
0,111
0,030
0,119
0,064
0,100
0,158
0,027
0,100
0,046
0,082
Table 14
Regression of monthly returns of the subsamples International evidence 
The table represents the returns on monthly excess log returns form pair trading portfolios where the independent variables are 4 risk factors as represented by Fama
and French constructed on international indices. The sample period is from April, 01 1996 to December, 2007. Daily returns are compounded to calculate monthly
returns. The sample period has been divided into 4 subsamples: The first period is from April, 01 1996 to December, 31 1999, the second period is from January, 1
2000 to December 31 2002. The third period extends from January 1 2003 to December, 31 2005 and the last period extended from January 1 2006, to December
2007. The "top n" represents the "n" best eligible ranked pairs according to the historical distance of their mean price. We open the trade when the divergence between
the pairs exceed 0.5 standard deviations, and if does not converge within the next 20 business days we stop the trade. One day waiting estimations represents the
implementation of the strategy the next business day. International indices where the weighted is according to the weights of MSCI EAFE. The table reports loadings on
3 factors market excess return (MKT), book-to-market (B/M), cash earnings to price (CE/P). 
 1996:09-1999:12
2000:01-2002:12
2003:01-2005:12
2006:01-2007:12
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

44 
 
Table 15 
Analysis of Opening Probability of the pairs 
The table represents a cross-sectional logistic regression of pairs opening probability from pair trading portfolios 
where the independent variables are the days that every pair is opening and takes the value of one. In panel A 
and panel B, the profits are computed from a strategy of 20days and 60days respectively. We run 4 different 
regressions. Regression 1 includes all the variables, regression 2 only the macro variables, regression 3 the 
market variables, regression 4 the fundamental variables and regression 5 only the variables that survived from 
the previous 4 regressions. The sample period is from September 1996 to December 2007. The p-values and R2 
from each time-series regression are reported in nominal form.  
Panel A: 20 Days 
  
All Variables (1) 
Macro (2) 
Market (3) 
Fundamentals (4) 
Optimized (5) 
Top 5 pairs 
Portfolio 
Coefficient 
pValue 
Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intercept 
-1,579 
0,000 
-1,852 
0,000
 
 
-1,447 
0,000 
-1,482 
0,000 
Inflation Long 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10,760 
0,063 
Inflation Short 
10,585 
0,063 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Default Premium 
Long 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,104 
0,002 
0,104 
0,002 
Dividend Yield 
Long 
-5,571 
0,064 
 
 
 
 
-8,728 
0,002 
-7,803 
0,008 
EPS forward Long 
0,000 
0,036 
 
 
 
 
0,000 
0,014 
0,000 
0,012 
Eps Forward 
Short 
-0,001 
0,000 
 
 
 
 
-0,001 
0,002 
-0,001 
0,002 
FX Long 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0,723 
0,001 
-0,607 
0,005 
Market Volatility 
Long 
-0,151 
0,037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0,168 
0,054 
Unemployment 
Rate Short 
  
  
0,022 
0,090
  
  
  
  
  
  
McFadden Rsquared 
0,003 
 
0,000 
 
 
 
0,003 
 
0,004 
 
Obs with Dep=0 
11.360 
 
12.754 
 
 
 
11.488 
 
11.288 
 
Obs with Dep=1 
1.719 
  
1.999 
  
  
  
1.738 
  
1.713 
  
Panel B: 60 Days 
  
All Variables (1) 
Macro (2) 
Market (3) 
Fundamentals (4) 
Optimized (5) 
Top 5 pairs 
Portfolio 
Coefficient 
pValue 
Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue 
Intercept 
-1,907 
0,000 
-2,265 
0,000
-1,332 
0,000 
-2,223 
0,000 
-1,712 
0,000
Inflation Long 
 
 
11,014 
0,096
 
 
 
 
 
 
Default Premium 
Short 
0,129 
0,002 
 
 
 
 
0,066 
0,050 
0,128 
0,003
Dividend Yield 
Short 
-9,843 
0,020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-12,010 
0,006
EPS forward Long 
-0,001 
0,003 
 
 
 
 
-0,001 
0,001 
-0,001 
0,000
GDP Short 
 
 
-0,037 
0,052
 
 
 
 
0,053 
0,040
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

45 
 
Market Cap Short 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,000 
0,076 
0,000 
0,034
Market Volatility 
Short 
0,354 
0.0421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,421 
0,011
Unemployment 
Rate Short 
-0,039 
0.0575 
-0,034 
0,074
 
 
 
 
-0,050 
0,029
Turnover Long 
0,000 
0.0444 
  
  
0,000 
0,000 
  
  
  
  
McFadden Rsquared 
0,004 
0,001 
0,088 
0,002 
0,006 
Obs with Dep=0 
11140 
13082 
14107 
12127 
10598 
Obs with Dep=1 
1076 
1268 
1363 
1154 
1007 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

46 
 
 
Table 16 
Survivor Analysis of Time to Convergence 
The table represents a negative binomial regression of the days to convergence of each separate pair, where 
the independent variables are the days of each individual pair. In panel A and panel B, the profits are computed 
from a strategy of 20days and 60days respectively. We run 4 different regressions. Regression 1 includes all the 
variables, regression 2 only the macro variables, regression 3 the market variables, regression 4 the 
fundamental variables and regression  5 only the variables that survived from the previous 4 regressions. The 
sample period is from September 1996 to December 2007. The p-values and R2 from each time-series 
regression are reported in nominal form. Standard errors have been corrected with Huber-White. 
Panel A: 20days 
  
All Variables (1) 
Macro (2) 
Market (3) 
Fundamentals (4) 
Optimized (5) 
Top 5 pairs 
Portfolio 
Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intercept 
1,455 
0,000 
2,009 
0,000 
 
 
1,532 
0,000 
2,253 
0,000 
GDP Short 
 
 
-0,028 
0,070 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Default Premium 
Long 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0,071 
0,013 
 
 
Dividend Yield 
Short 
10,990 
0,001 
 
 
 
 
8,657 
0,002 
 
 
EPS forward Long 
0,001 
0,003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,001 
0,019 
Eps Forward Short 
0,001 
0,001 
 
 
 
 
0,001 
0,000 
 
 
FX Long 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,406 
0,017 
 
 
Portfolio Inflows 
Short 
0,000 
0,053 
 
 
 
 
0,000 
0,014 
 
 
Unemployment 
Rate Long 
-0,109 
0,039 
-0,079 
0,077 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unemployment 
Rate Short 
 
 
-0,026 
0,021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turnover Short 
0,000 
0,038 
  
  
  
  
  
  
0,000 
0,077 
R-squared 
0,020 
0,003 
 
 
0,018 
0,005 
Observations 
included 
1.216 
1.510 
  
  
1.756 
1.246 
Panel B: 60days 
  
All Variables (1) 
Macro (2) 
Market (3) 
Fundamentals (4) 
Optimized (5) 
Top 5 pairs 
Portfolio 
Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue 
Intercept 
1,883 
0,000 
 
 
 
 
1,880 
0,000 
1,880 
0,000 
Default Premium 
Short 
-0,143 
0,002 
 
 
 
 
-0,143 
0,002 
-0,143 
0,002 
Dividend Yield 
Short 
13,797 
0,004 
  
  
  
  
13,797 
0,004 
13,797 
0,004 
R-squared 
0,007 
 
 
 
 
0,007 
0,007 
Observations 
included 
1.254 
  
  
  
  
1.254 
1.254 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

47 
 
 
 
Table 17 
Times-Series Cross Sectional Regressions of Pairs Returns  
The table represents a times series cross-sectional regression of excess returns from pair trading portfolios 
where the independent variables are the pairs returns of each individual pairs profit. In panel A and panel B, 
the profits are computed from a strategy of 20days and 60days respectively. We run 4 different regressions. 
Regression 1 includes all the variables, regression 2 only the macro variables, regression 3 the market variables, 
regression 4 the fundamental variables and regression 5 only the variables that survived from the previous 4 
regressions. The sample period is from September 1996 to December 2007. The p-values and R2 from each 
time-series regression are reported in nominal form.  
Panel A: 20Days 
  
All Variables (1) 
Macro (2) 
Market (3) 
Fundamentals (4) 
Optimized (5) 
Top 5 pairs 
Portfolio 
Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intercept 
-1.168 
0,08 
-3,43 
0,00 
 
 
-1,34 
0,03 
-2,47 
0,00 
Default Premium 
Long 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,46 
0,01 
0,56 
0,00 
Dividend Yield 
Short 
-46,68 
0,02 
 
 
 
 
-50,98 
0,01 
-31,35 
0,04 
EPS forward 
Short 
0,00 
0,05 
 
 
 
 
0,00 
0,06 
 
 
FX Long 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2,12 
0,05 
-2,53 
0,02 
Money Market 
Rates Short 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Portfolio Inflows 
Short 
0,00 
0,00 
 
 
 
 
0,00 
0,00 
 
 
Inflation Long 
  
  
-55,15 
0,06 
  
  
  
  
-64,14 
0,04 
R-square 
0,02 
 
0,00 
 
 
 
0,02 
 
0,01 
 
Observations 
1.641 
  
2.096 
  
  
  
1.756 
  
1.856 
  
Panel B: 60Days 
 
All Variables (1) 
Macro (2) 
Market (3) 
Fundamentals (5) 
Optimized (6) 
Top 5 pairs 
Portfolio 
Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue Coefficient 
pValue 
Intercept 
-0,002 
0,003 
-0,001 
0,472
-0,003 
0,000 
-0,004 
0,000 
-0,004 
0,000
Inflation Short 
 
 
-0,202 
0,035
 
 
 
 
 
 
Default Premium 
Short 
0,001 
0,021 
 
 
 
 
0,001 
0,035 
0,002 
0,008
EPS Forward 
Short 
0,000 
0,067 
 
 
 
 
0,000 
0,021 
0,000 
0,004 
GDP Short 
 
 
-0,001 
0,018
 
 
 
 
 
 
Market Cap Short 
0,000 
0,011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,000 
0,008
Money Market 
Rates Short 
0,008 
0,077 
0,010 
0,047
 
 
 
 
0,011 
0,038
Portfolio Inflows 
Short 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,000 
0,015 
0,000 
0,089 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

48 
 
Credit Rating 
Short 
-0,003 
0,062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Market Volatility 
Short 
 
 
 
 
0,005 
0,007 
 
 
0,005 
0,004
Turnover Short 
0,000 
0,040 
  
  
  
  
  
  
0,000 
0,016
R-square 
0,020 
 
0,011 
 
0,052 
 
0,009 
 
0,032 
 
Observations 
986 
  
1.116 
  
1.388 
  
1.230 
  
937 
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

49 
 
 
 
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
1
2
3
4
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
90
120
Trading Horizon
Mean Return
  
Figure 1: The lines plot the distribution of mean returns of the best 5 eligible pairs 
according to different measures of standard deviations on the identification of the 
opportunities. During the formation period (120 days), the strategy is evaluating two 
price absolute differences according to three different scales of distance. For different k 
trading horizons, where k=1,…,120, we consider three scales of deviations, 0.5, 1.0 and 
2.0 standard deviations. Blue line corresponds to the distribution of mean returns for 0.5 
standard deviations, magenta corresponds to empirical distribution of 1.0 standard 
deviation, and gold corresponds to empirical distribution of 2.0 standards deviations. The 
execution of the strategy occurs one day after the divergence  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

50 
 
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
1
11
21
31
41
51
61
71
81
91
101
111
 
Figure 2: Distribution of Mean Returns according to different Time Exit Strategies. The 
testing period is between 1day and 120days. The mean returns are represented also from 
Kernel density on the left. The execution of the strategy occurs the next business after 
the divergence and the evidence have been applied to top 5 pairs. The grey bar on the 
left side of the plot represents Kernel Density. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

51 
 
 
-.10
-.05
.00
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
 
Figure 3: The line plots the distribution of the monthly Excess Return of Pair Trading 
Strategy for the top 5 eligible pairs. The trading period is extended from September 1996 
to March 2009. The execution horizon is 20days. The strategy is implemented the next 
business day of the divergence day.   
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

52 
 
 
Panel A: Mean return distribution during the 20days execution period. 
5
10
15
20
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
Evaluation days
mret
 
 
Panel B: Distribution of standard deviation during the 20 days execution period. 
5
10
15
20
0.0055 0.0060 0.0065 0.0070 0.0075 0.0080
Evaluation days
sret
 
 
Figure 4: Panel A and Panel B plots the distribution of mean returns and standard 
deviation of top 5 eligible pairs of pairs trading strategy. The execution horizon is 20 
days. The implementation of the strategy occurs one day after the divergence.   
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

53 
 
 
 
Figure 5: The plot exhibits the daily Omega Ratio using the best 5 eligible pairs. The 
threshold is set to zero and we are considering positive returns. 
 
 
0.000 
0.005 
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
Omega Ratio 
return
omega 
PAIRS
LONG
SHORT
SPY
EQUAL
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

54 
 
 
Panel A: Top2 Pairs Portfolio  
 
Panel B: Top5 Pairs Portfolio 
 
 
 
 
 
Panel C: Top10 Pairs Portfolio 
 
Panel D: Top20 Pairs Portfolio 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Presents daily terminal wealth of baseline results for different number of 
eligible pairs in the respective panels (A:2pairs, B:5pairs, C:10pairs, D:20pairs). In the 
figures, we represent in align with the terminal wealth, long and short component and 
S&P500 for the relative comparison.    
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

55 
 
 
Appendix 
 
 
 
Variable Definitions 
Macroeconomic Variables: In macros, we include a set of 4 variables, GDP, Inflation 
and Unemployment Rate and are represented as growth rates. Chen, Roll and Ross 
(1986), Ferson and Harvey (1993) Chan, Karceski and Lakonishok (1998) mentioned the 
relevance of macro variables on equity returns. Variables are transformed to daily 
frequency to be adapted to the respective trading days.  
Money Market Rates: outline interbank rates of each country and we transformed to 
daily rates.  
 
Market Variables: 
Market Volatility: define a continue time series variable constructed as range based 
volatility estimators at day t, based on the daily prices of individual ETFs during the 
trading period. Market risk is the average cumulative return over the prior 5 days. 
Daily Turnover: The daily turnover of individual ETFs in Us dollars. EGJ (2008) 
referred to market capitalization and daily turnover ratio as proxies on examination of 
liquidity effect on profitability. Daily Turnover is the average return over the prior 5 days. 
Average Return of the previous quarter: Each country daily excess return over the 
previous 60 days, with respect to day t.  
 
Fundamental factors  
Dividend Yield Ratio: the countries daily dividend yield at day t.  
Forward Earnings per share ratio: defines earnings per share of the next 12 months 
for each respective country index. Forecast included the median of the consensus of the 
market specialists. Earnings are the consensus at day t and prices calculated by the last 
traded day t. 
Default Premium: defines the daily change premium as the difference of US 10 year 
government bonds minus daily change 10year government bond of each individual 
country. Default premium is based on the perception to examine potentially financial 
contagion (Khandani and Lo [2007]). 
Exchange Rates: represents the daily exchange rate of each country against to US 
dollars and is the rate of each day t relevant to prior day.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546

56 
 
International Portfolio Flows: The difference between portfolio inflows and outflows 
of each country. Brennan and Cao (1997), Froot, O’ Connell and Seasholes (2001), stated 
about the importance of international portfolio flows in the equity returns and loaded in 
their estimations. Taylor and Sarno (1997) argued about the importance of global and 
country specific factors in determining the long-run movements in equity flows. 
International portfolio flows are expressed on the difference of the event daily minus the 
prior day.  
Market Capitalization: The daily market capitalization of each ETF in millions US 
dollars at day t. Market capitalization is the average return over the prior 5 days.  
Credit Rating: credit rating is the a dummy variable that takes the value of one if there 
is an upgrade of the long term credit rating of each country, takes the value of zero if 
there is a unchanged evaluation and takes the value of minus one if there is a downgrade. 
Goh and Ederington (1993) argued about the importance of credit rating. The data 
download from the three biggest credit rating agencies, Moody’s, S&P and Fitch.   
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1958546
