The Inverted Parabola World of Classical Quantitative Finance:
Non-Equilibrium and Non-Perturbative Finance Perspective
Igor Halperin
NYU Tandon School of Engineering
e-mail: ighalp@gmail.com
August 8, 2020
Abstract:
Classical quantitative ﬁnance models such as the Geometric Brownian Motion or its later extensions such as local or stochastic volatility models do not make sense when seen from a
physics-based perspective, as they are all equivalent to a negative mass oscillator with a noise.
This paper presents an alternative formulation based on insights from physics.
I would like to thank Peter Carr for critical remarks. All possible errors are my own.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

1
Introduction
The novel ”The Inverted World” by Christopher Priest paints a fascinating image of a world
where a city called the City of Earth slowly travels on railway tracks across an alien planet.
The city’s engineers keep laying a fresh track for the city, and pick up the old track as it moves.
The city must move on to stay within 10 miles of the Optimum - which is a location where the
gravitational ﬁeld is not distorted, and matches the gravitational ﬁeld of the planet Earth.
But the world of the novel is not Earth. In this world, the ground is in a constant move
from the north to the south, as a result of some sort of a global gravitational catastrophe that
happened at some point in the past. Even as the Optimum stays in the same position, the
City will drift away from the Optimum if it does not move all the time. If the City of Earth
ﬁnds itself too far from the Optimum, gravitational distortions become too strong as a result of
moving grounds and their drift to the south. This is what makes the City crawls to the North
all the time. If it ever stops, it will eventually be pulled to the South, and destroyed at the
end by gravitational distortion forces, along with all its citizens. So it has to move forward
through a devastated land full of hostile tribes. The only alternative to a constant move in such
an inverted world, where the grounds are moving and the Sun looks like a rotating parabola, is
death.
The resolution of the many puzzles and gaps of history of the Inverted World comes only
towards the end of the book. The City of Earth was crawling the planet of Earth, never leaving
it. Moving grounds, a parabolic Sun, and other related puzzles of the Inverted World was caused
by side neurological eﬀects of a UV radiation that was produced by the city’s power generator.
The generator was based on an alternative energy method that was developed by a founder of
the city.
This novel, which I ﬁrst read many years ago, came repeatedly to my mind when I worked
on a model of asset price dynamic in an open and non-equilibrium market called the Quantum
Equilibrium-Disequilibrium (QED) model [5]. The QED model generalizes the Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM) model by introducing two additional parameters, along with a non-linear
extension of a diﬀusion equation driving the dynamics of the model, see also [4]. Surprisingly,
the QED model suggests that the notions of a market growth and market stability in this model
and in the GBM model are essentially opposite.
What was ’equilibrium’ dynamics in the GBM model becomes non-equilibrium dynamics
from the perspective of the QED model. What was the commonly excepted average exponential
growth of asset prices becomes a fall from a point of instability towards a point of local stability.
This sounds much like an Inverted World vs a Normal World, the only question is which one is
the Inverted World?
This paper oﬀers a non-technical introduction to the QED model, along with a reasoning
why it corresponds to a ’Normal World’, while the GBM model, along with its multiple direct
descendants such as local or stochastic volatility models, describes an ’Inverted World’.
As
I will try to argue, assumptions of closed-system dynamics, (quasi-)stationarity and linearity
made in classical ﬁnancial models do not adequately capture realities of real world ﬁnancial
markets, and in a sense can be viewed as ‘wrong limits’ of a (yet unknown) ‘right’ theory. Then
I show how these deﬁciencies are addressed in the QED model that treats markets as open
and non-linear systems, and does not rely on a linearization of dynamics within a perturbation
theory to treat non-linearities. Instead, the QED model presents a non-perturbative approach to
handle non-linearities. This position paper discusses how insights from modern non-equilibrium
and non-perturbative physics can be fruitfully used for ﬁnancial modeling with non-linear and
non-equilibrium models such as the QED to better capture the true market dynamics.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

2
GBM, Langevin equation, and Inverted Parabola
2.1
GBM and the Langevin equation
Since the groundbreaking work of Samuelson in 1965 [11], Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM)
model, also known as the the log-normal asset return model,
dXt = µXtdt + σXtdWt
(1)
remains the main work-horse of ﬁnancial engineering. In Eq.(1), Xt is an asset price at time t,
µ is the stock drift, σ is the stock volatility, and Wt is a standard Brownian motion. For what
follows, we can view the GBM model as a special linear case of a more general model called It´o’s
diﬀusion
dXt = µ(Xt)dt + σ(Xt)dWt
(2)
with a linear drift function µ(Xt) = µXt and a multiplicative (i.e. proportional to Xt) diﬀusion
function σ(Xt) = σXt. Samuelson proposed the GBM model (1) as an improvement over an
Arithmetic Brownian Motion (ABM) model suggested by Bachelier in 1900 [1]. His objective
was to modify the ABM model to ensure non-negativity of stock prices. Note that the ABM
model itself can be viewed as a model with a constant drift and volatility terms.
A few years after Bachelier published his 1900 thesis that gave birth to the ABM model,
Paul Langevin proposed in 1908 an equation that later became known as the Langevin equation.
Langevin’s work focused on a simpliﬁed analysis of overdamped Brownian particles within the
Einstein-Smoluchovski theory of classical diﬀusion in the presence of an external potential ﬁeld
U(X). Such a ﬁeld can represent an impact of heavy molecules, a external gravitational or
electromagnetic ﬁeld, etc. [8]. The Langevin equation can be written in similar terms to It´o’s
diﬀusion (2), except that in the Langevin dynamics, a drift term is given by the negative gradient
of the potential U(X). The (overdamped) Langevin equation with a multiplicative noise reads
dXt = −∂U(Xt)
∂Xt
dt + σXtdWt
(3)
Therefore, the Langevin equation that is rooted in physics provides an interpretation to the drift
term µ(Xt) in the mathematical construction of It´o’s diﬀusion (2): any drift function µ(Xt) can
be viewed as a negative gradient of a potential U(Xt) in the equivalent Langevin dynamics (3).
In particular, when the potential U(Xt) has a minimum, the Langevin equation describes a
stochastic relaxation towards this minimum, where the gradient of the potential vanishes.
While this observation applies to any drift function µ(Xt) in Eq.(2), it is of particular interest
to explore its consequences for the GBM model (1). Comparing Eqs.(3) and (1), we observe
that the GBM model corresponds to a special case of a more general Langevin equation for the
following choice of the force potential U(X):
UGBM(X) = −µ
2 X2
(4)
When the drift µ is positive, this is the potential of an inverted harmonic oscillator with ’mass’
µ! Such a potential has a maximum at X = 0 and no minimum, see Fig. 1. From elementary
physics, a classical motion in such potential describes an unstable system.1
1A similar analysis can be performed by changing to log-prices yt := log Xt. When expressed in terms of logprices yt, the noise term becomes additive, while the y-space potential is V (y) = −

µ −σ2
2

y. When µ > σ2
2 ,
this potential corresponding to a uniform force pushing the particle away from the negative inﬁnity y = −∞
corresponding to a ﬁnancial distress or a bankruptcy. On the other hand, taking µ < σ2
2 would produce a linear
attraction to y = −∞and defaults (bankruptcies) happening too fast.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

Figure 1: The classical potential U(x) corresponding to the GBM model with µ > 0. Red dots
correspond to a “particle” representing the ﬁrm, coordinate Xt being the ﬁrm’s stock price.
This is the potential of a harmonic oscillator with a negative mass. Such a system is globally
unstable, and the default state Xt = 0 is unreachable as the force of the negative gradient of
the potential pushes the particle away from the default boundary Xt = 0 for any value Xt > 0,
producing an ever-accelerating and unbounded fall in this potential.
2.2
The Inverted Parabola World of the GBM model and its descendants
The inverted parabola potential (4) thus describes the most classical example of an unstable
system in physics - an inverted (negative mass) harmonic oscillator. Of course, the fact that
the GBM model is non-stationary for µ̸ = 0 is evident and well known in the literature. On
the other hand, ’classical’ ﬁnancial inter-temporal models (e.g.
the Black-Scholes model [2,
10] or inter-temporal versions of the CAMP model [12]) often work under assumptions of a
general equilibrium or competitive market equilibrium.
In these approaches, one assumes a
dynamic market equilibrium between rational ﬁnancial agents having instantaneous access to
either symmetric or asymmetric information. Here the concept of a market equilibrium refers
not to a price process, but rather to an equilibrium of supply and demand given a price level
(recall the Equilibrium in ”Inverted World”). Thus, the stock price is considered a ’reference
frame’ to describe the supply-demand balance equations. As the stock price dynamics is nonstationary, the same holds for the full system given by both ﬁnancial agents (traders) and price
dynamics. This means that the concept of a market equilibrium under a non-stationary price
process can be at best applied only approximately for short times, as a local approximation.
To illustrate this point, imagine you step into an elevator on a top ﬂoor of a skyscraper. All
of a sudden, the elevator cable breaks, and now the elevator is in a free fall, with you trapped
inside.2 According to elementary physics, as long as the elevator continues to freely fall, you
will be levitating inside of the elevator, being in a state of a local ‘equilibrium’. This is because
being inside of a freely falling elevator is equivalent to residing in a non-inertial reference frame,
where a ﬁctitious ’anti-gravitational’ force exactly cancels the gravitational force. This simple
example illustrates the point that from the point of view of an external observer who observes
both the elevator and you inside of the elevator, the dynamics of the full system most deﬁnitely
cannot be described as equilibrium dynamics proceeding indeﬁnitely in time.
Far from being a purely theoretical observation, the inverted parabola potential (4) implies a
2Of course, this is largely a hypothetical scenario, see e.g.
https://science.howstuﬀworks.com/science-vsmyth/everyday-myths/question730.htm regarding practical safety measures to prevent it from happening.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

completely absurd behavior of stock prices in the GBM model, as well as its all direct descendants
such as local or stochastic volatility models, that becomes especially transparent in a small noise
limit.3 While the fact the the zero-price level X = 0 is not attainable in the GBM model is well
known, the nature of this mechanism is rarely discussed. A critical observation is that not only
the GBM model is incompatible with corporate defaults due to its inability to reach the zero
level X = 0, but rather that non-negative prices are obtained in the GBM model at the cost of
introducing a completely ﬁctitious and absurd force, due to the negative gradient of the GBM
potential, that somehow saves a ﬁrm from default once it gets close to the zero level. More
than that, this force becomes unboundedly stronger as the price increases! The presence of such
an absurd ever-growing force for all positive prices appears to be too steep a price to pay for
non-negativity of stock prices, which was the original motivation for the GBM model.
Interestingly, the last observation that the repelling force actually increasses rather than
decreases as the price moves away from the default boundary Xt = 0 also implies the model
behavior should also become progressively less trustworthy for large values of Xt, that could be
expected in a long run for the GBM dynamics (1). The GBM model predicts that on average,
the price of a given stock should grow exponentially in time, but empirically, a very few stocks
have observable prices for a long period of, say, 100 years.4 Most of stocks live much shorter
than this, and often end their life via mergers, acquisitions, or corporate bankruptcies. Recall
that none of such events should be possible according to the GBM model, again suggesting that
it contradicts the reality.5 Also note that it would not be fair to use a long history of market
index portfolios such as e.g. Dow Jones or S&P500 as an evidence of an average exponential
long-term growth for individual stocks. Due to the fact that the composition of such market
index portfolios continuously changes, it embeds a survivorship bias that allows it to ignore the
fact that stocks can default, and proceed away with the implicit assumption that stocks are
immortal.
An analogy with the Inverted World mentioned in the introduction should become more
transparent to the reader at this point. An unlimited fall in an unbounded potential (4) describing a small noise dynamics of the GBM model and all its descendants can only be perceived
as an exponential growth only if the observer is somehow ‘inverted’ as well. When viewed from
the perspective of the Langevin dynamics, an unbounded average exponential growth of assets
according to the GBM model turns out to be an unbounded fall in the inverted parabolic potential. This is obviously a catastrophic scenario for most models in physics except dedicated
models designed to describe short-lived unstable systems (e.g. in some cosmological models).
3Analysis of a small noise limit is useful in order to not get ’fooled by randomness’. Note that this is not
the same as setting volatility σ to zero exactly.
In such a strict limit, a stock becomes a riskless asset that
should earn a risk-free rate r according to a no-arbitrage argument, and thus should be the same as cash in
a bank account. As the exponential growth ert follows as a solution of a compound interest equation, ﬁnancial
mathematicians typically have no issue with taking the exponential law ert on its face value, and formally applying
it for arbitrary times t →∞arguing that ’we believe this will continue in the next 100 years or so, given
the past experience’.
I believe that an appeal to the money bank account law ert as a ‘justiﬁcation’ for an
unbounded average exponential growth for stocks would be erroneous both ﬁnancially and mathematically. It
is wrong ﬁnancially because stocks are not cash, they can default, while a bank account is protected by state
regulations. It is also wrong mathematically because the limit σ = 0 is a singular limit: corporate defaults become
mathematically impossible in this limit, while their probability may remain small but non-zero for arbitrarily small
but non-zero values σ > 0.
4I would like to thank Peter Carr for pointing out one such stock: Sotheby’s (BID).
5While this only becomes evident in a long run, it does not mean that the GBM model is only ‘asymptotically
wrong’ rather than being ‘qualitatively wrong’. As I argued above, a ﬁctitious ever-growing force equal to the
negative gradient of the GBM potential is absurd on the whole positive semi-axis X ≥0, that is, at each time
moment. On the other hand, the simplicity of the GBM potential (4) does not justify invoking of an asymptotic
analysis to identify regions of the state space X ≥0 where the model becomes ‘too’ wrong - it is wrong everywhere.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

As an unbounded exponential expansion never occurs in most of other natural systems known to
physics, real ‘physical’ markets should have mechanisms that eventually stop such an unbounded
expansion. As I argue next, such stabilization can arise from taking into account interactions
and non-linearities in the market dynamics.
2.3
Stabilization of dynamics by non-linearities
Both the classical GBM model and a majority of models used in quantitative trading6 are
linear models, in the sense that they have a linear (or constant) drift. A linear or a constant
speciﬁcation of a drift term for stock dynamics might appear a simplest reasonable choice, given
that a drift is harder to measure at small time steps ∆t than a diﬀusion term7.
As is known in physics, linear dynamic systems can typically be only considered approximations to real-world dynamics of natural systems, which are often non-linear. Non-linearities
capture interactions in physical systems, that could be produced either by interactions between
diﬀerent elements of a system, or interactions with some external potential. In particular, within
the Langevin approach, the most common approach to incorporate complex interactions in a
physical system is to consider more complex potentials than a harmonic oscillator potential. One
popular choice are potentials expressed as polynomials in a state variable X. While the use of
a general polynomial potential can be justiﬁed as a Taylor expansion of an arbitrary potential,
for most systems encountered in statistical and quantum physics it usually suﬃces to consider
polynomial potentials up to the fourth degree [7] (see also references in [5]).
One of the most popular non-linear potentials describing many systems in physics is the
so-called quartic potential
U(X) = −1
2θX2 + 1
3κX3 + 1
4gX4,
(5)
where parameters θ, κ and g may depend on time through their dependence on various predictors,
but can be taken constant in a simplest case. Obviously, if we set κ = g = 0 and θ = µ, this
potential recovers the GBM potential (4). Otherwise, for non-zero values of κ, g, the GBM
potential (4) can serve as a local approximation, valid for small values of X, to the non-linear
potential (5).
The fact that linear models such as the GBM model are only approximations to more general
non-linear models that incorporate market impact, transaction costs etc. is well known in the
literature. However, there exists a common belief among both market practitioners and academics that such non-linear eﬀects are only important for large players who ‘move the market’,
while for small trades the standard linear models that neglect market impact can still be used.
I propose that even for classical quantitative ﬁnance models such as the GBM that do not
assume a large trader, capturing non-linear eﬀects of market interactions is critically important
for constructing more reasonable models that would not produce the absurd ever-accelerating
unbounded decay in the inverted parabola potential (4) of the GBM model.
Indeed, assume for a moment that the quartic potential (5) is a ‘right’ model of the world
(I will argue later in favor of this choice, so that the example is not hypothetical).
When
X is suﬃciently small, the cubic and quartic terms can be neglected, and upon setting θ =
µ, we recover the GBM potential (4) as a small-ﬁeld approximation to the quartic potential
6Excluding more specialized models speciﬁcally addressing market impact, for example for optimal stock
execution.
7This is because a drift and diﬀusion term scale as O (∆t) and O
√
∆t

, respectively, therefore the second
term dominates when ∆t →0.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

(5). Depending on model parameters, the behavior of the potential can match the quadratic
approximation well in a parametrically wide range of the price Xt. Clearly, if we set parameters
κ and g to zero exactly, then the two potentials are identical on the whole semi-axis X ≥0.
On the other hand, for non-vanishing values of parameters κ and g that control, respectively,
the cubic and quartic non-linear terms in the potential U(x), the latter can produce a wide variety
of shapes, depending on the values of parameters, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Figure 2: Under diﬀerent parameter choices in the quartic potential U(x) of Eq.(5), it can take
diﬀerent forms. A stable state of the system corresponds to a minimum of the potential. The
potential on the left describes a metastable system with a local minimum at zero and a global
minimum at x = 3.3. If a particle is initially released near the global minimum, most of the time
it will experience a small diﬀusive relaxation towards the global minimum, which, with a small
probability, can be replaced at each instance by a large sudden jump across the potential barrier
separating the two minima. The minimum at zero corresponds to the default state. For the
potential in the center, the state x = 3.3 becomes unstable, and the state x = 0 is metastable.
The potential on the right has two symmetric minima, and the particle can choose any of them
to minimize its energy. Such a scenario is called “spontaneous symmetry breaking” in physics.
As was argued in [5], it is the potential in the left graph in Fig. 2 that leads to the most
interesting dynamics of a stock market price. Instead of unstable dynamics of the GBM model,
with such a potential, dynamics can rather be metastable. Such metastable dynamics are different from globally stable dynamics such as e.g. the harmonic oscillator dynamics in that they
eventually change, though the time for this change to occur may be long, or very long, depending
on the parameters. In between of such infrequent transitions, dynamics are approximately equilibrium (stationary) or quasi-equilibrium. Changes of the dynamics correspond to rare events
of transitions between local minima of the potential.
While an explanation of how this happens will be given momentarily, it is very important to
emphasize a critical role of a non-vanishing noise σ > 0 for a realization of a scenario described
below. This is because any transitions between diﬀerent local minima of a potential are only
possible when thermal ﬂuctuations are turned on by allowing for a non-zero σ > 0. If σ is large,
ﬂuctuations become stronger and transitions happen more often, but in the strict opposite limit
σ = 0, any ﬂuctuations die oﬀ, and transitions between local minima of the potential are no
longer possible. Dynamics obtained in the strict limit σ = 0 are qualitatively diﬀerent from
dynamics obtained for non-zero values σ > 0, even though the actual numerical value of σ may
be very small numerically. This is the reason why appealing to an exponential bank account
law as a justiﬁcation for a similar average behavior for stocks would be mathematically wrong
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

- as was mentioned in Sect. 2.2, the limit σ →0 is singular (non-analytic).8
The potential shown on the left of Fig. 2 has a potential barrier between a metastable point
at the bottom of the local well, and the part of the potential for small values of x, where the
motion against the gradient of the potential means a fall to the zero price level x = 0. Due
to noise-induced ﬂuctuations, a particle representing a stock with value xt at time t placed
initially to the right of the barrier, can hop over to the left of the barrier. In physics, solutions
of dynamics equations that describe such “barrier-hopping” transitions are called instantons.
The reason for this nomenclature is that the transitions between the meta-stable state and the
regime of instability (a “fall” to the zero level x = 0) happens almost instantaneously in time.
What might take a long time though is the time for this hopping to occur: depending on model
parameters, the waiting time can in principle even exceed the age of the observed universe. See
Fig. 3 for examples of an instanton, anti-instanton (an instanton going backward in time), and
a bounce (an instanton-anti-instanton pair, i.e. an instanton followed by an anti-instanton)
Figure 3: Instanton, anti-instanton, and bounce solutions. The instanton hops from the right
of a global maximum to the left of it, the anti-instanton proceeds in an opposite order, and the
bounce is made of the instanton followed by the anti-instanton.
In ﬁnancial terms, an event of hopping over the barrier en route to the zero level at x = 0
corresponds to a corporate bankruptcy (default). As the GBM model corresponds to the inverted
harmonic potential where the point x = 0 is unattainable, corporate defaults cannot be captured
by the GBM model. In contrast, with the quartic potential shown on the left of Fig. 2, corporate
defaults are perfectly possible, and correspond to the instanton-type hopping transitions between
diﬀerent local minima of the meta-stable potential.
Note that both the drift (the negative
gradient of the potential (5)) and volatility vanish at X = 0. This means the the zero level
X = 0 is an absorbing state: once the particle reaches this point, it stays there forever. This
is a highly desirable model behavior as it captures corporate default in a simple diﬀusion-based
stock price model, in a sharp contrast with a failure of the GBM model to produce a defaultable
equity model, in addition to unrealistic dynamics for X > 0.
8A popular example of a non-analytical dependence on a model parameter is given by the function f(g) =
e−A/g, where g ≥0 is a model parameter, and A > 0 is a constant.
Functions of such form are frequently
encountered in quantum ﬁeld theory. While the value of this function is very small for small but non-vanishing
values g > 0, it does not have a Taylor expansion around the point g = 0, which means that this limit is singular.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

3
The “Quantum Equilibrium-Disequilibrium” (QED) model
Unlike the GBM model, the QED model [5] incorporates capital inﬂows and outﬂows in the
market, along with capturing their price impact in the model construction.
As I will show
below, capturing these phenomena using simple function approximations eﬀectively produces
the Langevin dynamics with the quartic potential (5), thus oﬀering a plausible mechanism for
stabilization of market dynamics by non-linearities as described in Sect. 2.3. Before providing a
mathematical formulation of the model, it is helpful to discuss empirical data.
3.1
Markets are open systems: importance of money ﬂows and their impact
Traditional classical ﬁnance models such as the GBM model of Samuelson [11], the Black-Scholes
model [2], the CAPM model [12] etc. typically all assume that a market is a closed system that
does not exchange cash with outside investors (an “outside world”). A common assumption for
stock dividends often made for modeling stock prices is that any dividends paid by a company
are immediately re-invested back into the stock by the shareholders. However, in addition to
current investors in a given stock at any point in time, the normal regime of the market is
that on average, there is an approximately continuous rate of cash inﬂows into the market from
new investors, mainly due to various retirement plans programs. In other words, money is not
conserved in the market due to continuous inﬂows (and outﬂows) of new market participants.
Fig. 4 demonstrates the dynamics of combined inﬂows into equity, bond, and hybrid funds
[3]. It shows that on average, there was a steady inﬂow of around $325bn annually into the US
funds between 2004 and 2016, with a local drop around 2009 as a result of the economic crisis.
Assuming as a rough estimate that about two thirds of these inﬂows are invested in stocks, this
gives rise to about $200bn injected every year into the stock market. The main origin of such
cash injection are retirement plans of the US workers.
Figure 4: Combined inﬂows into equity, bond, and hybrid funds. The annual rate is approximately constant at the level of $325bn [3].
Should an annual injection of $200bn in the capital market be considered a large or a negligible eﬀect? The total market capitalization of all stocks in the S&P500 index is about $25.5
trillion, or $25,500bn, so the inﬂows are of the order of 1% of the total index value, which may
not be a numerically insigniﬁcant eﬀect. In addition, the answer depends on how exactly these
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

inﬂows are distributed across diﬀerent stocks. If retails or institutional investors are massively
driven to invest in a particular “hot” stock, after a relatively short period of increased returns
driven “mechanically” by the momentum, a long term impact of such investor “crowding” in the
stock normally amounts to diminishing long-term returns. The latter phenomenon is known as
the “dumb money” eﬀect [9].
Therefore, to model the impact of investors ﬂows and their impact on stock returns, we should
simultaneously incorporate two things into the modeling framework, which are both missing in
most conventional classical models such as the GBM: capital inﬂows, and saturation/market
friction eﬀects. As we will see next, the QED model incorporates both these eﬀects, and moreover
it provides an explanation why these eﬀect are critically important to ensure a long-term stability
(or, more accurately, meta-stability, as will be more clear below) of the resulting dynamics, no
matter how small these eﬀects may be numerically.
3.2
The QED model
Let Xt be a total capitalization of a ﬁrm at time t, rescaled to a dimensionless quantity of the
order of one Xt ∼1, e.g. by dividing by a mean capitalization over the observation period. We
consider discrete-time dynamics described, in general form, by the following equations:
Xt+∆t = (1 + rt+∆t∆t)(Xt −cXt∆t + utXt∆t),
rt+∆t = rf + wT zt + f(ut) +
σ
√
∆t
εt,
(6)
where ∆t is a time step, rf is a risk-free rate, c is a dividend rate (assumed constant here), zt is
a vector of predictors with weights w, ut ≡ut(Xt, zt) is a percentage rate of cash inﬂow/outﬂow
from outside investors9, f(ut) is a market impact factor, and εt ∼N(·|0, 1) is white noise. Here
the ﬁrst equation deﬁnes the change of the total market cap10 in the time step [t, t + ∆t] as
a composition of two changes to its time-t value Xt. First, at the beginning of the interval, a
dividend cXt∆t is paid to the investors, while they also may inject the amount utXt∆t of capital
in the stock. After that, the new capital value Xt +(ut −c)Xt∆t grows at rate rt+∆t. The latter
is given by the second of Eqs.(6), where the term f(ut) describes the price impact of the money
inﬂow or outﬂow. In [5], we used a simple linear trade impact speciﬁcation
f(ut) = −µut
(7)
where µ is a market impact parameter.
Assuming that µ > 0, the chosen sign convention
corresponds to a market saturation eﬀect, which may be a proper setting for long-term asset
returns. On the other hand, µ < 0 corresponds to a positive impact of money inﬂow ut > 0, which
may be a relevant setting to describe a short-term impact of money inﬂows due to momentum
eﬀects. Note that ut can be either zero or non-zero, including both positive values and negative
values, with a ‘normal’ market corresponding to ut > 0. Another possible speciﬁcation of the
impact function f(ut) will be presented below, after we introduce the basic setting.
The reason that the same quantity ut appears in both equations in (6) is simple. In the ﬁrst
equation, ut enters as a capital injection utXt∆t, while in the second equation it enters via the
market impact term f(ut) because adding capital utXt∆t means trading a quantity of the stock
that is proportional to ut. Using a linear impact approximation, this produces the impact term
f(ut) = −µut.
9Note that here we deﬁne cash inﬂows ut as multiples of the total market cap (or equivalently, of the stock
market price) Xt, while it was deﬁned in the absolute terms in [5].
10or, equivalently, the stock price, if the number of outstanding shares is kept constant.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

In general, the rate of capital injection ut injected by investors in the market at time t should
depend on the current market capitalization Xt (or current returns), plus possibly other factors
(e.g. alpha signals). In [5], we considered a simple quadratic choice for ut
ut = ¯u + φXt + λX2
t
(8)
with three parameters ¯u, φ and λ.11 Note that Eq.(8) implies that the total money ﬂow utXt →0
in Eq.(6) when Xt →0. This ensures that no investor would invest in a stock with a strictly
zero price. Also note that the Eq.(8) can always be viewed as a leading-order Taylor expansion
of a more general nonlinear “capital supply” function u(Xt, zt) that can depend on both Xt and
signals zt. (alternatively, the capital supply u can be made a function of returns rather than
prices [6]). Respectively, parameters ¯u, φ and λ could be slowly varying functions of signals zt.
Here we consider a limiting case when they are treated as ﬁxed parameters, which may be a
reasonable assumption for time periods when an economic regime does not change too much.
Substituting Eq.(8) into Eqs.(6), neglecting terms O(∆t)2 and taking the continuous time
limit ∆t →dt we obtain the “Quantum Equilibrium-Disequilibrium” (QED) model:
dXt = κXt
θ + wT zt
κ
−Xt −g
κX2
t

dt + σXtdWt,
(9)
where Wt is the standard Brownian motion, and parameters are deﬁned as follows:
θ = rf −c + ¯u, κ = (µ −1)φ, g = (µ −1)λ.
(10)
The dynamics of the QED model is therefore given by the Langevin equation (3) with the
following potential
U(X) = −
 θ + wT zt

X2 + κ
3X3 + g
4X4
(11)
When the signals zt are turned oﬀ, this is exactly the quartic potential of Eq.(5). As discussed in
Sect. 2.3, for some choices of model parameters, this potential leads to stabilization of dynamics
around a metastable potential minimum that prevents the stock price from an indeﬁnite growth,
while also allowing for corporate defaults (Fig. 2). The latter proceed via instanton transitions
that correspond to sudden thermally induced jumps over the top of a potential barrier separating
diﬀerent local minima of the potential (11). Instanton solutions in the QED model are illustrated
in Fig. 3.
It should be noted that the linear impact function (7) may be overly simplistic. Indeed,
assuming that µ > 0 and ut > 0, it implies that when new money are invested in the stock, it
produces an immediate negative impact on the next-period returns. This goes contrary to the
presence of momentum eﬀects in the markets that predict that, unless the stock is “saturated”
or “crowded”, an injection of the new money increases the demand and should increase rather
than decrease returns. As shown in [6], instead of a linear impact model, a quadratic model with
time-dependent parameters can better capture the ’dumb money’ eﬀect [9] that predicts that
an initial ﬂow into a stock should increase expected returns, but a continuous buildup of inﬂows
into the stock leads (crowding) leads to diminishing long-term returns. With such a choice of
the impact function, we can retain only the linear term in Eq.(8) to come up with the same
QED dynamics (9) and the potential (11), albeit with diﬀerent expression for parameters θ, κ
and g in terms of original model parameters entering Eq.(6).
11A slight diﬀerence between Eq.(8) and a similar formula presented in [5] is because here we deﬁne ut as a
rate, rather than in absolute terms as was deﬁned in [5]. This diﬀerence is inessential as it only produces redeﬁned parameter values of the ﬁnal model, given by Eq.(9) below, in terms of original model parameters entering
equations (6) and (8).
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

3.3
QED model and instantons: non-perturbative ﬁnance
For some physical systems, non-linearities can be handled approximately, by treating them as
small perturbations around a linear regime, using e.g. a perturbation theory in a small parameter
that quantiﬁes the stength of non-linearity. However, in many other cases arising in the natural
sciences, non-linearities should be treated as key ingredients of the dynamics.
For example, non-linearity is critical for self-organizing systems which cannot be described
using a perturbation theory around a linear regime. Another well-known example is provided by
instantons - barrier transition phenomena in statistical and quantum physics discussed above.
Probabilities of such barrier transitions cannot be obtained at any ﬁnite order of a perturbation theory in a small parameter controlling the non-linearity. They are examples of so-called
non-perturbative phenomena. While instantons and other non-perturbative phenomena are very
important in many models of statistical physics and quantum ﬁeld theory12, they are not traceable using tools of perturbation theory, see e.g. references cited in [5].
Similarly, instantons in the QED model (see Fig. 3) are non-perturbative phenomena in
parameters κ, g, and thus could not be seen at any ﬁnite order of a perturbation theory constructed around a strict limit κ = 0, g = 0 of the QED dynamics. As in this strict limit the
QED model would be identical to the GBM model, this means that while the latter could formally be considered as a ’baseline’, unperturbed model for construction of such a perturbative
expansion, instantons (and hence corporate defaults) would be entirely lost in such a scheme.
Non-perturbative methods to compute instanton-induced transition probabilities associated with
probabilities of corporate defaults are presented in [5]. As was illustrated in [5], this enables a
simultaneous calibration of the QED model to equity and credit markets, by a joint ﬁt to equity
returns and credit default swaps (CDS) spreads. In its turn, it enables using data from credit
markets to produce information on a long-term equity returns. The QED model is therefore a
ﬁrst defaultable equity model that captures corporate defaults without introducing additional
degrees of freedom such as hazard rates.
4
Summary
To summarize, starting with Samuelson’s GBM model, many models used by practitioners for
modeling stock prices and derivatives prices, such as local or stochastic volatility models, relied
on the assumption of a linear (and typically positive) drift of a price process, or equivalently a
constant drift of a log-price process. In this paper I showed that, when interpreted in physics
terms, these models describe an oscillator with a negative mass (or equivalently a particle in an
inverted parabolic potential) subject to noise, where diﬀerences between speciﬁc models amount
to diﬀerent ways of modeling noise.
This makes them all models of stochastic dynamics in
an unstable potential, and conﬂicts with conventional ways of analysis of natural systems in
physics where models typically describe ﬂuctuations around some stable or metastable state.
A qualitatively wrong behavior describing an unlimited fall in such an unbounded potential is
obtained as a result. Samuelson’s solution of the problem of negative prices in the ABM model
of Bachelier is unsatisfactory as it leads to a conﬂict with basic physics.
I argued that such a pathological behavior can be avoided if the market is modeled as an
open system with a possible exchange of money with an outside world, along with a price
impact of the new money on stock prices. For a single-stock market, this produces a simple nonlinear two-parametric extension of the GBM model, with new parameters κ, g, called ”Quantum
12Including e.g. quantum chromodynamics (QCD), the modern theory of strong interactions. To explain the
very existence of protons and neutrons, QCD needs to go beyond perturbation theory.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

Equilibrium-Disequilibrium” (QED) model [5]. The QED model formally transforms into the
GBM model in the limit κ, g →0. With non-zero parameters, it produces a qualitatively different behavior: while the GBM model describes unstable dynamics, the QED model describes
metastable dynamics where a diﬀusive relaxation to a metastable state is followed by a rare large
negative move describing a transition to a distressed state or corporate bankruptcy. Such rare
large moves are due to noise-induced solutions of the model called instantons. Similarly to instantons in physics, instantons in the QED model are non-perturbative phenomena: they cannot
be seen in a perturbative expansion of the model that could be attempted when parameters κ, g
are small but non-zero. In particular, instanton disappear in the strict ’GBM limit’ κ = g = 0.
The QED model oﬀers a few important theoretical insights. While classical ﬁnancial models
have traditionally focused on modeling volatility while keeping simple linear assumptions of
the drift, the QED model suggests that the drift should instead be non-linear, and should
be identiﬁed prior to analyzing volatility patterns. In particular, it would be interesting to
reconsider various stochastic volatility and ‘rough volatility’ models after ﬁxing the drift function
alone the lines suggested in this paper.
The QED model can be extended along multiple dimensions. In particular, it can be extended
to a market with multiple assets, producing the IQED (“Interacting-assets QED”) model [6].
Other possible extensions can make the quartic potential random - for example, by allowing a
dependence of parameter θ on signals zt as in Eq.(11). This may make the dynamics of the
model more realistic and avoid a possible negative long-term drift that might be obtained in the
model if the potential is kept static. Clearly, for applying the model for a long term modeling,
one should better make some or all model parameters dependent on signals zt, assuming that
the latter carry information on a contemporaneous market environment. Proceeding in such
way would eﬀectively promote the potential to a random quartic potential.
Obviously, an important practical question is that assuming that the QED model is a ‘right’
model, how important are non-perturbative eﬀects implied by the model? Can we still rely
on traditional ﬁnancial engineering models that are all based on the assumption of a linear
or constant drift? If yes, when can we still rely on them? Such questions can (and should)
be answered for any particular stock market and any traditional model by comparing results
obtained with that model versus the QED model. In general, non-linear and non-perturbative
eﬀects are not expected to be critically important for small local price ﬂuctuations. However,
it is a comparison with a more general non-linear model such as the QED model that should
answer the question about a range of prices and times where traditional linear models can still
be used. The QED model could also be used for option pricing, and its predictions could be
analyzed and compared with traditional models both numerically and analytically using various
approximations. Results of such analysis will be presented elsewhere.
References
[1] L. Bachelier, “Thorie de la speculation”, Annales Scientiﬁques de L?cole Normale Suprieure, 17, 21-86 (1900). (English translation by A. J. Boness in P.H. Cootner (Editor):
The Random Character of Stock Market Prices, p. 17?75. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
(1964).
[2] F. Black and M. Scholes, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities”, Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 81(3), 637-654, 1973.
[3] Deutsche Bank, “Grassroots Crowding Measures” (2016).
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972

[4] M. Dixon, I. Halperin, and P. Bilokon, Machine Learning in Finance: from Theory to
Practice, Springer 2020.
[5] I. Halperin and M.F. Dixon, “Quantum Equilibrium-Disequilibrium: Asset Price Dynamics, Symmetry Breaking, and Defaults as Dissipative Instantons”, Physica A 537, 122187,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.122187 (2020).
[6] I. Halperin, “Dumb Money, The Origin of Factors, Skew and Rare Events: Interacting-assets
“Quantum Equilibrium-Disequilibrium””, forthcoming (2020).
[7] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifschitz, Statistical Physics, Elsevier (1980).
[8] P. Langevin, “Sur la Th´eorie du Mouvement Brownien”, Comps Rendus Acad. Sci. (Paris)
146, 530-533 (1908).
[9] A. Frazzini and O.A. Lamont, “Dumb Money: Mutual Fund Flows and the Cross-Section of
Stock Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics, Elsevier, vol. 88(2), pages 299-322 (2008).
[10] R. Merton, “Theory of Rational Option Pricing”, Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, Vol.4(1), 141-183, 1974.
[11] P. Samuelson, “Rational theory of warrant pricing”, Industrial Management Review, 6
(Spring), 13-32 (1965).
[12] W.F. Sharpe, “Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of
risk”, Journal of Finance, 19 (3), 425?442 (1964).
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3669972
