1 
 
 
 
 
Trading and the Limits of Reason 
What Can an Austrian Economist Teach Us About Trading? 
This version, February 2024 
 
Toby Carrodus* 
 
Abstract 
This article links the foundational research of Friedrich von Hayek on the human mind and the limits 
of its reasoning ability to the world of trading. Hayek advocated the use of rules as a means of 
overcoming our inability to comprehend the full complexity of reality in its entirety. The usefulness 
of a rules-based approach to trading is illustrated by highlighting the well-documented inability of 
retail and institutional investors to outperform standard industry indices, which are themselves rulebased systems. In terms of establishing the most appropriate trading rules, a delineation between 
simple and complex phenomena is discussed, and salient points for best-practice trading research 
are referenced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Toby Carrodus is a professional, proprietary trader who has worked in London, Frankfurt, Sydney and Los Angeles for 
some of the world’s largest hedge funds and asset managers, including PIMCO and Winton Capital. His career focus has 
been on global macro trading and for most of the last decade, medium-frequency systematic global macro trading. 
The author would like to thank Professor Dr. Viktor Vanberg, who eloquently summarized the key points of Friedrich von 
Hayek’s work and taught it with pedagogical mastery at the Albert-Ludwigs Universität in Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4190925

2 
 
 
Introduction 
Systematic trading has grown in popularity in recent years with the widespread availability of data, 
increased processing power of computers and general awareness of systematic trading strategies. 
Much time has been spent focusing on strategies, albeit without appreciating the psychological 
reasons of why systematic trading may be more advantageous in the first place. This article seeks to 
explore this topic in greater detail. First, the work of the double-doctorate Nobel prize winner 
Friedrich von Hayek is discussed in order to form a framework for how the human mind is 
understood to work. Within this framework, the empirical trading results of both retail and 
institutional investors are evaluated. Second, the complexity of financial markets is discussed along 
with a useful methodological delineation between simple and complex phenomena that affects the 
sorts of conclusions that can be drawn from studies of systematic trading rules. Finally, and based 
on the aforementioned delineation, salient points for best practice research in systematic trading 
are highlighted. 
Our Constitutional Ignorance 
In 1952, Hayek published “The Sensory Order – An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical 
Psychology”, in which he outlined his theory of the human mind. This interdisciplinary work was 
foundational and ahead of its time. So much so, that Joaquin Fuster, a prominent authority on the 
neuronal basis of memory at UCLA, was quoted as saying: 
The first proponent of cortical memory networks on a major scale was neither a 
neuroscientist nor a computer scientist, but, curiously, a Viennese economist, Friedrich von 
Hayek… Hayek’s model clearly contains most of the elements of those later network models 
of associative memory.1 
One of the key points of “The Sensory Order” is that the mind is essentially “an instrument of 
classification.” In the words of Hayek, “perception is thus always an interpretation, the placing of 
something into one or several classes of objects.”2 That is, we can never comprehend the full 
complexity of reality in its entirety apart from the categories formed by the mind’s classificatory 
apparatus. Therefore, we cannot respond to the “inexhaustible complexity of everything” but 
instead must use the classificatory apparatus of our mind to selectively focus only on certain 
situational characteristics deemed as relevant and ignore the rest. 
In order for humans to cope with this so-called “constitutional ignorance”, we have become 
accustomed to relying on rules as a means of determining the appropriate behavioural response to 
a given set of circumstances. Hayek argues rules are “a device we have learned to use because our 
reason is insufficient to master the full detail of complex reality.” 3 Rules essentially simplify the 
number of factors we need to consider in a given situation, “singling out certain classes of facts as 
alone determining the general kind of action which we should take.”4 Rules can be understood as 
socially accepted patterns of behaviour that are instinctual and learned via socialization, for there is 
so much inter-generational knowledge embedded in societal rules that have endured a process of 
cultural evolution. As Hayek eloquently puts it: 
No single human intelligence is capable of inventing the most appropriate abstract rules 
because those rules which have evolved in the process of the growth of society embody the 
experience of many more trials and errors than any individual mind could acquire.5  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4190925

3 
 
In an article entitled “On Hayek’s ‘Kinds of Order in Society’, Part 1”, Donald Boudreaux provided 
several useful examples of the use of rules in society: 
Think of yourself in a big city… You know that when you come with your filled grocery cart 
upon a queue at the supermarket checkout lane, you take your place at the back of that line 
– and you’re content to do so because you know that other people will follow the same rule. 
You know that you aren’t allowed, without invitation, to enter premises belonging to other 
people. You know what green lights and red lights mean to motorists.6 
Such rule-oriented behaviour allows for cooperation among a much larger number of individuals 
than any individual can personally know. Many of us conduct our lives adhering to such rules without 
an explicit awareness of them, as generally these rules have evolved through the spontaneous 
growth of society. 
Following rules as a means of coping with our “constitutional ignorance” has notable implications 
for economics, which is primarily focused on self-interested, omniscient, rational beings making 
decisions to maximize their utility. For an agent to maximize their own utility it must know all 
possible circumstances, courses of action and consequences. In reality, such things are of course 
unknowable, not least due to our “constitutional ignorance”. Given humans are only able to perceive 
certain situational characteristics, Hayek argues that one must therefore compare: 
 
the selectivity of our discretionary situational judgement vs 
 
the selectivity resulting from following rules 
Hayek poses the question whether humans do better trying to maximize their outcomes 
discretionarily on a case-by-case basis or by following simple rules of behaviour. Given humans 
cannot know all possible facts, choices and outcomes relating to a given situation, have limited 
mental capacity and decision-making can be costly and hold up other areas of life, Hayek argues that 
on average we can do better by adhering to rules that have withstood the test of time and benefitted 
from the trial-and-error of generations before us.  
This idea has been explored and confirmed by other academics, such as Ronald Heiner.7 Using a 
series of repeated games in which agents sought to maximize their payoffs by only either making 
discretionary decisions or adhering to simple “imperfect” rules, Heiner showed that non-omniscient 
agents achieve better outcomes by following rules. 
Relevance for Trading 
In light of the above arguments, in the world of trading it would therefore make sense to investigate 
whether simple rules perform better than discretionary trades. In 2011, Brad Barber and Terrance 
Odean from the University of California published an article entitled “The Behavior of Individual 
Investors.”8 Some relevant conclusions from the article demonstrate that retail investors: 
1) underperform standard industry benchmarks such as low cost index funds 
2) sell winning trades early while holding on to losing trades 
3) exhibit limited attention span and recency bias 
These results were derived using data from different geographies and time periods, suggesting that 
they are cross-cultural and reflective of general human behaviour. Retail investors are typically 
classified as ‘unsophisticated’ and do not utilize extensive data, models or rule-based systems, so 
the results are perhaps not so surprising. More surprising is the ample evidence that most 
institutional mutual fund managers underperform their benchmarks. Literature consistently 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4190925

4 
 
documenting such underperformance is available beginning with Michael Jensen in 1968 all the way 
through to Carhart in 1997 and in K.J. Martijn Cremers more recently. 
So, if retail and institutional investors both underperform relative to simple benchmarks, and if 
humans are likely to do better by following simple rules than trying to maximize outcomes 
discretionarily on a case-by-case basis, the answer for any aspiring trader should be clear: utilize a 
simple rules-based approach to trading and minimize discretion. In fact, simple investing 
benchmarks such as the S&P500 index are themselves rule-based systems, which is another reason 
why most investors cannot outperform them. Among other things, the S&P500 index requires that 
stocks meet a market capitalization threshold, which means that losing stocks necessarily drop out 
of the index and winning stocks remain in the index. This simple rule mechanism is why many 
investors would do better to invest in indices as opposed to ‘flying by the seat of their pants’ and 
succumbing to the many biases humans exhibit (recency bias, confirmation bias, prospect theory, 
etc). 
Apart from standard index rules, there are many other simple rules available that have withstood 
the test of time. One only has to think of David Ricardo (1772-1823), who amassed a fortune with 
the credos “cut short your losses, let your profits run on.” Such statements provide the foundation 
for a profitable, well-documented, rules-based approach to trading called “trend-following,” which 
has outperformed most standard benchmarks over extended periods of time, particularly during 
bear markets. Michael Covel has done a superb job at documenting the success of such traders 
through the ages.9 Another classic example is the old adage “buy low, sell high,” which is distilled in 
classic “value” strategies, such as those outlined in Benjamin Graham’s famous book, “The 
Intelligent Investor.” These strategies can easily be codified and applied systematically and in fact 
there are numerous successful hedge funds that have done so. There are a multitude of other 
successful rules-based trading strategies, such as those documented in Antti Ilmanen’s magnum 
opus, “Expected Returns.”10 Therefore, in light our limited mental capacity to discretionarily 
maximize outcomes on a case-by-case basis, both the theory and the evidence point to the general 
superiority of a rules-based approach. This begs the question of how best to determine the 
appropriate set of rules, which brings us to the second insight from Hayek: distinctions between the 
social and physical sciences. 
The Delineation of Simple and Complex Phenomena 
Trading is necessarily a social science, as it is based on the results of human psychology and action 
en masse. To this day, human nature is not as scientifically well understood as physical phenomena 
in the natural sciences. E.g., if a physicist performs experiments on cubes of copper in a given setting 
1000 times, he will obtain a high degree of certainty as to the specific outcome of the procedure. In 
contrast, if a social experiment were performed analysing human behaviour in a given setting 1000 
times, there is typically a high degree of variability in the results and not often a high degree of 
certainty as to the outcome. One of the main reasons behind this is the heterogeneity in human 
personalities (social science) vs the homogeneity of the properties of copper (physical science).  
Earlier studies of human behaviour (particularly in the realm of economics) relied on statements of 
logic to understand the chain of events that led to a human making a particular decision. Hayek 
departed from this approach by favouring an empirical approach that relied on Karl Popper’s 
principle of “falsifiability.” This concept essentially claims that once we form a hypothesis regarding 
some phenomena, empirical data cannot prove this hypothesis to be true, but instead can only 
prove it not to be false. That is, via repeated experiments, we cannot claim that a working theory of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4190925

5 
 
some causal mechanism driving some outcome is true only because we have not found any 
observations to the contrary. We can only claim that it has not been proven false. The causal 
mechanism may in fact be different from what we believe it to be. It takes only one observation 
counter to a hypothesis to invalidate that hypothesis and prove it false. Therefore, scientific 
discovery is merely refining the number of possible explanations by excluding those that have been 
disproven as opposed to proving the truth of a given hypothesis. 
Contrasting the physical properties of a cube of copper with the outcomes of human behaviour, one 
can begin to see why it can be so challenging to create working theories of human behaviour if this 
approach only requires one observation to the contrary to disprove a hypothesis. To deal with this, 
Hayek acknowledged the need for a separate approach in terms of possible conclusions from 
experiments in the social sciences compared to the natural sciences. In “The Counterrevolution of 
Science”, Hayek cautioned against “slavish imitation of the method and language of the physical 
sciences” and applying the mechanical “physics model” of the natural sciences to the social 
sciences.11 Initially, Hayek argued for a methodological delineation of the social and physical 
sciences. Later, he refined this argument in favour of differentiating sciences that study simple 
phenomena and those that study complex phenomena: 
 
Simple phenomena: “closed systems” with a “sufficiently small” number of interconnected 
variables 
 
Complex phenomena: “open systems” (of life, mind, society) where the outcomes of 
processes “depend on a very large number of particular facts, far too numerous for us to 
know in their entirety”12 
Hayek argued that the level of complexity determines the extent to which we can draw conclusions. 
Specifically, for complex phenomena, due to our inability to know the facts and circumstances of 
each individual agent and their interaction with other agents, at best we will only be able to 
determine an “explanation of the principle” and a “prediction merely of the abstract pattern the 
process will follow.”13 In contrast to being able to predict a specific outcome with simple phenomena 
(e.g., a chemical reaction in a controlled environment), with complex phenomena we cannot hope 
for more than being able to account for the general principle. Therefore, with complex phenomena 
we will be restricted to general pattern predictions as opposed to specific outcomes of individual 
instances. 
Clearly, financial markets are complex phenomena, being the aggregate outcome of the instincts 
and nature of millions of dispersed agents, each with their own individual circumstances, 
personality, objectives and risk tolerances, all of which is unknowable to any single being. Hence, in 
general, when forming hypotheses to e.g., determine profitable trading rules in financial markets, 
one can only hope to identify an “explanation of the principle” and a prediction of the “abstract 
pattern the process will follow.” Contrast this with a discipline such as physics, which seeks to 
precisely quantify motion through space and time and predict specific instances of situations. The 
application of such models is misplaced in an “open system” such as financial markets, with a vast 
number of unknown variables. At best, a profitable trading rule is expected to only work on average, 
in general and not in all circumstances. Essentially, the outcome of a trading rule applied to any 
specific instance is largely random, but as the trading rule is applied over a sample size of many 
trades, one can determine if it is likely to be profitable.  
There are certain general patterns of human behaviour or structural features of markets that can 
be exploited by the cunning trader. In order to save great heartache (and fortunes), one can 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4190925

6 
 
thankfully obtain large datasets across countries spanning decades in order to test if rules can be 
specified that exploit such general patterns of behaviour. However, again, note that based on the 
principle of falsification this does not mean we know with certainty whether the rule works or if our 
explanation is true – it is merely only an indication that based on the evidence available, it is not 
false.  
There are three points worth mentioning in this regard. First, just because one has established a 
general pattern of behaviour in financial markets and identified a profitable trading relationship 
does not mean that it is assured to work in the future. Therefore, one would need to have a separate 
risk management framework in place. This echoes the sentiment of Nassim Taleb in “The Black 
Swan”, which is based on the premise that just because an extreme event has not transpired in the 
data, does not mean it cannot happen. We should therefore be cautious of the strength of 
conclusions we can draw from a data sample. Regardless of how strong a relationship may appear 
during “backtesting”, limiting position sizes through an effective risk management protocol that 
incorporates e.g., dynamic estimates of volatilities and correlations is vital to reduce the risk 
catastrophic losses.  
Second, as trading rules seek to generally capture the “abstract pattern” of some human behaviour 
and hence are only expected to work on average, it would be prudent to diversify across trading 
rules and markets. Preference should therefore be given to parsimonious models with a low number 
of parameters relative to the amount of data available. Models with too many parameters are often 
tuned to both signal and noise, thereby reducing their statistical forecasting power. Such models 
may perfectly explain the past but have limited explanatory power with respect to the future. It is 
therefore better to be “roughly right” than “exactly wrong” by acknowledging the imprecision with 
which even dynamic models can be estimated in light of the classification of financial markets as 
complex phenomena. 
Third, one needs to exercise care in developing an explanation for an exploitable pattern. Ideally, 
one should start from the place of formulating a hypothesis based on some fundamental reasoning 
as to why a particular pattern should occur (e.g., behavioural biases, structural impediments, 
regulatory restrictions, etc) and this should be specified before examining too much data, if any at 
all. This is preferable to a “data-mining” approach where one establishes a potentially random 
combination of parameters that appear predictive but one is unable to explain why the relationship 
works. This point is particularly important when going through the inevitable losing period. If a 
model is based upon some fundamental principle e.g., trade flows, one can at least seek to explain 
whether a key relationship has permanently changed due to e.g., trade embargos or sanctions and 
decide if the losses are justified or if the signal should be switched off. This commonsense overlay 
only exists for “ideas first” approaches to trading compared to “data first” approaches. 
Summary 
The human brain necessarily and systematically ignores much of reality due to its inherent 
complexity. This allows our brains to filter information that is deemed important for survival. As a 
means of coping with this “constitutional ignorance”, humans tend to do better by adhering to rules 
as opposed to discretionarily maximizing outcomes on a case-by-case basis. The most appropriate 
rules tend to be those developed through cultural evolution, for such rules contain the wisdom 
acquired by generations of trial-and-error, more than any individual could acquire. This is 
particularly the case in the world of trading, where simple rules have been widely documented to 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4190925

7 
 
perform better than the discretion of either retail or institutional investors. This result holds across 
geographies (space) and decades (time). 
When examining complex phenomena characterized by a large number of unknowable variables 
such as financial markets, as opposed to simple phenomena such as the physical world, we can at 
best aim to explain concepts in principle and predict the general patterns a process may exhibit as 
opposed to specific outcomes. Therefore, in general, trading rules can only be expected to work “on 
average” as opposed to predicting the specific outcome of any single trade (as a discretionary trader 
may do). Furthermore, as trading rules are often designed based on historical data, which, given the 
concept of falsification, does not necessarily prove that one’s working hypothesis is true, it would 
be wise to couple any trading rules with a separate risk management protocol. Finally, one must 
take care in forming hypotheses when testing ideas on historical data to avoid perfectly explaining 
the past but not the future, and should utilize parsimonious models where possible. 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4190925

8 
 
References 
1. Fuster, J. (1995). Memory in the Cerebral Cortex: An Empirical Approach to Neural Networks in 
the Human and Nonhuman Primate. Cambridge: MIT Press, p. 87 
2. von Hayek, F. (1952). The Sensory Order. University of Chicago Press, p. xviii 
3. von Hayek, F. (1960). The Constitution of Liberty. University of Chicago Press, p. 127 
4. von Hayek, F. (1964). “Kinds of Order in Society”, New Individualist Review (Winter).  
5. von Hayek, F. (1978). New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, Economics and the History of Ideas. 
The University of Chicago Press 
6. Boudreaux, D. (2021). On Hayek’s “Kinds of Order in Society,” Part 1, American Institute for 
Economic Research.  https://www.aier.org/article/on-hayeks-kinds-of-order-in-society-part-i/  
7. Heiner, R. (1983). “The origins of predictable behaviour”, American Economic Review. 
8. Barber, B. & Odean, T. (2011). The Behavior of Individual Investors. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1872211  
9. Covel, M. (2017). Trend Following. Wiley. 
10. Ilmanen, A. (2011). Expected Returns. Wiley 
11. von Hayek, F. (1942). “Economics and Knowledge: Scientism and the Study of Society”, 
Economica, New Series, 9 (35), 267-291, p.268 
12. von Hayek, F. (1973). Rules and order. Law, legislation and liberty (Vol. 1). London and Henley: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. p.23 
13. von Hayek, F. (1973). Rules and order. Law, legislation and liberty (Vol. 1). London and Henley: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. p.23 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4190925
