NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE STATISTICAL LIMIT OF ARBITRAGE
Rui Da
Stefan Nagel
Dacheng Xiu
Working Paper 33070
http://www.nber.org/papers/w33070
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2024
We are grateful for comments from Adem Atmaz, Lars Hansen, Ye Luo, Andreas Neuhierl, 
Markus Pelger, Seth Pruitt, Yao Zeng, and seminar and conference participants at Columbia 
University, Indiana University, Louisiana State University, Princeton University, ITAM Business 
School, University of Cincinnati, University of Chicago, Yale School of Management, EPFL, ETH 
Zurich, Stockholm Business School, University of Gothenburg, University of Liverpool, 
University of Oxford, City University of Hong Kong, Gregory Chow Seminar Series in 
Econometrics and Statistics, HKUST, KAIST, Peking University, Shanghai University of Finance 
and Economics, Southern University of Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, University 
of Melbourne, Sao Paulo School of Economics, American Finance Association Annual Meetings, 
NBER Summer Institute, Jacobs Levy Center Frontiers in Quantitative Finance Conference, 
Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, SFS Cavalcade North America, Annual SoFiE 
Conference, Global AI Finance Research Conference in Singapore, China International 
Conference in Finance, and Wabash River Finance Conference. The views expressed herein are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic 
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this 
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w33070
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Rui Da, Stefan Nagel, and Dacheng Xiu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, 
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, 
including © notice, is given to the source.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

The Statistical Limit of Arbitrage
Rui Da, Stefan Nagel, and Dacheng Xiu 
NBER Working Paper No. 33070
October 2024
JEL No. C55, C58, G11, G14
ABSTRACT
We investigate the economic consequences of statistical learning for arbitrage pricing in a highdimensional setting. Arbitrageurs learn about alphas from historical data. When alphas are weak 
and rare, estimation errors hinder arbitrageurs—even those employing optimal machine learning 
techniques—from fully exploiting all true pricing errors. This statistical limit to arbitrage widens 
the equilibrium bounds of alphas beyond what traditional arbitrage pricing theory predicts, leading 
to a significant divergence between the feasible Sharpe ratio achievable by arbitrageurs and the 
unattainable theoretical maximum under perfect knowledge of alphas.
Rui Da
Kelley School of Business
Indiana University
HH 6100 
1309 E. 10th St. 
Bloomington, IN 47405
ruida@iu.edu
Stefan Nagel
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business 
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue 
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefan.nagel@chicagobooth.edu
Dacheng Xiu
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
dacheng.xiu@chicagobooth.edu
A supplemental appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w33070
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

1
Introduction
Full-information rational expectations models assume that economic agents have perfect
knowledge of the functional form and parameters of the data-generating process (DGP),
thereby bypassing the statistical challenges real-world agents encounter when estimating the
law of motion. While this assumption might be reasonable in a low-dimensional environment
with ample data for learning, many economic settings are more realistically high-dimensional,
with an unknown DGP and limited data.
This raises important questions: How should
agents optimally learn in such environments, and what are the implications for equilibrium
outcomes? In this paper, we explore these questions in the context of asset market arbitrage.
The absence of near-arbitrage opportunities is a fundamental principle in most asset
pricing theories, including the Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT). These theories implicitly
assume that if investment opportunities with exceptionally high reward-to-risk ratios were
to exist, they would attract arbitrageurs.
Armed with knowledge of the functional form
and the parameters governing the DGP of returns, these arbitrageurs would exploit and, in
turn, eliminate such opportunities. In reality, however, sophisticated investors seeking neararbitrage opportunities lack perfect knowledge of the true functional form and parameters.
Instead, they rely on statistical analysis to infer the existence of such opportunities from
historical data, introducing statistical uncertainty. In some cases, such as derivatives pricing,
this uncertainty may be small enough that it does not signiﬁcantly hinder arbitrage activity.
However, in noisier, high-dimensional settings like the cross-section of stock returns, statistical
uncertainty can be substantial, imposing a meaningful limit on arbitrage.
To analyze the eﬀects of arbitrageur learning, we consider a setting in which returns
follow a statistical linear factor model. Near-arbitrage opportunities take the form of factorneutral trading strategies with high Sharpe ratios. Exploiting these opportunities requires
arbitrageurs to have knowledge of factor model alphas, which they must learn from historical
return data. We derive the optimal Sharpe ratio achievable by any feasible arbitrage trading
strategy, which is strictly dominated by the infeasible optimal Sharpe ratio that arbitrageurs
could achieve if they were endowed with perfect knowledge of alphas. This, in turn, provides
a new no-feasible-near-arbitrage bound on the Sharpe ratio that accounts for the statistical
limit to arbitrage.
The diﬃculty of the learning problem depends on the DGP of alpha signals. While our
theory does not generally rely on speciﬁc cross-sectional distributions of alpha signals, we use
simple special cases to illustrate how the optimal Sharpe ratio varies with the strength and
sparsity of alphas. When alphas are strong and not too rare relative to the dimensionality of
the cross-section and the sample size, arbitrageurs can, in the limit, perfectly learn the distri2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

bution of alpha. However, when alphas are weaker and more rare, inferring their distribution
becomes more challenging, creating a gap between the optimal feasible Sharpe ratio and the
infeasible Sharpe ratio that requires perfect knowledge of alphas. For instance, the infeasible
Sharpe ratio may explode asymptotically, while the feasible Sharpe ratio remains bounded.
The existence of this statistical limit to arbitrage implies that the range within which mispricing can survive in equilibrium is broader compared to a scenario where arbitrageurs have
full knowledge of the DGP and its parameters. Mispricing can survive because it is obscured
by statistical uncertainty. Empirically, it is the feasible Sharpe ratio—not the unattainable,
infeasible one—that reveals the minimum reward-to-risk compensation arbitrageurs require.
We further demonstrate how arbitrageurs can construct a feasible trading strategy that
achieves the theoretically optimal feasible Sharpe ratio, uniformly over DGPs of alphas, regardless of the strength and sparsity of alphas. This means that the feasible Sharpe ratio
bound is in fact sharp. A uniformly valid trading strategy is desirable because, in practice,
arbitrageurs do not know which DGP accurately represents the observed data. The optimal strategy involves estimating the empirical distribution of alpha signals and assigning
portfolio weights based on the relative magnitudes and associated uncertainty of the alpha
estimates. Assets with high alpha t-statistics receive portfolio weights proportional to their
signal strength. Although weaker alphas are more diﬃcult to exploit, ignoring them would
lead to a suboptimal strategy. Instead, the optimal approach constructs portfolio weights for
weak signals by locally smoothing alpha signals cross-sectionally.
To empirically contrast feasible and infeasible Sharpe ratios, we propose an estimator of
the infeasible Sharpe ratio that a hypothetical arbitrageur endowed with perfect knowledge
of DGP parameters would perceive. While this Sharpe ratio can be estimated consistently, it
cannot be achieved by any feasible portfolio with weights constructed using historical data.
The infeasible Sharpe ratio often serves as the foundation for tests of the APT, see, e.g.,
Gibbons et al. (1989), Gagliardini et al. (2016), Fan et al. (2015), and Pesaran and Yamagata
(2017). While these tests are powerful and can lead to the discovery of alpha signals, they are
not relevant for arbitrageurs limited to feasible trading strategies. Our eﬀort in constructing
the optimal feasible arbitrage portfolio and evaluating its economic performance directly
responds to Shanken’s call to empirically assess the APT by “characterizing the investment
opportunities that are available as a consequence of the observed expected return deviation”
and “examining the extent to which we can approximate an arbitrage with existing assets”
(Shanken, 1992). Here we do so taking into account the statistical limits to arbitrage.
Under certain conditions, the optimal feasible arbitrage strategy can be approximated using alternative approaches such as multiple testing, shrinkage, and selection applied to alphas
estimated from cross-sectional regressions. These alternative approaches are used widely by
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

empirical asset pricing researchers and practitioners, making it valuable to understand how
closely they approximate the optimal feasible strategy. A multiple-testing procedure as in
Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) (BH) seeks to prevent false alpha discoveries by applying a
p-value threshold that controls the false discovery rate (FDR), setting alphas that do not pass
this threshold to zero. The BH procedure achieves optimal performance only when a small
number of true alpha signals are strong; otherwise, it tends to be overly conservative, falling
short of optimality. Applying ridge-style shrinkage to portfolio weights yields a portfolio that
is equivalent to one constructed with alpha estimates from plain cross-sectional regressions
without shrinkage. This approach can achieve optimality when almost all true alphas are either uniformly strong or uniformly weak. Lasso-based selection aims to balance the strengths
of the two previous methods, yielding a portfolio that closely approaches the theoretically
optimal feasible Sharpe ratio, provided an optimal tuning parameter is chosen.
Finally, we demonstrate the empirical implications of the statistical limits of arbitrage by
examining monthly equity returns in US stock market from 1965 to 2020. Our empirical analysis has two parts. In the ﬁrst part, we examine individual stock returns. We construct a multifactor model that uses observed stock characteristics as risk exposures. The characteristics
include 16 commonly used return predictors and 11 industry indicators. These characteristics
and industry dummies capture similar equity factors in the MSCI Barra model widely-used
among practitioners. In the second part, we analyze returns on 1,273 characteristics-sorted
portfolios and 49 industry portfolios, for which we construct latent factor models via singular
value decomposition, following Giglio and Xiu (2021). Data on characteristics and portfolio
returns in our empirical analysis is from Chen and Zimmermann (2020).1
For individual stocks, we estimate alphas as the averaged residuals in cross-sectional regressions of stock returns on characteristics in 60-month rolling windows. The cross-sectional
R2s are relatively low, averaging around 8% over our sample period.
This suggests that
learning alphas from realized returns is diﬃcult, as the alphas are obscured by large amounts
of noise. Accordingly, only 7.58% and 1.12% of individual stocks’ alpha estimates have tstatistics greater than 2.0 and 3.0, respectively, in absolute values. Even without accounting
for multiple testing, these estimates indicate that non-zero alphas are both rare and weak.
One may be concerned that these results may overstate the diﬃculty of learning alphas
because they use only realized returns as the only signal of alpha. Our analysis of portfolio
returns addresses these concerns. The large number of characteristics used to construct these
portfolios can be interpreted as signals of alphas, and the portfolios as managed investment
strategies that exploit the information in these signals. Although a latent factor model accounts for a larger portion (around 35%) of the cross-sectional variation in realized portfolio
1See openassetpricing.com (Stock-level Signal Datasets August 2023 Release).
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

returns than the factor model for individual stock returns, we ﬁnd that portfolio alphas still
exhibit notable rarity and weakness. This is particularly evident once we adjust for publication years, ensuring that portfolios are considered only after their sorting characteristics were
published in the previous years.
We then ﬁnd, across both individual stocks and portfolios and using various methods, that
the optimal feasible arbitrage portfolios yield moderately low annualized Sharpe ratios below
0.7. In contrast, the infeasible Sharpe ratios are considerably higher, averaging more than 4.8
and reaching as high as 16 in some sample periods for individual stocks, and ranging from 5
to 20 for portfolios. These infeasible Sharpe ratios represent what arbitrageurs could achieve
with perfect knowledge of the DGP parameters. The large gap between feasible and infeasible
Sharpe ratios highlights the empirical signiﬁcance of the statistical limits to arbitrage. When
these statistical limits to arbitrage are taken into account, the empirical facts are in line with
the implication of the APT that near-arbitrage opportunities should be absent.
Our paper builds on a large literature on the arbitrage pricing theory (APT) developed
by Ross (1976) and later reﬁned by Huberman (1982), Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983),
and Ingersoll (1984). As in these foundational studies, we employ asymptotic arguments
that avoid imposing strong structural assumptions about the economy. The results of this
analysis should be interpreted as an asymptotic approximation for a more realistic setting
with a ﬁnite number of assets. The key point is that weak economic restrictions rule out
Sharpe ratios far above the Sharpe ratios of diversiﬁed factor portfolios. Diﬀerent from earlier
work on the APT, we show in this paper that the statistical limit to arbitrage dramatically
widens this Sharpe ratio bound compared with an economy in which arbitrageurs are endowed
with perfect knowledge of DGP parameters. In this regard, our paper is also related to the
literature on the limits of arbitrage reviewed in Gromb and Vayanos (2010). Complementary
to this literature, the arbitrage limit in our setting stems from statistical uncertainty, rather
than from risk, costs, frictions, and other constraints faced by arbitrageurs.
Our paper provides a solution to a long standing problem in optimal portfolio choice under
parameter uncertainty. Historically, the plug-in mean-variance portfolio, which is based on
sample means and covariance matrices, has been criticized for underperforming. Assuming
normally distributed returns, Kan and Zhou (2007) study the expected performance of this
portfolio and observe that its Sharpe ratio is below its theoretical value. Further studies by Tu
and Zhou (2010) and Kan et al. (2022) expand their analysis by exploring alternative portfolio
rules that aim to minimize utility loss under estimation uncertainty. However, these studies
only identify optimal solutions within a predetermined class of strategies, which does not
reﬂect the ﬂexibility investors have in practice to choose any perceived superior strategy. In
contrast, our study identiﬁes an upper bound for all feasible Sharpe ratios without imposing
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

restrictions on the choice of strategies. Our analytical framework is primarily concerned with
arbitrage portfolios, but our results are broadly applicable to optimal portfolios in general,
thus providing a solution to this classic problem.
A closely related paper to ours is Kim et al. (2020), which proposes a characteristicsbased factor model to construct feasible arbitrage portfolios. Their asymptotic theory does
not preclude arbitrage opportunities with a theoretically inﬁnite Sharpe ratio, which implies a
rather strong signal-to-noise ratio in their alpha signals. Our setting is considerably diﬀerent
in that the premise of our framework rules out inﬁnite feasible Sharpe ratios, which enforces
weak and rare signals. In our setting, alphas cannot possibly be recovered with certainty
even when the sample size is large.2
Our paper also contributes to the evolving literature on applications of statistical and
machine learning in asset pricing, and in particular on the topic of testing the APT, e.g.,
Gibbons et al. (1989), Gagliardini et al. (2016), and Fan et al. (2015), as well as on testing
for alphas, e.g., Barras et al. (2010), Harvey and Liu (2020), and Giglio et al. (2021). The
ﬁrst literature focuses on testing a null that all alphas are equal to zero. This is certainly an
interesting null hypothesis. However, as we emphasize in this paper, an economically sensible
interpretation of the APT should allow for statistical limits to arbitrage. This means that
the APT does allow for non-zero alphas as long as they do not induce an explosive feasible
Sharpe ratio. The second literature focuses on detecting strong alphas, applying multiple
testing methods, such as the BH method, or extensions thereof, to control the FDR. In
contrast, we allow for rare and weak alpha signals such that any procedure aiming to control
the FDR is too conservative with too few or no discoveries.3 Our objective here is not on
model testing or signal detection. Rather, we strive for the optimal economic performance of
arbitrage portfolios. We show that even if signals were so weak that they are undetectable
by multiple testing methods, they may lead to a portfolio with a considerable Sharpe ratio.
In macroeconomics and ﬁnance, rational expectation models in which decision makers
are not confronted with statistical uncertainty about the structure of the economy have
attracted criticism (Hansen, 2007). Bayesian learning is one way to expose model decision
makers to statistical uncertainty. Pastor and Veronesi (2009) survey the literature on learning
in ﬁnancial markets. In many settings, e.g., Collin-Dufresne et al. (2016), learning can be
suﬃciently slow such that its eﬀects persist in empirically realistic sample sizes, even though
2On the empirical side, Guijarro-Ordonez et al. (2022) propose a deep learning approach to statistical
arbitrage that achieves a sizable out-of-sample Sharpe ratio. The proﬁts of their trading strategy stem from
generalized return reversals at daily to weekly frequencies, potentially due to liquidity provision and other
microstructure channels. Our empirical analysis is not targeted towards characterizing the reward-to-risk
ratios for high frequency traders, nor for traders that turnover a large portion of their portfolios daily.
3Donoho and Jin (2004) adopt the so-called higher criticism approach, dating back to Tukey (1976), to
detect rare and weak signals in a stylized multiple testing problem.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

convergence to rational expectations takes place in the long-run. An exception is Martin
and Nagel (2021) where learning eﬀects persist because investors face a high-dimensional
inference problem about the process generating ﬁrm cash ﬂows. Similarly, arbitrageurs in our
model attempt to make inference on a high-dimensional parameter vector with a potentially
insuﬃcient sample size, but they learn about returns, not ﬁrms’ underlying cash ﬂows. We
examine diﬀerent sequences of DGPs and in most scenarios, our learning system does not
converge to a rational expectations limit.4
Our paper is also related to Chen et al. (2021b) and Chen et al. (2021a) in that they
also account for the distinction between beliefs of economic agents and the DGP revealed
by empirical evidence.
They model belief distortions as a change of measure in moment
conditions, use statistical measures of divergence relative to rational expectations to bound
the set of subjective probabilities, and seek robust inference with respect to this form of
misspeciﬁcation.
In the spirit of Hansen (2014), we calculate an optimal feasible Sharpe
ratio for arbitrageurs inside the economic model, which diﬀers from the infeasible one as it
appears to an econometrician outside the model. In our setting, the deviation from rational
expectations stems naturally from the statistical obstacles faced by economic agents. A more
subtle but important point is that the outcomes attainable by economic agents embracing
machine learning methods in a high-dimensional environment diﬀer from those that rational expectation agents endowed with knowledge of the economy’s structure could achieve
asymptotically.
The literature on portfolio choice through Bayesian and economic decision-theoretical
perspectives is extensive, as outlined in the survey by Avramov and Zhou (2010). Early
works like those by Jorion (1986) and Frost and Savarino (1986) highlight the advantages
of using Bayes-Stein shrinkage solutions.
Further contributions in this topic incorporate
informative and economically motivated priors, as in Black and Litterman (1992), Pastor
(2000), and Pastor and Stambaugh (2000). In our context, the optimal portfolio weights
are proportional to the posterior mean of alpha. This resembles the classical normal mean
problem in empirical Bayes, dating back to Robbins (1956), where the unknown parameters
(alphas) are regarded as random draws from some common distribution, and only a noisy
version (realized ex-factor returns) is observed. Our nonparametric approach thereby shares
the same spirit of nonparametric empirical Bayes, see, e.g., Johns (1957), Zhang (1997),
and Brown and Greenshtein (2009). Yet unlike the classical empirical Bayes inference, our
analysis allows for weak and rare alphas as motivated from economic restrictions, and also
considers Sharpe ratios, not only the posterior mean of alphas.
4Our analysis is related to a large literature in econometrics and statistics that discuss uniform validity of
asymptotic approximations, see, e.g., Staiger and Stock (1997), Imbens and Manski (2004), Leeb and P¨otscher
(2005), Andrews et al. (2020).
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops our main result on the statistical limit
to arbitrage.
Speciﬁcally, Section 2.1 sets up the model, Section 2.2 motivates and then
deﬁnes the feasibility constraint facing arbitrageurs, Sections 2.3 - 2.4 specify arbitrageurs’
decision problem, derive the optimal strategy, illustrate the Bayes correction for alpha, and
demonstrate the gap between feasible and infeasible Sharpe ratios, Section 2.5 constructs
a feasible trading strategy that achieves the bound, Section 2.6 proposes an estimator of
the infeasible Sharpe ratio, and ﬁnally Section 2.7 analyzes alternative strategies. Section
3 provides simulation evidence, followed by an empirical analysis in Section 4. Section 5
concludes. The appendix provides additional empirical and theoretical results, as well as all
the technical details.
2
Main Theoretical Results
We start by revisiting the arbitrage pricing theory framework developed by Ross (1976).
This theory is primarily based on a reduced-form statistical model for asset returns, which,
despite its stylized nature, oﬀers signiﬁcant theoretical insights and remains relevant for
guiding empirical investment decisions.
2.1
Factor Model Setup
The factor economy has N assets in the investment universe. The N × 1 vector of excess
returns rt follows a reduced-form linear factor model:
rt = α + βγ + βvt + ut,
(1)
where β is an N × K matrix of factor exposures (with the ﬁrst column being a vector of 1s),
α is an N × 1 vector of pricing errors, vt is a K × 1 vector of zero-mean factor innovations
with covariance matrix Σv, γ is a K ×1 vector of risk premia (ﬁrst entry corresponding to the
column of 1s is the zero beta rate), and ut is a vector of idiosyncratic returns with a diagonal
covariance matrix Σu and zero mean conditional on all the variables before time-t.5
We assume at any given time t, arbitrageurs examine a sample of size T, derived from
Equation (1), spanning from t −T + 1 to t. Throughout we will consider asymptotic limits
as N and T increase while K and t are ﬁxed.6 To facilitate our asymptotic analysis along
5While approximate factor models become more prevalent following Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983),
allowing for oﬀ-diagonal entries in the covariance matrix Σu would introduce additional statistical obstacles
due to the estimation of large covariance matrix for inference on alpha and for building optimal portfolios.
For simplicity, we illustrate the economic consequences of statistical limits to arbitrage using a strict factor
model. We discuss violations of these model assumptions later.
6 This framework presents a slight deviation from the conventional scenario in which arbitrageurs observe
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

the cross-sectional dimension, N, we regard high dimensional objects such as α, β, and Σu
as random variables drawn from some cross-sectional distributions, whereas γ and Σv are
regarded as deterministic parameters. This distinction is made because γ and Σv serve as
nuisance parameters in our analysis and their dimensions remain ﬁxed. We assume that α
has mean zero, and is cross-sectionally independent of β. These conditions are essential for
identiﬁcation of γ in a model that allows for pricing errors. We formalize these conditions
below.
To allow for a more general DGP, we may consider a conditional version of (1):
rt = αt−1 + βt−1γt−1 + βt−1vt + ut,
(2)
where βt is a vector of time-varying factor loadings and γt is a vector of time-varying risk
premia.7 Despite the conditional model’s greater generality, it does not provide additional
economic insights in our analysis of the theoretical limits of arbitrage, compared with the
unconditional model.
While our primary theoretical ﬁndings, such as those provided in
Theorems 1 and 2, remain applicable when β is substituted with βt, we concentrate, for
clarity, on the more stylized model (1) to illustrate our theory.
There are at least three variations of the factor model, depending on what econometricians
assume to be observable. The most common setup in the academic ﬁnance literature imposes
that factors are observable as, e.g., in Fama and French (1993).8 The second setting, which
has gained more popularity recently since its debut in Connor and Korajczyk (1986), assumes
that factors are latent. The third setting, arguably most prevalent among practitioners, is
the MSCI Barra model originally proposed by Rosenberg (1974), where factor exposures are
equal to stock characteristics and hence observable.9 One notable advantage of this model is
that it sidesteps the statistically and computationally demanding task of estimating a large
number of potentially time-varying stock-level factor exposures. In our empirical work, we
prefer to use the MSCI Barra model for its practicality in analyzing individual stock returns,
a sample spanning t = 1, . . . , T and make their investment decision at time T + 1. Essentially, our approach
highlights the continuous process of making investment decisions, rather than conceiving these decisions as
occurring at a single, distant future point, T. That said, this conceptual diﬀerence does not result in any
tangible diﬀerence in our theoretical and empirical results.
7This model is overly parametrized that parameters are not identiﬁable without additional restrictions.
Some examples of parsimonious conditional factor models include Connor et al. (2012), Gagliardini et al.
(2016), and Kelly et al. (2019).
8This is diﬀerent from saying factor innovations, vt, are observable. The setting of observable factors
typically involves another equation that ft = µ + vt, where µ are the population means of the observed
factors ft, which are not necessarily identical to the factor risk premia, γ. Since µ is an unknown parameter,
vt is still not observable.
9See Kozak and Nagel (2023) on the conditions on factor construction and return covariance matrix that
must hold for characteristics to equal factor loadings.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

adhering to (2) but with a constant alpha.10
The constant alpha assumption in our theoretical analysis may seem restrictive. In practice, arbitrageurs may make use of trading signals that capture time-variation in individual
stock’s alphas. Our framework can in fact easily accommodate this if we assume that (2)
holds with αt = ctα and βt = ctβ for certain characteristics ct that represent arbitrageurs’
signals, then projecting returns onto lagged characteristics results in:
(c⊺
t−1ct−1)−1c⊺
t−1rt = α + β(γt−1 + vt) + (c⊺
t−1ct−1)−1c⊺
t−1ut.
(3)
This transformation converts a conditional model for individual stocks with time-varying
alphas into an unconditional latent factor model for managed portfolios, (c⊺
t−1ct−1)−1c⊺
t−1rt,
with constant alphas as in (1). Thus, via these managed portfolios, our theoretical framework also applies to a setting in which arbitrageurs make use of signals about time-varying
individual stock alphas. Empirically, we therefore also examine returns on portfolios formed
on a large number of stock characteristics, in addition to the individual stock analysis.
2.2
Feasible Near-Arbitrage Opportunities
Building upon the insight of Ross (1976), Huberman (1982) and Ingersoll (1984) established
the concept of near-arbitrage, which can be formalized in a more general setting as below:
Deﬁnition 1. A portfolio strategy w at time t is said to generate a near-arbitrage under
a sequence of data-generating processes, such as (1), deﬁned in a ﬁltered probability space
(Ω, F, {Fs}s≤t, P), where Ft contains information generated by α, β, {rs, vs, us}s≤t, if it satisﬁes w ∈Ft, and along some diverging subsequence,11 with probability approaching one,
Var(w⊺rt+1|Ft) →0,
E(w⊺rt+1|Ft) ≥δ > 0.
Intuitively, no near-arbitrage means there exists no sequence of portfolios that earn positive expected returns with vanishing risks. Ingersoll (1984) established that a suﬃcient and
necessary condition for the absence of near-arbitrage is that12
S⋆:=
p
α⊺Σ−1
u α ≲P 1.
(4)
10Empirically, we use a moving window method for alpha estimation, which eﬀectively allows alphas to
vary slowly over time.
11We adopt the same subsequence deﬁnition as that used in Ingersoll (1984). The subsequence typically
depends on the count of investment opportunities, i.e., N, though we do not need make this explicit in this
deﬁnition. For simplicity of notation and without ambiguity, we omit the dependence of w on N and t.
12We use the notation a ≲b to denote a ≤Cb for some constant C > 0, a ≲P b to denote a = OP(b), a ≂b
if a ≲b and b ≲a, and use a ≂P b accordingly. Throughout, cN represent some sequence vanishing with N.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Here, S⋆is the theoretically optimal Sharpe ratio arbitrageurs can achieve in this economy using a portfolio strategy that has zero exposure to factor risks, namely, a “statistical arbitrage”
strategy in the jargon of practitioners. This result suggests that moderate mispricing in the
form of nonzero alphas is permitted in an economy without near-arbitrage opportunities, but
there cannot be too many alphas that are too large, to the extent that S⋆explodes.13
To achieve this optimal Sharpe ratio, arbitrageurs should hold a factor-neutral portfolio
with weights given by w⋆∝Σ−1
u α, according to Ingersoll (1984).14
His analysis assumes
that arbitrageurs know the true (population) parameters: α and Σu. In reality, however, the
true parameters are unknown to arbitrageurs as they only have a ﬁnite sample of data to
learn about these parameters. The consequences of such parameter uncertainty can be minor
in some contexts if the true parameters are revealed asymptotically and model predictions
converge to those of a rational expectations model in which agents are endowed with perfect
knowledge of parameters.
Fundamentally, this requires that the learning problem in the
limiting experiment becomes increasingly simpler as the sample size increases.
In the current context, the diﬃculty of the learning problem also hinges on the number
of investment opportunities, N.
As N increases, for a given sample size T, it becomes
increasingly diﬃcult for arbitrageurs to determine which assets truly have nonzero alphas.
If the learning problem remains diﬃcult as N and T increase, the learning eﬀect persists,
which could lead to limiting implications that diﬀer from the rational expectation case. In
our setting, it turns out that the rational expectation limit S⋆is only relevant for rather
restrictive scenarios. In more realistic settings, e.g., N is much larger than T, the optimal
Sharpe ratio arbitrageurs can achieve without factor exposures is far smaller than S⋆because
of their inability to make error-free inference. Therefore, the condition (4) could be excessively
restrictive in such scenarios.
To illustrate this intuition, we consider a simple and speciﬁc example.
Example 1. Suppose the cross-section of alphas is drawn from the following distribution:
13Assuming αi is i.i.d. and λmax(Σu) ≲P 1, by equation (4), we have α⊺α ≲P α⊺λmin(Σ−1
u )α ≲P α⊺Σ−1
u α ≲P
1, so that E(α2
i ) = o(1) by the law of large numbers.
14In Ingersoll (1984), α is deﬁned to be the cross-sectional projection of the expected returns onto β in the
population model, such that α⊺Σ−1
u β = 0. As a result, his arbitrage portfolio weights are factor neutral, i.e.,
w⋆⊺β = 0 by construction. In contrast, our paper sets forth a predetermined DGP as speciﬁed in (1), where
α is modeled as a random variable with the property E(α⊺β) = 0. Consequently, the factor-neutral optimal
strategy derived in Theorem 1 and illustrated by (10) does not exactly align with the formula presented by
Ingersoll (1984). Under our DGP assumptions, Ingersoll’s portfolio weights are not strictly factor-neutral.
Nonetheless, we can show that our optimal portfolio weights remain factor-neutral, and achieve the same
Sharpe ratio S⋆asymptotically as N increases.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

αi
i.i.d.
∼





µ
with prob. ρ/2
−µ
with prob. ρ/2
0
with prob. 1 −ρ
,
1 ≤i ≤N,
(5)
where µ ≥0 and 0 ≤ρ ≤1, and they potentially vary with N and T. In addition, we also
assume β = 0, Σu = σ2IN, for some σ > 0. Consequently, equation (1) becomes rt = α + ut.
In this example, µ dictates the strength of alphas, ρ describes how rare alphas are, whereas
σ is a nuisance parameter. By modeling parameters µ and ρ as functions of the sample size and
dimension of the investment set, we introduce greater ﬂexibility in depicting the challenges
arbitrageurs encounter in ﬁnite sample situations.15 To emphasize the role of signal strength
and count, we impose in this example that all assets share the same alpha distribution and
the same idiosyncratic variance.
Now suppose, more speciﬁcally, that the magnitude of (µ, ρ) satisﬁes
µ ≂T −1/2
and
ρ ≂N −1/2.
(6)
This condition (6) implies that the signal strength µ vanishes as the sample size increases
(T →∞) and the signal percentage count ρ decays as the investment universe expands
(N →∞). This setup is used to approximate a situation in which only a small portion of
assets have a nonzero and small alpha. On the other hand, σ is assumed to be ﬁxed, since
in reality idiosyncratic risks never vanish, whereas alphas can be small due to competition
among arbitrageurs. This model resides in an uncommon territory in the existing literature
of asset pricing: weak and rare alphas.
In fact, the classical no-near-arbitrage condition
(4) imposes, implicitly, weakness or rareness on alphas; otherwise, if alphas were strong and
dense, α⊺α would explode rather rapidly. Even in the current setting, in light of the fact
that E(α⊺α) = ρµ2N, we still have α⊺α
P
−→∞as long as N 1/2/T →∞. In other words, a
near-arbitrage opportunity arises according to (4), with a strategy w = σ−2α.
However, statistical uncertainty prevents arbitrageurs from having this “free lunch.” In
general, it is only possible to recover any element of alpha up to some estimation error of
magnitude T −1/2.16 Since, by design, the true alpha is of the same order of magnitude as its
level of statistical uncertainty, i.e., µ ≂T −1/2, it is impossible for arbitrageurs to determine
15Adopting a drifting sequence for parameters is a common trick in econometrics to provide more accurate
ﬁnite sample approximations. As Bekker (1994) put, “in evaluating the results, it is important to keep in mind
that the parameter sequence is designed to make the asymptotic distribution ﬁt the ﬁnite sample distribution
better. It is completely irrelevant whether or not further sampling will lead to samples conforming to this
sequence or not.”
16Giglio et al. (2021) develop the asymptotic normality result for alpha estimates via a Fama-MacBeth
procedure in various scenarios, in which factors are (partially) observable or latent whereas β is unknown.
The CLTs in these scenarios share the same form: for any 1 ≤i ≤N,
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

precisely which assets among all have nonzero alpha.
For illustration purpose, suppose that arbitrageurs adopt the strategy bw = σ−2bα,17 replacing α in w with bα = ¯r = α + ¯u.18 Out of sample, this portfolio’s conditional expected
return and conditional variance can be written as:
E
 σ−2 (α + ¯u)⊺(α + ut+1)|Ft

= σ−2(α⊺α + ¯u⊺α),
Var
 σ−2 (α + ¯u)⊺(α + ut+1)|Ft

= σ−2(α⊺α + 2α⊺¯u + ¯u⊺¯u),
where ut+1 denotes a future de-meaned return at t + 1, that shares the same distribution
as {us}s≤t, but is independent of ¯u which belongs to the information set up to t, Ft. The
resulting squared conditional Sharpe ratio is given by:
S2 =
σ−4(α⊺α + ¯u⊺α)2
σ−2(α⊺α + 2α⊺¯u + ¯u⊺¯u) ≲P T −1 →0,
(8)
where we use the fact that ¯u⊺¯u ≂P N/T when ut is i.i.d.. In other words, this portfolio
achieves a Sharpe ratio equal to zero asymptotically.
Is there a superior trading strategy capable of maintaining a non-vanishing Sharpe ratio?
The straightforward answer is no.
Our discussion below will elucidate that, within this
context, namely, (6) holds true, the highest achievable Sharpe ratio for all feasible trading
strategies employed by arbitrageurs, represented as SOPT, vanishes asymptotically as N, T →
∞. Conversely, the infeasible optimal Sharpe ratio, denoted S⋆, diverges under the condition
that N 1/2/T →∞. There is a vast disparity, as shown by this example, between SOPT and
S⋆.
The diﬀerence between feasible and infeasible strategies is primarily driven by the information set accessible to arbitrageurs when they implement their trading strategies. In this
example, the infeasible strategy assumes that arbitrageurs have access to a comprehensive
information set, Ft, that encompasses the knowledge of α. This knowledge proves to be
extremely valuable when α is both rare and weak, which creates signiﬁcant gap between this
strategy and others that lack access to such information.
To clarify, we formalize the deﬁnitions as follows:
√
T(bαi −αi)
d
−→N(0, σ2
i (1 + γ⊺(Σv)−1γ)),
(7)
where σ2
i is the ith entry of Σu. In the case that β is observable (but factors are not), we can show that the
CLT has a similar form except that the scalar (1 + γ⊺(Σv)−1γ) disappears.
17The knowledge of σ is ultimately inconsequential for our purposes, as we will demonstrate subsequently
for a more general setting. Despite σ being known, this strategy fails to yield any positive Sharpe ratio.
18For any time series of random vector at, we use ¯a to denote its sample average. As we will point out later
in the paper, this strategy bw, which we will denote by bwCSR, fails to achieve the optimal Sharpe ratio in all
scenarios. We will discuss the optimal strategy in Section 2.5.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Deﬁnition 2. A strategy is deemed feasible when it relies solely on observable data, in stark
contrast to an infeasible strategy that presupposes complete knowledge of the DGP, encapsulated by the full information set, Ft.
Recognizing the distinction between feasible and infeasible strategies, we proceed to investigate the maximum Sharpe ratio attainable by feasible strategies. This exploration necessitates deﬁning the decision-making problem faced by arbitrageurs, which we turn to next.
2.3
Arbitrageurs’ Decision Problem and Feasible Sharpe Ratio Bound
In the broader context of the DGP, given by equation (1), the information set Ft not only
includes α and {rs}s≤t but also other variables such as Σu, β, and {vs}s≤t, alongside unknown
parameters like Σv and γ. For a strategy to be considered feasible, it must refrain from
leveraging these unknown variables and parameters. This constraint introduces complexity
to the arbitrageurs’ decision-making process by intertwining optimization with statistical
techniques, resulting in solutions that are not uniquely deﬁned.
Recognizing that the disparity in Sharpe ratios between infeasible and feasible strategies
primarily stems from the challenges of learning about α, we seek to navigate this complexity
by considering a broader set of trading strategies. These strategies deliberately exclude reliance on information about α, although they may not all be feasible. Given this constraint,
we derive an upper bound for the Sharpe ratio that applies to all such strategies, and by
extension, to all feasible strategies, since they similarly avoid using information on α. However, this upper bound may not be achievable by a feasible strategy, as the derivation does
not preclude the use of potentially infeasible information on other variables, such as Σu. In
Section 2.5, we demonstrate that it is indeed possible to attain this upper bound with a wellcrafted feasible trading strategy. Consequently, even without perfect knowledge about other
variables and parameters, arbitrageurs can eﬀectively use statistical inference to estimate
these unknowns, with the statistical error of such estimates diminishing asymptotically. This
highlights that the main hurdle for arbitrageurs is not in learning about factors, volatilities,
or risk premia, but in acquiring knowledge about α.
We are now ready to characterize the decision problem arbitrageurs confront. Operating
under a certain information set, G, a subset of Ft, arbitrageurs at time t are tasked with
solving a mean-variance optimization problem expressed as:
ew = arg
max
w∈G:w⊺β=0 U(w),
where
U(w) = E
 w⊺rt+1
G

−κ
2Var
 w⊺rt+1
G

,
and κ measures the degree of risk aversion. Our objective is to identify the optimal strategy
subject to the measurability constraint: w ∈G. Given the necessity for statistical arbitrage
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

to be factor-neutral, the strategy w must be orthogonal to β, with β being predetermined,
i.e., β ∈G.
To streamline the portfolio formation process, we exclude transaction cost considerations,
which yields a static, single-period optimization problem. Thus, we omit subscript t whenever
possible. This approach aligns with the APT framework introduced by Ross (1976), where the
arbitrageurs’ chosen strategy aims to eliminate exposure to systematic factors, concentrating
instead on capitalizing on alphas and balancing idiosyncratic risks. Arbitrageurs’ utility is
modeled as a Bayesian posterior expected loss, a concept discussed in Berger (1985). The
next theorem presents a solution with minimal conditions on G.
Theorem 1. Suppose that rt follows (1) and that β is G-measurable. It holds that
ew = 1
κ
eΣ−1/2
u
MeΣ−1/2
u
β eΣ−1/2
u
eα,
(9)
where eα := E(α|G) and eΣu := E(Σu|G) + Var(α|G).19
This result associates the optimal strategy with the posterior summary statistics of α
and Σu. Essentially, the choice of the optimal G-measurable strategy is determined by arbitrageurs’ best parameter estimates based on their information set, rather than the true values
of the unknown parameters. In the special scenario where G = Ft, meaning arbitrageurs possess complete information up to time t, we have eα = α, and eΣu = Σu. Under these conditions,
the optimal infeasible strategy, denoted by w⋆, is given by
w⋆= 1
κΣ−1/2
u
MΣ−1/2
u
βΣ−1/2
u
α.
(10)
Moving forward, our attention is directed towards a speciﬁc choice of G as generated by
{(rs, β, vs, Σu) : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t}.20
Accordingly, ew is assumed associated with this
particular choice by default hereafter.
Next, we examine the investment performance of arbitrageurs’ optimal strategy, ew. It
is important to note that in evaluating a strategy, the conditional Sharpe ratio is calculated based on the comprehensive information set, Ft, rather than the arbitrageurs’ speciﬁc
information set, G. For any given strategy w, its conditional Sharpe ratio is deﬁned as:
S(w) := E(w⊺rt+1|Ft)/Var(w⊺rt+1|Ft)1/2.
19MA = I −A(A⊺A)−1A⊺for any matrix A.
20The nuisance parameters γ and Σv are deterministic constants and, as such, are encompassed within
any information set. Although they are part of G, their presence does not inﬂuence the optimal strategy of
arbitrageurs.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

To describe the asymptotic behavior of a strategy, we need to impose assumptions on the
return generating process:
Assumption 1. For each N ≥1, the following conditions hold:
(a) (αi, ui) is i.i.d. across i, and satisﬁes E(αi|(Σu)i,i) = 0 and E∥α∥2
MAX = o(1). Moreover,
it holds that 1 ≲P λmin(Σu) ≤λmax(Σu) ≲P 1.21
(b) The pricing errors α, factors vt, factor loadings β, and idiosyncratic errors ut are,
conditionally on Σu, mutually independent.
Condition (a) suggests that the alphas in our model are inherently weak; as the number
of assets, N, increases, their magnitudes diminish.22 Moreover, this condition ensures that
volatilities remain within upper and lower bounds.
Condition (a) therefore implies that
learning about alpha is a more arduous task than learning about volatilities. Condition (b)
is imperative for the model’s identiﬁcation. For instance, assuming independence between α
and β is key to identify the risk premia, γ, see, e.g., Giglio et al. (2022).
Given this assumption, the subsequent theorem illustrates that the optimal strategy ew
yields a Sharpe ratio that is nearly at its maximum.
Theorem 2. Suppose that rt follows (1) and that Assumption 1 holds. Let G represent the
information set generated by {(rs, β, vs, Σu) : t −T + 1 ≤s ≤t}. For any strategy w that is
both G-measurable and factor-neutral, it follows that as N →∞,
S(w) ≤S(G) + oP(1 + S(G)),
(11)
where S(G)2 = eα⊺Σ−1
u eα, and the equality in (11) holds if w = ew. Moreover, the optimal
strategy for arbitrageurs, ew, has a simple approximation:
 ew −1
κMβΣ−1
u eα
 = oP(1 + S(G)).
(12)
Accordingly, their optimal utility satisﬁes
p
2κU( ew) = S(G) + oP(1 + S(G)).
Theorem 2 derives an upper bound, denoted as S(G), on the Sharpe ratio that any Gmeasurable strategy can attain. This upper bound also connects with arbitrageurs’ optimal
21For a matrix A, we use ∥A∥and ∥A∥MAX = maxi,j |aij| to denote the operator norm (or ℓ2 norm) and
the ℓ∞norm of A on the vector space. We use λmin(A) and λmax(A) to denote the minimum and maximum
eigenvalues of A.
22By Assumption 1(a), Var(αi) = E(α2
i ) = o(1). Referencing our earlier discussion (footnote 13), a diminishing variance in α is essential for precluding near-arbitrage opportunities within Ross’ APT framework.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

utility. By the deﬁnition of S(G), this upper bound satisﬁes
E
 S(G)2
≤E
 α⊺Σ−1
u α

,
(13)
where the equality holds only when eα = α almost surely. The right-hand side corresponds to
the infeasible scenario in which arbitrageurs have perfect knowledge of α, which echoes (4).
Furthermore, the result demonstrates that the optimal strategy, as articulated in Theorem
1, can reach this upper bound with a negligible approximation error. In scenarios where S(G)
is ﬁnite, that is OP(1), the error term oP(1+S(G)) reduces to oP(1) and vanishes in the limit.
The theorem additionally addresses situations where S(G) may diverge. In this case, the
approximation error is reduced to oP(S(G)), remaining inconsequentially small relative to
S(G) itself.
Also, Equation (12) oﬀers a more straightforward and intuitive formula for approximating
the optimal feasible strategy, ew. Additionally, as a byproduct of Theorem 2, the optimal
infeasible strategy in Equation (10) can also be approximated in a simpler form:
w⋆−1
κMβΣ−1
u α
 = oP(1 + S⋆),
(14)
which represents a special case of Equation (12) where G is set as Ft. At its core, it is eα, the
posterior estimate of the pricing errors that dictates the optimal Sharpe ratio achievable by
arbitrageurs, rather than the true α. Intuitively, part of the construction in (12), Σ−1
u eα, is the
optimal allocation to the ex-factor returns, α + ut = rt −β(γ + vt), based on a simple meanvariance analysis, except for the use of eα, because arbitrageurs do not observe true alphas
in the DGP. Pre-multiplying Σ−1
u eα by Mβ simply eliminates the portfolio’s factor exposures,
because (MβΣ−1
u eα)⊺β = 0.
Theorems 1 and 2 are concerned with factor-neutral strategies, as our main results focus
on the limits of arbitrage. Proposition B1 in our appendix broadens this scope to encompass
any strategy, revealing that any G-measurable strategy, w, adheres to a similar upper limit:
S(w) ≤
 S(G)2 + γ⊺Σ−1
v γ
1/2 + oP(1 + S(G)),
(15)
where γ⊺Σ−1
v γ is the squared optimal Sharpe ratio earned from the factor portfolios.
This result addresses a longstanding challenge in optimal portfolio choice under parameter
uncertainty. Kan and Zhou (2007) examine the expected performance of the plug-in meanvariance portfolio and ﬁnd that its Sharpe ratio is smaller than the infeasible Sharpe ratio,
S⋆. To construct a solution, they consider a limited class of trading strategies that does not
accommodate the broad range of strategies investors might consider in real-world scenarios.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

In contrast, by imposing only mild restrictions on the DGP of returns, equation (15) identiﬁes
an upper bound for all feasible Sharpe ratios without limiting the choice of strategies.
The result in Theorem 2 appears to require that arbitrageurs rely on the information
set G, which embodies perfect knowledge of factors, vt, and their exposures, β, in addition
to past asset returns, rt. Moreover, arbitrageurs appear to have perfect knowledge of the
covariance matrix of idiosyncratic errors, Σu. In fact, the upper bound in (15) still holds if
arbitrageurs are endowed with less information, because for any information sets G′ and G
such that G′ ⊆G, we have E(S(G′)2) ≤E(S(G)2). Since all feasible strategies are measurable
with respect to G, S(G) establishes an upper bound for the Sharpe ratio applicable to this
set of strategies, although it may not be sharp. In light of this and Deﬁnitions 1 and 2,
we immediately obtain a suﬃcient condition of the absence of near-arbitrage with feasible
strategies:
Corollary 1. Suppose the same assumptions as in Theorem 2 hold. For any given returngenerating process satisfying (1), there exists no feasible factor-neutral strategy that leads to
a near-arbitrage, if
S(G) ≲P 1,
as
N →∞.
(16)
2.4
Bayes Correction for Selection Bias
While the previous discussion underscored the role of the posterior mean of α, denoted as
eα = E(α|G), on the optimal G-measurable portfolio, this expression remains implicit and not
directly actionable. Our focus now shifts to reducing the information set G to its suﬃcient
statistics for α. This step is crucial for understanding why eα leads to enhanced portfolio
performance. To facilitate this analysis, we introduce further assumptions:
Assumption 2. For each N ≥1, the following conditions hold:
(a) ui,t = σiεi,t, where εi,t follows a standard normal distribution, and is i.i.d. across (i, t)
and independent of Σu.
(b) si := αi/σi is independent of σi.
Based on the DGP described in Equation (1) and given the information set G, Assumptions 1 and 2(a) together ensure that the key summary statistics for αi are the volatility σi
and the sample average of the ex-factor returns, expressed as ˇαi := ¯ri −βi(γ + ¯v) = αi + ¯ui.
In other words, E(αi|G) = E(αi|ˇαi, σi). Consequently, this assumption simpliﬁes the conditional information set G in the posterior distribution of α to merely a two-dimensional vector
comprising these conditioning variables. To evaluate this conditional expectation, it becomes
necessary to assume a speciﬁc form of dependence between αi and σi.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

In light of this, we introduce Assumption 2(b), which allows us to further express
E(αi|ˇαi, σi) = σiE(si|ˇαi, σi) = σiE(si|ˇαi/σi).23 This leads to esi := E(si|G) = E(si|ˇsi), where
ˇsi := ˇαi/σi. Consequently, in terms of the scaled version of α, namely, s, the conditioning
information set is now a single scalar variable, which simpliﬁes the estimation problem later.
Further, in light of Theorem 2, eα, ew, and S(G)2 can all be represented in relation to es:24
eα = Σ−1/2
u
es,
ew ∝MβΣ−1/2
u
es,
S(G)2 = es⊺es.
(17)
Finally, note that
ˇsi = si + ¯εi ∼N(si, T −1),
conditional on si.
This formulation casts the original posterior inference problem into the framework of the
classical Gaussian sequence model for recovering a high-dimensional mean vector, s, from
noisy observations ˇs, which has been extensively studied in the statistics literature (see,
e.g., Robbins (1956), Efron (2011), and Efron (2019)). Although the assumption that εi
follows a Gaussian distribution may seem restrictive, this framework is suﬃciently versatile
to accommodate a wide range of distributions for si.
Arbitrageurs face the challenge of identifying the true underlying signal, s, from an observed noisy signal ˇs. This task is complicated by what Efron (2011) described as selection
bias or “the winner’s curse”: A high observed signal, ˇsi, could reﬂect a high si, or it could be
the result of “luck”, with an unusually large noise realization ¯εi. Consequently, arbitrageurs
must carefully adjust their investment strategies to mitigate this potential bias. The correction involves relying on es, which accounts for this bias. To see this, we present an explicit
formula for es:
Theorem 3. Suppose that rt follows (1) and Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. We introduce a
function ψ(a) = E (si|ˇsi = a), with which we have eαi = σiesi, where esi = ψ(ˇsi). Moreover, it
holds that
ψ(a) = a + 1
T
d
da log p(a),
(18)
where p(a) = E
 φ1/T(a −si)

is the probability distribution function of ˇsi.25
The preceding discussion directly leads to the ﬁrst assertion of the theorem. Equation (18)
is rooted in Tweedie’s formula (Robbins, 1956), which establishes a connection between the
posterior mean of s, given ˇs = a, denoted ψ(a), and the posterior probability distribution of
23This equality relies on the result that conditional on bαi/σi, αi/σi is independent of σi. We impose this
condition primarily for clarity of exposition and simplicity of Algorithm 1 below.
24Given that risk aversion does not impact the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, we will use ∝to substitute for
κ−1 in our subsequent discussions on the portfolio strategy.
25φx(a) is the distribution function for N(0, x).
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

ˇs. The formula’s second component, T −1d log p(a)/da, plays a crucial role in adjusting for the
selection bias in the observed signal, ˇsi, which introduces several intriguing properties. An
example of these properties, as shown by Andrews et al. (1972), is that ψ(a) is a nondecreasing
function of a. This property ensures that the relative magnitude of various signals is preserved
post-correction. Moreover, under mild assumptions about the prior distribution of si, such
as being symmetric and unimodal, the posterior mean es induces a shrinkage eﬀect towards
the prior mean, which, in our context, is zero.
The posterior shrinkage on α, or equivalently on s, consequently induces a “shrinkage”
eﬀect on the optimal Sharpe ratio achievable by arbitrageurs, as demonstrated by the inequality (13). Based on the results of Theorem 3, and under a technical condition concerning
the tail behavior of si, we can obtain a more explicit formula for S(G):
Corollary 2. Under the same assumptions outlined in Theorem 3, and with the additional
condition that E(s2
i 1{|si|≥cN}) = o(N −1), we arrive at the conclusion that:
S(G) = SOPT + oP(1),
with
SOPT =

N
Z
ψ(a)2p(a)da
1/2
.
This result enables us to compute SOPT in various examples. For instance, by utilizing
this result, we can compare SOPT with S⋆in Example 1. This comparison illuminates the feasibility of attaining non-vanishing Sharpe ratios and how diﬀerent DGP conditions inﬂuence
the attainability.
Corollary 3. Suppose that the same assumptions as in Corollary 2 hold. In addition, we
assume alpha follows (5) as in Example 1. Then we have S⋆= σ−1µ(ρN)1/2+oP(1). Further,
assuming that σ−1µ(ρN)1/2 does not vanish, then it holds that SOPT ≤(1 −ϵ)σ−1µ(ρN)1/2
for some ϵ > 0, if and only if
T 1/2µ/σ −
p
−2 log ρ ≲1.
(19)
Corollary 3 suggests that when T 1/2µ/σ is large enough that the constraint (19) is violated,
S⋆≂P SOPT—that is, in the limit, learning does not play any role—arbitrageurs in this
scenario achieve the same Sharpe ratio as under perfect knowledge of alphas. Furthermore,
the rareness parameter ρ does not make much diﬀerence if T 1/2µ/σ gets suﬃciently large.
That said, if ρ approaches to zero so fast that √−2 log ρ dominates T 1/2µ/σ—that is, alpha is
extremely rare and suﬃciently weak—the learning problem becomes rather challenging and
the Sharpe ratio attainable by arbitrageurs, SOPT, is dominated, in the limit, by the infeasible
Sharpe ratio S⋆.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

To give a concrete example of Corollary 3, consider an alternative DGP assumption instead
of (6):26
µ ≂N −η
and
ρ > 0
is ﬁxed.
(20)
In this scenario, (S⋆)2 ≂P N 1−2η, which explodes unless η > 1/2. If we further assume that
N/T →ψ > 0, then the left-hand-side of condition (19) is of order N 1/2−η ∨1, so that
(19) holds if and only if η ≥1/2. Therefore, η < 1/2 is not consistent with absence of
(feasible) near arbitrage because S⋆explodes and, since SOPT = S⋆by Corollary 3, SOPT
explodes, too.
If η > 1/2, S⋆(and hence SOPT) vanishes, which does not seem like an
economically plausible case. If we think that asset demand distortions are suﬃciently big so
that arbitrageur activity is required to prevent substantial mispricing, and that arbitrageurs
require some compensation for holding arbitrage positions, then a setting where true alphas
disappear asymptotically is not plausible. This suggests that under the DGP (20), the only
economically plausible case with absence of near-arbitrage, but not absence of mispricing, is
η = 1/2. That is, η can be thought as determined in equilibrium. Mispricing should be big
enough that arbitrageurs are active, earning a non-vanishing Sharpe ratio, and at the same
time small enough that near-arbitrage opportunities do not exist.
We now illustrate the behavior of SOPT numerically and verify the theoretical predictions
of Corollary 3 using the DGP speciﬁed in Example 1. Figure 1 reports the Sharpe ratio,
SOPT, of optimal feasible arbitrage portfolios for a range of µ/σ and ρ values in the case of
N = 1, 000 and T = 20 years. Recall that according to model (5), a fraction ρ of assets
have alphas with a Sharpe ratio µ/σ.
That is, ρ characterizes the rareness of the alpha
signal, whereas µ/σ captures its strength. We intentionally choose a wide range of µ/σ (with
annualized Sharpe ratios from 0.11 to 10.95) and ρ (from 0.12% to 50%) to shed light on the
dependence of Sharpe ratios on signal weakness and rareness, although some of the resulting
portfolio Sharpe ratios (the top left corner of Figure 1) are unrealistically high. Note that
when µ/σ ×
√
12 hits 0.44, its corresponding t-statistic based on a 20-year sample exceeds
1.96, the typical t-hurdle for a standard student-t test.
The pattern of Sharpe ratios agrees with our intuition and theoretical predictions. For
any ﬁxed ρ, as the alpha signal weakens (i.e., µ/σ decreases), the optimal Sharpe ratio drops.
The same is true if we decrease the signal count (i.e., ρ vanishes), for any ﬁxed value of µ/σ.
The arbitrageur’s learning problem is easiest when signal is strong and count is large (top left
corner), and most challenging towards the right bottom corner, where the optimal Sharpe
ratios drop to near zero.
26It is easy to show that the setup (20) satisﬁes all assumptions of Corollary 2 for all ﬁxed η > 0.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
50.00
44.72
38.73
31.62
27.39
22.36
15.81
11.18
10.00
8.66
7.07
5.00
3.54
37.50
33.54
29.05
23.72
20.54
16.77
11.86
8.39
7.50
6.50
5.30
3.75
2.65
35.35
24.99
22.35
19.36
15.80
13.68
11.17
7.90
5.58
4.99
4.32
3.53
2.49
1.76
28.21
19.92
17.80
15.40
12.56
10.87
8.86
6.24
4.40
3.93
3.39
2.76
1.94
1.36
20.83
14.55
12.96
11.16
9.04
7.78
6.29
4.36
3.01
2.67
2.28
1.83
1.25
0.85
16.95
11.66
10.33
8.84
7.08
6.04
4.83
3.27
2.20
1.93
1.63
1.28
0.84
0.55
12.96
8.64
7.58
6.40
5.02
4.22
3.30
2.14
1.37
1.18
0.98
0.74
0.46
0.28
10.94
7.12
6.20
5.17
4.00
3.32
2.55
1.60
0.99
0.84
0.68
0.51
0.30
0.17
8.94
5.64
4.85
4.00
3.03
2.47
1.85
1.11
0.66
0.55
0.44
0.31
0.18
0.10
6.97
4.22
3.59
2.90
2.14
1.71
1.25
0.71
0.40
0.33
0.25
0.18
0.09
0.05
5.04
2.92
2.44
1.93
1.38
1.08
0.76
0.41
0.22
0.18
0.13
0.09
0.05
0.02
4.29
2.43
2.02
1.58
1.12
0.87
0.60
0.32
0.17
0.13
0.10
0.07
0.03
0.02
3.55
1.98
1.63
1.27
0.88
0.68
0.47
0.24
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.05
0.03
0.01
2.85
1.56
1.28
0.98
0.68
0.52
0.35
0.18
0.09
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.01
2.19
1.17
0.96
0.73
0.50
0.38
0.26
0.13
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.01
1.58
0.83
0.68
0.51
0.35
0.26
0.18
0.09
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
1.05
0.54
0.44
0.33
0.22
0.17
0.11
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.61
0.31
0.25
0.19
0.13
0.09
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.28
0.14
0.11
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.16
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
70.71 53.03
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Figure 1: Optimal Sharpe Ratios (SOPT) of Feasible Arbitrage Portfolios
Note: The ﬁgure reports optimal Sharpe ratios of feasible arbitrage portfolios in model (5), in which a
100 × ρ% of assets have alphas that correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12.
The reported Sharpe ratios in Figure 1 are only a fraction of the corresponding (infeasible)
Sharpe ratios, S⋆=
p
α⊺(Σu)−1α = µ/σ√ρN, as shown by Figure 2. The pattern we see from
Figure 2 agrees with theoretical predictions of Corollary 3. When the annualized Sharpe ratio
µ/σ ×
√
12 is larger than 2.74, regardless of the values of ρ, the signal-to-noise ratio of the
learning problem is suﬃciently strong that the statistical limit to arbitrage does not matter
much, and hence SOPT/S⋆is close to 1. Nonetheless, this regime is irrelevant in practice,
since it is mostly associated with unrealistically high Sharpe ratios (see Figure 1). In contrast,
as µ/σ diminishes, the gap between S⋆and SOPT widens. In almost all empirically relevant
scenarios, S⋆is much larger than the feasible Sharpe ratio than arbitrageurs can actually
earn with an optimal strategy.
2.5
Constructing the Optimal Arbitrage Portfolio
In our previous discussion, Theorem 2 establishes that the optimal Sharpe ratio attainable
by any feasible strategy is capped by S(G), which, by Corollary 2, is approximately equal
to SOPT under additional conditions. Following this, Corollary 3 illustrates the dependence
of SOPT on the unknown parameters in the DGP of alpha, i.e., (5). In addition, (17) and
Theorem 3 characterize the strategy ew that achieves the optimal Sharpe ratio attainable by
any feasible strategy.
However, this characterization assumes access to the information set G, which includes
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.66
0.63
0.66
0.53
0.49
0.73
0.72
0.65
0.62
0.58
0.48
0.36
0.31
0.72
0.69
0.65
0.62
0.54
0.51
0.47
0.37
0.27
0.22
0.73
0.71
0.67
0.63
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.42
0.39
0.35
0.27
0.19
0.14
0.65
0.63
0.59
0.54
0.50
0.44
0.38
0.30
0.28
0.24
0.18
0.12
0.09
0.72
0.57
0.54
0.49
0.43
0.39
0.34
0.28
0.21
0.19
0.16
0.12
0.07
0.05
0.68
0.52
0.49
0.44
0.39
0.35
0.30
0.24
0.18
0.16
0.13
0.10
0.06
0.04
0.63
0.48
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.31
0.26
0.21
0.15
0.13
0.11
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.58
0.43
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.27
0.22
0.17
0.13
0.11
0.09
0.07
0.04
0.03
0.52
0.38
0.35
0.31
0.26
0.23
0.19
0.15
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.45
0.32
0.30
0.26
0.22
0.19
0.16
0.12
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.37
0.26
0.24
0.21
0.17
0.15
0.12
0.10
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.29
0.20
0.18
0.16
0.13
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.20
0.14
0.12
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.15
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.10
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
1.00
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.91
0.79
0.79
1.00
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.91
0.79
0.79
1.00
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.91
0.79
0.79
1.00
0.97
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.89
0.77
0.76
0.99
0.94
0.95
0.94
0.94
0.95
0.93
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.91
0.79
0.96
0.90
0.91
0.89
0.89
0.88
0.85
0.88
0.84
0.81
0.78
0.92
0.84
0.83
0.81
0.79
0.77
0.89
0.79
0.78
0.75
0.85
0.79
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Figure 2: Ratios between SOPT and S⋆
Note: The ﬁgure reports the ratios of optimal Sharpe ratios between feasible and infeasible arbitrage
portfolios. The simulation setting is based on model (5), in which a 100 × ρ% of assets have alphas that
correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12.
not only past returns, rt, but also potentially unknown variables, such as β, vt, and Σu.
Furthermore, it relies on knowledge of γ and the probability distribution function of ˇs, i.e.,
p(a). As a result, while the Sharpe ratio bound remains a valid upper ceiling—since having
less information generally leads to lower achievable Sharpe ratios—the strategy ew is infeasible.
Its reliance on Σu and es, which in turn depend on ex-factor returns, ¯ri −βi(γ + ¯v), and
the probability distribution of ˇs via (18), makes its implementation impractical. Therefore,
arbitrageurs encounter additional challenges in this context. They must conduct statistical
inference concerning unknown parameters and variables to shape their investment strategies.
Moreover, the devised optimal strategy must be ﬂexible and adapt to the nuances of diﬀerent
DGPs.
Despite these challenges, arbitrageurs can indeed construct a uniformly optimal strategy
that attains SOPT across a broad spectrum of DGPs, even without access to all information
in G and perfect knowledge of γ and the probability distribution of ˇs. In fact, this strategy
relies only observable data, making it entirely feasible. Speciﬁcally, we formulate this strategy
within a framework where factors remain latent, but factor exposures are observable—a
scenario that aligns with our empirical analysis.
We describe this portfolio strategy as “all weather,” signifying its adaptability to all
considered DGP scenarios. Moreover, the fact that this strategy achieves SOPT implies that
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

the feasible Sharpe ratio upper bound we derive is sharp. We outline the following algorithm
to construct this strategy:
Algorithm 1 (Optimal Arbitrage Portfolio via Empirical Bayes).
Inputs: rt, t ∈T = {t −T + 1, . . . , t} and β.
S1. Construct cross-sectional regression estimates of alpha and idiosyncratic volatilities, for
each i = 1, 2, . . . , N:
bα = T −1 X
s∈T
Mβrs,
bσ2
i = T −1 X
s∈T
 (Mβrs)i −bαi
2,
and
bsi := bαi/bσi.
S2. Construct a nonparametric estimate of the marginal density of bs using Gaussian kernel
function φ1/T(x) and bandwidth kN ≂(log N)−1:
bp(a) =
1
NkN
X
i
φ1/T
bsi −a
kN

.
S3. Estimate es by Tweedie’s formula (18) and isotonic regression:
˘ψ(a) =a + 1 + k2
N
T
d
da log bp(a).
bψ = arg min
x∈RN
∥x −˘ψ∥2, s.t. xi ≤xj if bsi ≤bsj, for 1 ≤i, j ≤N, where ˘ψi := ˘ψ(bsi).
S4. Construct the arbitrage portfolio weights as bwOPT ∝Mβ bΣ−1/2
u
bψ.
Outputs: bwOPT.
Step S1 of Algorithm 1 provides feasible estimates of bα and bΣu = Diag(bσ2
i ), which in
turn leads to the suﬃcient statistic, bs. The motivation behind Steps S2 and S3 stems from
Tweedie’s formula (18); here, we employ a nonparametric empirical Bayes method for estimating the posterior mean function using kernel density estimation, as suggested by Brown
and Greenshtein (2009). The incorporation of the factor (1 + k2
N) serves to adjust for ﬁnite
sample biases introduced by estimation errors in bp(a). To enhance the nonparametric estimator’s performance in ﬁnite samples, enforcing monotonicity on ψ(·) proves beneﬁcial. For this
purpose, isotonic regression is utilized (see Robertson et al. (1988)), yielding a monotonic
piece-wise linear approximation of ψ(·). Step S4 constructs the optimal portfolio weights,
bwOPT, following (17).
An essential step towards achieving optimality involves aggregating information from assets with comparable bsi, as done in Step S2. This strategy outperforms the alternatives, some
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

of which directly use estimated bs as if these estimates are not susceptible to estimation errors
even when they are rather weak, or simply ignore the contribution of all weaker signals. Like
any machine learning method, the proposed approach requires a tuning parameter kN, which
can be selected in a validation sample.
The following theorem demonstrates the optimality of bwOPT:
Theorem 4. Let P denote the collection of all data-generating processes under which the same
assumptions outlined in Corollary 2 hold. Moreover, we assume ∥β∥MAX ≲P 1, λmin(β⊺β) ≳P
N, and that the distribution of si is symmetric. In addition, suppose that N d ≲T ≲N d′ for
ﬁxed constants d > 1/2 and d′ < 1. We denote the Sharpe ratio achieved by bwOPT as bSOPT :=
E(r⊺
t+1 bwOPT|Ft)/Var(r⊺
t+1 bwOPT|Ft)1/2. Then it holds that bwOPT achieves, asymptotically, the
upper bound SOPT, uniformly over all sequences of data-generating processes. That is, for
any ϵ > 0,
lim
N,T→∞sup
P∈P
P
 bSOPT −SOPT ≥ϵSOPT + ϵ

= 0.
Theorem 4 imposes a mild assumption on λmin(β⊺β), which requires that all factors are
pervasive.27 This condition is frequently utilized in the factor model literature and is particularly relevant here, given our assumption that the factors within our model are latent. A
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between our context and the traditional empirical Bayes literature (e.g.,
Brown and Greenshtein (2009)) lies in our lack of direct access to the signals, ˇsi’s. Instead,
we estimate these signals via cross-sectional regressions. This step results in our estimators,
bsi’s, being inevitably polluted by estimation errors. The additional conditions imposed by
Theorem 4 ensure that such estimation errors become asymptotically negligible.
Theorem 4 concludes that in the context of a linear factor model, arbitrageurs can construct this strategy, without any knowledge besides past returns and risk exposures (beta), to
achieve the maximal Sharpe ratio over all feasible trading strategies that have zero exposure
to factor risks. This Sharpe ratio precisely characterizes the limit of feasible arbitrages in
economic terms. A key reason for this result is that idiosyncratic variances represented by
Σu remain bounded both from below and above as N and T increase, unlike alphas. This
diﬀerence is empirically supported; alphas are expected to be small and rare, a result of
the competitive nature of arbitrage activities, in contrast to the consistent presence of idiosyncratic risks. Consequently, uncertainty about Σu becomes negligible in the context of
statistical arbitrage limitations. Furthermore, given the low-dimensional nature of vt and
γ and arbitrageurs’ knowledge knowledge of β, the problem of learning about vt and γ is
negligible as well.
27See, e.g., Assumption I.1 of Giglio and Xiu (2021). While our theoretical results may extend to certain
weak factor settings, this is not our emphasis here.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

The term ϵSOPT + ϵ accommodates both small and large values of SOPT. If SOPT ≲1,
then ϵ dominates and the estimation error inside the probability is characterized by the
absolute diﬀerence between bSOPT and SOPT. Otherwise, if SOPT →∞, the estimation error
is described in percentage terms. This is necessary because we simultaneously consider a
large class of models where the Sharpe ratios may become extremely high or approach zero.
With Theorem 4, we establish the necessity for the no near-arbitrage condition given by
(16).
Corollary 4. Suppose the same assumptions as in Theorem 4 hold. The portfolio weights
bwOPT yield a near-arbitrage strategy under any sequences of data-generating processes for
which condition (16) does not hold.
The ability of arbitrageurs to construct an optimal strategy that realizes SOPT carries
important economic implications.
In an economy with statistical limits to arbitrage, the
equilibrium compensation that arbitrageurs demand for executing such a strategy equals
SOPT. If it were otherwise, arbitrageurs would continue trading until all proﬁt opportunities were exhausted. Therefore, bSOPT can be interpreted as an empirical estimate of this
equilibrium compensation, which we seek to pin down empirically.
2.6
Estimating Optimal Infeasible Sharpe Ratio
We are also interested in estimating the optimal infeasible Sharpe ratio, S⋆. This Sharpe
ratio can be estimated by an econometrician ex-post and in-sample, but it cannot be achieved
by any feasible portfolio. The existing literature on testing the APT often constructs test
statistics in the spirit of Gibbons et al. (1989), which are eﬀectively based on S⋆(see, e.g.,
Pesaran and Yamagata (2017) and Fan et al. (2015)). While such tests are powerful and may
lead to detection of alphas, their relevance for arbitrageurs might be limited. The challenge
for arbitrageurs lies in translating statistical evidence of alpha discoveries into a feasible
portfolio strategy that realizes proﬁts. Our proposed SOPT tackles this issue, providing an
economically more meaningful evaluation of the APT.
To provide a benchmark for bSOPT, we propose an estimator for S⋆inspired by its sample
analog:
eS⋆=

¯r⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯r
1/2
.
(21)
Unfortunately, this estimator has a non-vanishing asymptotic bias for certain DGPs we consider, as we will show later. To ﬁx this issue, we propose a new estimator that is uniformly
consistent:
bS⋆=

¯r⊺Mβ bΣ−1
u Mβ¯r −N/T
1/2
.
(22)
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

The next proposition summarizes the asymptotic properties of both estimators.
Proposition 1. Suppose that the same assumptions outlined in Corollary 2 hold. Moreover,
we assume ∥β∥MAX ≲P 1 and λmin(β⊺β) ≳P N. We also impose T ≲N and T −1N 1/2 log N ≤
cN. Then we have
bS⋆−S⋆
 1 + S⋆
=
oP

T −1/2N 1/4p
log N

,
eS⋆−

(S⋆)2 + NT −11/2
. 1 + S⋆
=
oP

T −1N 1/2 log N

.
Similar to Theorem 4, the estimation error is relative when S⋆dominates 1.0 asymptotically, and in absolute terms if S⋆is dominated by 1.0.28 This accommodates a large class of
models, some of which have an exploding or a shrinking S⋆. While it is possible to estimate
S⋆, it is not possible to build a portfolio that realizes it, unless the signal-to-noise ratio is
suﬃciently large such that S⋆= SOPT. Empirically, the diﬀerence between bS⋆and bSOPT
thereby informs us about the economic consequences of learning.
2.7
Alternative Strategies for Arbitrage Portfolios
Algorithm 1 introduces a nuanced approach that allows arbitrageurs to achieve feasible optimality. In practice, many empirical asset pricing researchers and practitioners often rely
on simpler strategies. Given the widespread adoption of these alternative approaches, it is
useful to assess how closely they approximate the optimal feasible strategy. In this section,
we examine their strengths and weaknesses in diﬀerent DGP scenarios.
2.7.1
Cross-Sectional Regression
One of the most common strategies involves forming portfolios based directly on the crosssectional regression estimates of α, obtained in Step S1 of Algorithm 1.
This method is
referred to as CSR, with its portfolio represented by bwCSR:
bwCSR ∝Mβ bΣ−1
u bα.
(23)
This is eﬀectively a sample analogue of the approximated infeasible strategy given by (14).
A speciﬁc instance of this strategy was discussed following Example 1.
We now exploit Example 1 to illustrate the pros and cons of the CSR strategy. Figure 3
illustrates the relationship between SCSR, the theoretical Sharpe ratio achieved by bwCSR, and
SOPT across a spectrum of DGPs. According to Proposition B2 in the online appendix, SCSR
28Obviously, the threshold 1.0 can be replaced by any ﬁxed constant.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

tends to be dominated by SOPT in scenarios when alpha signals are sparse (√ρTµ/σ is not
excessively large) and simultaneously strong (
√
Tµ/σ is not exceedingly small). This speciﬁc
regime of dominance is clearly marked with black numerals within the heatmap in Figure 3.
As the ratio µ/σ ×
√
12 edges closer to 1.0—either moving towards this vertical threshold
from the right hand side or descending from the upper left corner—the gap between SCSR
and SOPT enlarges increasingly.
The CSR approach takes all signal estimates directly, without diﬀerentiating the signiﬁcant ones from the insigniﬁcant ones. Consequently, even fake signals (pure noise) are
assigned non-zero weights. This hurts the portfolio’s performance. On the other hand, the
CSR strategy can achieve optimality when the strong signals are abundant (so that portfolio
weights allocated to noise are inconsequential) or when all signals are weak (so that they do
not diﬀer too much from fake ones). The latter case is interesting, as it also suggests that
simply ignoring weaker signals is not optimal. That said, Figure 1 shows that the DGPs for
which the cross-sectional regression approach is strongly dominated by our optimal strategy
are associated with realistic Sharpe ratios.
10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.77
0.71
0.58
0.45
0.76
0.73
0.68
0.60
0.47
0.35
0.75
0.62
0.58
0.52
0.45
0.33
0.24
0.68
0.54
0.50
0.45
0.38
0.28
0.20
0.73
0.61
0.48
0.44
0.39
0.33
0.25
0.19
0.72
0.59
0.47
0.43
0.39
0.33
0.26
0.20
0.73
0.60
0.49
0.46
0.42
0.37
0.31
0.25
0.74
0.63
0.53
0.50
0.46
0.42
0.36
0.31
0.78
0.68
0.59
0.57
0.54
0.50
0.45
0.41
0.75
0.68
0.67
0.65
0.62
0.59
0.56
0.77
0.76
0.75
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.95
0.91
0.85
0.82
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.95
0.92
0.86
0.98
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.91
0.89
0.85
0.97
0.95
0.93
0.91
0.88
0.85
0.79
0.97
0.93
0.92
0.89
0.84
0.80
0.97
0.93
0.91
0.88
0.83
0.79
0.98
0.95
0.93
0.89
0.84
0.79
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.91
0.85
0.81
0.99
0.97
0.95
0.92
0.87
0.83
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.94
0.90
0.87
0.82
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.89
0.84
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.95
0.93
0.91
0.88
0.85
0.85
0.84
0.83
0.83
0.82
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.89
0.89
0.88
0.88
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Figure 3: Ratios between SCSR and SOPT
Note: The ﬁgure reports the ratios between the Sharpe ratios of the OLS based portfolio and the feasible
optimal arbitrage portfolio.
The theoretical Sharpe ratio achieved by CSR is denoted as SCSR, given
explicitly by Proposition B2. The simulation setting is based on model (5), in which a 100 × ρ% of assets
have alphas that correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12.
The CSR approach is a simple benchmark as it does not rely on any advanced statistical
techniques to detect signals or distinguish their strength. The strategy we discuss next is
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

more advanced, in that it controls false discoveries among selected strong signals using the
B-H procedure proposed by Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).
2.7.2
False Discovery Rate Control
To address the aforementioned selection bias in identifying proﬁtable alpha signals, an alternative methodology conceptualizes the search for alpha as a multiple testing problem. In this
case, with N assets that are each potentially associated with a nonzero αi, we can establish
for each asset i a null hypothesis Hi
0 : αi = 0. Rejection of this null hypothesis leads to the
discovery of a non-zero alpha. Rather than focusing on the signiﬁcance level of individual
tests, a more appropriate strategy involves controlling the FDR, an approach recommended
by Barras et al. (2010), Bajgrowicz and Scaillet (2012), and Harvey et al. (2016) in various
asset pricing contexts. Giglio et al. (2021) have proved the validity of the B-H procedure for
FDR control in a general factor model setting for alpha detection. Below we describe the
necessary steps to prepare alpha estimates for constructing an arbitrage portfolio.
Begin with a series of p-values, pi, where each is the result of a t-test on the cross-sectional
regression estimate of αi,
√
Tbsi, for i = 1, 2, . . . , N. These p-values assess the signiﬁcance of
each αi’s deviation from zero. Arrange these p-values in ascending order, from the smallest
to the largest, resulting in a sorted sequence p(1) ≤. . . ≤p(N). Identify a critical index, bk,
deﬁned as the maximum i such that p(i) ≤τi/N where τ is a predetermined signiﬁcance level,
commonly set at 5%.
The threshold bk is selected such that, on average, at least a fraction (1 −τ) of the alpha
estimates identiﬁed as signiﬁcant (i.e., those with p-values smaller than p(bk)) are truly nonzero. This B-H criterion proves eﬀective in guarding against false discoveries irrespective of
the overall proportion of non-zero alphas present in the DGP. The selected alpha estimates
are then used as inputs for constructing an arbitrage portfolio, as illustrated by the following
equation:
bwBH(τ) ∝Mβ bΣ−1
u bαBH(τ), where bαBH
i
(τ) = bαi1{pi≤p(bk)}.
(24)
This strategy introduces a hard-thresholding mechanism to the alpha estimates, eﬀectively
nullifying the impact of alphas deemed insigniﬁcant.
Controlling the FDR on top of the CSR estimates is intuitively appealing, but doing so
incurs a potential loss of power that may hurt investment performance. Indeed, Proposition
B3 in the appendix shows, in the context of Example 1, arbitrageurs who adopt the B-H
based-trading strategy do not achieve the optimal portfolio for a large class of DGP sequences.
As shown by Proposition B3 and illustrated numerically by Figure 4, the discrepancy
between the optimal Sharpe ratio and that achieved through the B-H method is largely
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

determined by signal strength. The B-H procedure nears optimality when the signal strength,
quantiﬁed by
√
Tµ/σ, is substantial—exceeding the threshold of √−2 log ρ. The instances
where the B-H strategy reaches optimality are depicted by the white values on Figure 4,
with the boundary of this optimal region approximated by the line where µ/σ
√
12 = 2.19.
This demonstrates that the B-H method excels in identifying strong signals, leading to nearoptimal portfolios when signals are strong. Conversely, in the presence of weak signals, the
B-H procedure, which amounts to hard-thresholding, tends to underperform compared to
CSR.
This point is further elaborated in Figure 1, which underscores that even if individual
alphas are weak, their aggregated eﬀect on a portfolio’s Sharpe ratio can be non-trivial.
The B-H approach takes a notably conservative stance towards signal selection, especially in
contexts where signals are weak. This cautious approach ensures the reliability of selected
alphas by focusing on those that are truly signiﬁcant. However, this method might not fully
capitalize on the potential cumulative impact of weaker signals. In contrast, our optimal
arbitrage portfolio leverages the full spectrum of alpha estimates, including false positives,
extending beyond the signiﬁcant selections made through the B-H procedure.
At its core, this delineates a subtle yet critical divergence between two objectives: alpha
testing and portfolio construction. Alpha testing prioritizes the identiﬁcation of statistically
signiﬁcant alphas while controlling FDR, whereas portfolio construction concentrates on using
all available information to optimize performance. These objectives do not always align.
The CSR and the B-H approaches represent two typical strategies in practice. The former
trades all signals without distinguishing their strength, whereas the latter only trades the
stronger signals. Neither approach always achieves optimality.
2.7.3
Shrinkage Approaches
In the approximated infeasible strategy given by (14), the portfolio weights with respect to
ex-factor returns (Mβrt+1 ≈α + ut) are Σ−1
u α.
The CSR approach replaces the weights
Σ−1
u α with the sample analogue bΣ−1
u bα, and the B-H approach additionally imposes hardthresholding regularization on those weights.29 Multiplying the ex-factor return weights by
Mβ yields the portfolio weights in terms of raw returns (rt+1). Besides the hard-thresholding
of B-H, we can consider shrinkage-type regularization:
max
w {w⊺bα −1
2w⊺bΣuw −pλ(bΣ1/2
u w)},
29Regularizing those weights amounts to incorporating priors onto the alpha estimates.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.71
0.72
0.66
0.59
0.57
0.55
0.51
0.45
0.39
0.72
0.70
0.67
0.63
0.60
0.55
0.48
0.40
0.38
0.35
0.32
0.26
0.20
0.62
0.55
0.52
0.48
0.43
0.40
0.35
0.27
0.21
0.19
0.17
0.14
0.10
0.07
0.42
0.32
0.30
0.26
0.21
0.18
0.15
0.09
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.19
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.11
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.92
0.90
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.91
0.89
0.85
0.84
0.82
0.80
0.76
0.87
0.84
0.83
0.81
0.78
0.76
0.77
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Figure 4: Ratios between SBH and SOPT
Note: The ﬁgure reports the ratios between the Sharpe ratios of the multiple testing based portfolio (via
B-H procedure) and the feasible optimal arbitrage portfolio. The theoretical Sharpe ratio achieved by B-H
is denoted as SBH, given explicitly by Proposition B3. The simulation setting is based on model (5), in
which a 100 × ρ% of assets have alphas that correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12.
where pλ(x) = λ∥x∥1 or λ∥x∥2
2, for some λ > 0. Since bΣu is diagonal, this optimization
problem has a closed-form solution of weights with respect to ex-factor returns: ˘wq,i(λ) =
bσ−1
i ψq(bsi, λ), for i = 1, 2, . . . , N, where q = 1 corresponds to the Lasso penalty and q = 2 the
ridge, and ψq(s, λ) is
ψ1(s, λ) = sgn(s)(|s| −λ)+,
ψ2(s, λ) = (1 + 2λ)−1s.
This leads to the optimal portfolio weight on rt:30
bwq(λ) ∝Mβ ˘wq(λ),
q = 1, 2.
Depending on the magnitude of λ, the Lasso approach replaces all smaller signals (i.e., bsi) by
zero and shrinks the larger ones by λ in absolute terms. In other words, the Lasso approach
is the soft-thresholding alternative to the B-H method. In contrast, the ridge penalty shrinks
all signals proportionally. Since proportional scaling of portfolio weights does not aﬀect the
Sharpe ratio, this means that ridge is equivalent to CSR! This “embedded” shrinkage eﬀect
30An alternative strategy is to impose sparsity directly on the portfolio weights with respect to raw returns.
While this approach might be appealing from the transaction cost point of view, it does not associate with
an explicit prior on alpha, hence is more diﬃcult to interpret.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

of CSR explains why it performs well in the case of small signals.
Proposition B4, along with Proposition B2 in the online appendix, oﬀers explicit formulae
for the optimal feasible Sharpe ratios in the shrinkage case. The Sharpe ratio of ridge is
not aﬀected by the tuning parameter, but Lasso’s performance is contingent on its tuning
parameter. However, even with the optimal choice of tuning parameter, it cannot achieve the
optimal feasible Sharpe ratio in all DGPs.
Figure 5 compares SLasso
λ
with SOPT, where SLasso
λ
denotes the theoretical Sharpe ratio
achieved by Lasso for a given tuning parameter choice λ. In practice, the tuning parameter
choice would require a cross-validation procedure. Here we adopt the theoretically optimal
tuning parameter that maximizes SLasso
λ
in Figure 5. This strategy, unlike the B-H approach
where the tuning parameter τ is selected based on a clear statistical criterion, is not fully
feasible in practice, since the optimal tuning depends on the DGP, which is not fully known.
Hence, Figure 5 should be understood as showcasing the optimal performance of a class
of trading strategies indexed by the tuning parameter of Lasso, and only reports the best
performance within this class. This is a fair comparison to OPT, which represents the optimal
performance of all strategies, beyond the Lasso class, as the implementation of our algorithm
to achieve SOPT would also require choice of a tuning parameter. Although Proposition B4
suggests that Lasso is not uniformly optimal, it performs remarkably well, achieving the
optimal Sharpe ratio in almost all regimes. Intuitively, when signals are very strong, Lasso
behaves like a hard-thresholding selector, as shrinkage has minimal eﬀect. Conversely, when
signals are week, ridge (and hence CSR) approach optimality, and Lasso can replicate their
performance by setting the tunning parameter close to zero.
3
Simulation Evidence
This section illustrates the applicability of our theory through simulations and assesses the
ﬁnite sample performance of our proposed portfolio strategies.
For simplicity and clarity, we simulate a one-factor model of returns as speciﬁed by (1).
We set the factor risk premium at 5% per annum with an annualized volatility of 25%. The
distribution of beta across assets is modeled as a normal distribution with a mean and variance
of one.
Given our focus on arbitrage portfolios, the parameters of the factor component
(including the number of factors) are inconsequential, because factors are eliminated by Mβ
in the initial steps of constructing these trading strategies. In addition, we use the model
in (5) from Example 1 for the cross-sectional distribution of alpha. We maintain a constant
idiosyncratic volatility, denoted as σ for all assets, because the ratio α/σ determines signal
strength, and so there is no need to vary both α and σ in the cross section. While our Monte
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.92
0.89
0.95
0.93
0.93
0.92
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.92
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.89
0.96
0.95
0.93
0.93
0.92
0.92
0.91
0.91
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.95
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Figure 5: Ratios between SLasso
λ
and SOPT
Note: The ﬁgure reports the ratios between the Sharpe ratios of the Lasso based portfolio and the feasible
optimal arbitrage portfolio. The theoretical Sharpe ratio achieved by Lasso is treated as the maximum of
SLasso
λ
over all λ, given explicitly by Proposition B4. The simulation setting is based on model (5), in which
a 100 × ρ% of assets have alphas that correspond to an annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12. The tuning
parameter λ is selected to maximize SLasso
λ
.
Carlo experiment is stylized, it eﬀectively demonstrates the impact of estimation errors in
factors and volatilities and the ﬁnite sample performance of our theoretical predictions.
We compare the ﬁnite sample performance of our portfolio estimators across various
DGPs. We examine a broad spectrum of signal strength (µ/σ) and sparsity (ρ) values to cover
a range of potential empirical scenarios. For each set of parameters (µ/σ, ρ), we simulate the
corresponding DGP, construct portfolio weights, bwA, where A represents OPT, CSR, BH, or
Lasso, and compute the corresponding theoretical Sharpe ratio: bSA = bwA⊺µ/
p
bwA⊺Σ−1
u bwA.
Our algorithm requires a tuning parameter. We choose it with a validation procedure that
divides the in-sample data into two parts: the ﬁrst 80% is used for training, and the remaining
20% is reserved for validation. The optimal parameter maximizes the sample Sharpe ratio
in this validation subset. Once identiﬁed, this tuning parameter is then used with the entire
in-sample (training and validation) data to estimate portfolio weights.
We use the same
validation approach to determine the tuning parameter for the Lasso method.31
In light of Theorem 4, the following performance measure is sensible:
31The speciﬁc grid we use for tuning our method consists of the set {0.25, 0.5, . . . , 4} × (log N)−1. For the
Lasso method, the parameter λ is selected from the set {2−10, 2−9, . . . , 2−1}. For our method, theoretical
guidance from Theorem 4 helps — we know a tuning parameter ≃(log N)−1 would be optimal. For Lasso,
however, the optimal rate depends on the DGP, and we lack simple theoretical results to guide us.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

GapA(µ/σ, ρ) = bE

|bSA −SOPT|/(1 + SOPT)

,
where the explicit dependence of bSA and SOPT on µ/σ and ρ is not speciﬁed, and bE(·) denotes
the sample average computed over Monte Carlo simulations. This formula measures error as
relative percentages of SOPT when SOPT is signiﬁcantly large (i.e., signiﬁcantly greater than
1). Conversely, when SOPT is small (i.e., oP(1)), the error is gauged in absolute terms. This
approach ensures meaningful error measurment if SOPT diverges or diminishes depending on
the parameters involved.
To evaluate the asymptotic behavior of various estimators, we also report a measure of
the estimation error:
RMSEA(µ/σ, ρ) =

bE(bSA −SA)/(1 + SOPT)
2
+ d
Var

bSA/(1 + SOPT)
1/2
,
where d
Var(·) denotes the sample variance across Monte Carlo repetitions.
Table 1 presents the maximum performance gap and estimation error across all values
of µ/σ and ρ.
The results consistently show that OPT has the smallest gap to optimal
performance in comparison to CSR, BH, or Lasso. Lasso ranks second, while CSR and BH
exhibit signiﬁcantly poorer performance. Notably, as T increases from 2 years to 20 years, the
maximum gap of OPT decreases from 0.381 to 0.152 for N = 1, 000, and from 0.276 to 0.127
for N = 3, 000. In contrast, as N increases, the performance of the latter three methods tends
to deteriorate. This trend can be attributed to an increasing theoretical performance gap,
quantiﬁed as |SA−SOPT|/(1+SOPT), that plays a dominating role. Indeed, the bottom panel
of the table illustrate that the estimation error asymptotically diminishes with increasing N.
Finally, Figure 6 reports the sample average of estimation error
bS⋆−S⋆ 1 + S⋆
over
Monte Carlo simulations for each value of µ/σ and ρ. The results conﬁrm the consistency
result in Proposition 1.
The relative error remains small when S⋆is large or moderate
(signiﬁcantly greater than 1). Conversely, near the bottom right corner of Figure 6, where S⋆
is essentially zero as shown by Figures 1 and 2, the estimation proves more challenging. In
this scenario, the error, becoming absolute (S⋆<< 1), is notably larger due to a signiﬁcant
upward bias that is diﬃcult to mitigate in ﬁnite sample.
4
Empirical Analysis of US Equities
To demonstrate the empirical relevance of the statistical limit of arbitrage, we analyze US
monthly equity returns. Our analysis is divided into two parts: the ﬁrst focuses on individual
equity returns, and the second utilizes portfolios as test assets. Employing portfolios allows us
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

N = 1, 000
N = 3, 000
T = 2
T = 5
T = 10
T = 20
T = 2
T = 5
T = 10
T = 20
supµ/σ,ρ GapA(µ/σ, ρ)
OPT
0.381
0.243
0.171
0.152
0.276
0.228
0.143
0.127
CSR
0.622
0.586
0.532
0.477
0.462
0.604
0.610
0.562
BH
0.739
0.759
0.743
0.704
0.781
0.822
0.814
0.791
Lasso
0.396
0.259
0.176
0.154
0.298
0.265
0.159
0.172
supµ/σ,ρ RMSEA(µ/σ, ρ)
OPT
0.521
0.445
0.441
0.446
0.333
0.346
0.273
0.236
CSR
128
0.165
0.211
0.264
0.093
0.075
0.086
0.105
BH
0.492
0.436
0.440
0.442
0.359
0.347
0.263
0.248
Lasso
0.521
0.435
0.439
0.444
0.336
0.356
0.302
0.241
Table 1: Simulation Results
Note: The top panel displays the maximum Sharpe Ratio gap, deﬁned as supµ/σ,ρ GapA(µ/σ, ρ), across all
values of µ/σ and ρ shown in Figure 1. Similarly, the lower panel details the maximum root-mean-squared
error, deﬁned as supµ/σ,ρ RMSEA(µ/σ, ρ). Here, A represents the methods OPT, CSR, BH, or Lasso for
various combinations of N and T (measured in years). The OPT and Lasso methods employ a validation
procedure to determine the optimal tuning parameters. The BH method ensures control of the false discovery
rate at a 5% level.
10.95
 8.22
 5.48
 4.38
 3.29
 2.74
 2.19
 1.92
 1.64
 1.37
 1.10
 0.99
 0.88
 0.77
 0.66
 0.55
 0.44
 0.33
 0.22
 0.16
 0.11
50.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
 7.50
 5.00
 2.50
 1.25
 1.00
 0.75
 0.50
 0.25
 0.12
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.10
0.21
0.23
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.09
0.19
0.20
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.09
0.18
0.16
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.08
0.17
0.14
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.06
0.03
0.01
0.09
0.15
0.10
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.09
0.14
0.07
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.08
0.10
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.06
0.04
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.07
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.05
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.04
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.14
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.06
0.05
0.10
0.21
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.08
0.13
0.24
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.06
0.08
0.11
0.11
0.17
0.28
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.03
0.09
0.11
0.15
0.16
0.21
0.32
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.13
0.15
0.19
0.20
0.26
0.36
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.09
0.18
0.21
0.25
0.26
0.31
0.41
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.03
0.15
0.25
0.27
0.31
0.33
0.38
0.46
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.06
0.10
0.23
0.33
0.35
0.38
0.40
0.44
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.06
0.12
0.17
0.22
0.34
0.43
0.45
0.01
0.07
0.11
0.14
0.21
0.25
0.30
0.41
0.09
0.19
0.23
0.26
0.32
0.36
0.41
0.51
0.47
0.49
0.52
0.57
0.49
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.60
0.50
0.55
0.57
0.58
0.59
0.61
0.64
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Figure 6: Comparison between bS⋆and S⋆
Note: The ﬁgure reports the sample average of
bS⋆−S⋆ 1 + S⋆
over Monte Carlo repetitions. The
simulation setting is based on model (5), in which a 100 × ρ% of assets have αs that correspond to an
annualized Sharpe ratio µ/σ ×
√
12. In this experiment, N = 1, 000 and T = 20 years.
to explore scenarios where alphas are linear functions of characteristics, aligning our approach
with the common empirical practice of predicting alphas based on such characteristics. We
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

begin our discussion with a description of the datasets.
4.1
US Equity Data
Our monthly equity sample covers the period from January 1965 to December 2020. For
individual equities, we utilize a multi-factor model with observable factor loadings, closely
resembling the widely used MSCI Barra model. Speciﬁcally, we use 16 characteristics and 11
GICS sectors, drawing on both empirical insights from existing asset pricing literature and industry practice. The selected characteristics include market beta, size, operating proﬁts/book
equity, book equity/market equity, asset growth, momentum, short-term reversal, industry
momentum, illiquidity, leverage, return seasonality, sales growth, accruals, dividend yield,
tangibility, and idiosyncratic risk, which are downloaded directly from the website openassetpricing.com (Stock-level Signal Datasets August 2023 Release).Details on the construction of
these characteristics can be found in Chen and Zimmermann (2020).
We download monthly return data for individual equities from CRSP and apply several
preprocessing steps. First, in the case of delistings, we use the delisting return as the ﬁnal
return in the delisting month. Next, we merge the returns data with the aforementioned
characteristics database using permnos, which yields an average of 6,540 unique permnos per
month. We then apply standard ﬁlters (require share codes 10 and 11, and exchange codes
1, 2, and 3) to reﬁne the dataset. This process selectively removes returns for certain months
from stocks that fail to meet these criteria during those periods. After applying these ﬁlters,
the average number of stocks remaining per month totals 4,756.
We address missing characteristics in our dataset with an approach that avoids forwardlooking bias. If GICS codes are missing, we use the most recent records available before the
data is missing, but we do not copy records backwards in time. Observations that do not
have a GICS code after this procedure are excluded, which predominantly aﬀects records
before 1990. With GICS codes in place, we implement a two-step procedure to address other
missing characteristics. We ﬁll each missing characteristic with the sector-wise median for
that characteristic each month. If a characteristic’s values are missing for an entire sector in
a given month, we use the cross-sectional median from all stocks for that month. After these
preprocessing steps, the average number of stocks per month is reduced to 4,095.
Characteristics-sorted portfolio returns are directly downloaded from the website openassetpricing.com under the “Portfolio Return Datasets” section. The dataset comprises 1,322
portfolios, spanning the years from 1965 to 2020. The portfolios are long-only and sorted
based on 212 characteristics, including 49 industry indicators. The number of portfolios per
characteristic varies depending on the speciﬁcations in the original papers that introduced
each characteristic. Additionally, some portfolios may contain missing values due to a lack of
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

observations in certain categories. We use value-weighted portfolios to avoid high exposure
to illiquid small stocks.
4.2
Analysis of Individual Equity Returns
We consider a speciﬁc version of the model as deﬁned in (2), setting αt as constant and βt
as observable. Each month, we regress next month’s returns on the 27 predictors, using all
stocks present in the current month’s cross-section, and including an intercept. We normalize
the 16 characteristics within each cross-section to mitigate the impact of extreme outliers.
This normalization transforms the characteristics to follow a normal distribution.32
Figure 7 plots the time series of the cross-sectional regression R2s over time. The R2 has
declined since the beginning of the sample until the 1990s. This coincides with an increase
in the number of stocks in US equity markets. The R2s are moderately low, with an average
of 8.07%, which suggests that a substantial portion of cross-sectional variation of individual
equity returns is idiosyncratic. Therefore, learning alphas from residuals of the factor model
is a diﬃcult statistical task.
1970-02
1977-05
1984-08
1991-11
1999-03
2006-06
2013-09
2020-12
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Figure 7: Time-series of the Cross-sectional R2s
Note: The ﬁgure provides a time series of the cross-sectional R2s for individual equity returns, derived
from regressing next month’s returns against 27 ﬁrm-level characteristics in cross-sectional regressions.
32For each characteristic ci,t, the normalization applies the functional form Φ−1(rank(ci,t)), where Φ−1(·)
is the inverse of the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution.
Compared to
uniform normalization, this approach leads to slightly improved cross-sectional R2 values, thereby providing
a more accurate representation of realized returns. It is important to note, however, that the speciﬁc form of
normalization does not signiﬁcantly impact subsequent results on arbitrage Sharpe ratios.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

4.2.1
Rare and Weak Alphas
We now study the statistical properties of individual equity alphas using the full sample data.
For each stock, we collect its regression residuals and take their average as an estimate for
its alpha. We require at least 60 observations. This ensures a suﬃciently large sample size
for inference on alpha, although the empirical distribution of alphas’ t-statistics turns out be
insensitive to this requirement. Figure 8 provides histograms of the t-statistics and Sharpe
ratios for alphas of all 12,734 stocks in our sample that meet this criterion. Because these
stocks have diﬀerent sample sizes, the histograms of the Sharpe ratios are not simply the
scaled version of the histogram of the t-statistics.
Only 7.58% of the t-statistics exceed 2.0 in magnitude, and more than 1.12% exceed 3.0.
This suggests that truly signiﬁcant alphas are extremely rare. Moreover, the largest Sharpe
ratio among all individual stocks’ alphas is approximately 1.86. Notably, only 0.71% of the
alphas have a Sharpe ratio greater than 1.0. These summary statistics suggest that rare and
weak alpha is perhaps the most relevant scenario in practice.
Student t-Statistics
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Sharpe Ratios
-2
-1
0
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Figure 8: Histograms of the t-Statistics and Sharpe Ratios of Estimated Alphas
Note: The ﬁgure provides the histograms of the Student t-statistics (left) and Sharpe ratios (right) of
estimated alphas for all tickers in our sample with at least 60 months of data. The total number of tickers
available is 12,734.
Alphas are meaningless without reference to a speciﬁc factor model. While our analysis
includes only 27 ﬁrm-level characteristics, constructing a factor model with additional characteristics would transform “alpha” into risk premia. Put it diﬀerently, extracting additional
“factors” from returns would result in even rarer and weaker alphas.
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

4.2.2
Modest Feasible vs. Large Infeasible Sharpe Ratios
We now compare arbitrage portfolios based on various strategies discussed in Section 2.7.
At the end of each month, we construct optimal portfolio weights using these strategies.
These weights are estimated monthly with a 60-month rolling window, and the portfolios are
rebalanced accordingly.33 Both Lasso and OPT methods require a tuning parameter, which
is selected annually. For this purpose, the ﬁnal year of the rolling window is set aside as the
validation sample to optimize the tuning parameter selection.
All these strategies yield modest Sharpe ratios. OPT reaches the top of the chart, yielding
0.82, followed by CSR at 0.70. The BH and Lasso approaches obtain Sharpe ratios of 0.65
and 0.62, respectively. To compare cumulative returns, we normalize all strategies to have
the same (ex-post) volatility. The resulting time-series of normalized cumulative returns are
shown in Figure 14. Notably, most returns are generated during the late 1980s to early 2000s.
After 2005, the cumulative returns of all strategies tend to plateau, indicating a decrease in
proﬁtability of statistical arbitrage.
A detailed examination of these strategies oﬀers further insights. The BH strategy is
highly conservative; over 51 years of out-of-sample trading (from January 1970 to December
2020), there are 284 months with zero holdings. The maximum number of stocks held in any
month is 32, with an average of only 6 stocks during months when holdings are non-zero. In
contrast, the CSR and OPT strategies hold all stocks that meet the sample criteria, averaging
2,833 stocks per month. The number of stocks held by the Lasso strategy is notably volatile,
ranging from none to almost all stocks in a given month, with an average of 722 stocks per
month. This volatility reﬂects the underlying weakness in their alphas, whose estimates are
prone to ﬂuctuate with diﬀerent samples.
In contrast to the simulation study where performance of strategies are evaluated over
a large class of DGPs, results presented in the empirical analysis here all originate from a
single DGP, i.e. the real market. Given the strong performance of CSR and the weaker
performance of BH, it is likely that the alphas in reality are rare and weak to the extent that
CSR is rather close to the optimal strategy. In this case, Lasso could only perform equally
well as CSR if we were able to select the optimal tuning, i.e., zero, (no selection or shrinkage),
which cross-validation cannot reliably achieve in all rolling windows. If we lived in a market
where its DGP makes CSR suboptimal in many rolling windows, Lasso would have a chance
to outperform, given its ability to achieve optimality within a larger class of DGPs.
We also estimate the perceived or infeasible Sharpe ratios using (21) within the same 60month rolling window. Our estimate, eS⋆, averages 4.81 (with negative estimates truncated
33Empirical results based on 36- and 84-month windows are reported in Table A2 in the appendix for
robustness checks.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

1970-02
1977-05
1984-08
1991-11
1999-03
2006-06
2013-09
2020-12
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Cumulative Return
CSR
LASSO
BH
OPT
Figure 9: Normalized Cumulative Returns of Arbitrage Portfolios
Note: This ﬁgure compares the cumulative returns of OPT (black solid), CSR (red dotted), BH (green
dashed), and Lasso (blue dot-dashed) strategies. We normalize all returns by their realized volatilities
calculated by the square root of the sum of the squared returns over the entire sample, only for comparison
purpose.
at 0), but it can occasionally exceed 16.0. These estimates are much higher than the feasible
Sharpe ratios (0.6 ∼0.8) we obtain for any of these strategies. This supports our theoretical
prediction that the impact of statistical learning alone can eliminate a substantial portion of
investment opportunities.
4.3
Analysis of Portfolio Returns
When portfolios are chosen as test assets, we opt for latent factor models due to the absence of natural choices of their factors or factor exposures. This approach aligns with the
return generating process presented in (1) but with unknown β and vt. Our factor model
estimation step follows Algorithm 4 outlined in Giglio et al. (2021). We estimate this model
using a 60-month rolling window, consistent with the main empirical analysis above.34 Using
the estimated factor loadings from each rolling window, we then conduct a cross-sectional
regression of the average returns over this window against these loadings, augmented with a
column of ones, to determine the risk premia of the latent factors, the zero-beta rate, and
the residuals, which serve as estimates for α’s. It is important to note that these loadings
34Results based on alternative 3-year and 7-year windows, which show similar outcomes, are reported in
Tables A1 and A2 in the appendix for reference.
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

are identiﬁable only up to a rotation; hence, we report only those results that are invariant
to such rotations, for instance, R2 values and summary statistics for α’s.
4.3.1
Portfolio Alphas
These latent factor models demonstrate substantial in-sample cross-sectional explanatory
power for expected returns,35 accounting for an average of approximately 48% of the crosssection variation in average returns across all rolling windows, with 10 factors.36 This results
in notably smaller Sharpe ratios for the alphas compared to the portfolios’ own Sharpe ratios.
Figure 10 contrasts the histograms of their respective Sharpe ratios. Notably, the distribution
of the alphas’ Sharpe ratios in darker gray exhibits thinner tails compared to those of the
portfolios’ Sharpe ratios in lighter gray.
We then apply the same algorithms to the portfolios’ alphas that we previously used
for individual stocks. The normalized cumulative returns are displayed in Figure 11. All
strategies earn substantially higher Sharpe ratios than those achieved with individual stocks.
Notably, the OPT strategy once again leads, yielding a Sharpe ratio of 1.71, closely followed
by CSR at 1.67. Meanwhile, the BH and Lasso strategies register Sharpe ratios of 1.49 and
1.18, respectively.
Next, we visualize the average portfolio weights over time using a heatmap in Figure 12.
The portfolios in this ﬁgure are sorted by the average weight they receive with the OPT
method, with the highest positive weights on top and the biggest negative weights at the
bottom. The ﬁgure shows that both OPT and CSR exhibit similar allocation patterns, with
non-zero weights assigned to many portfolios. However, OPT, which applies shrinkage to
portfolio alphas, tends to assign smaller weights than CSR. Due to the absence of shrinkage,
CSR has consistently higher weights than all other methods. As previously mentioned, CSR
achieves the same Sharpe ratio as ridge, because uniform shrinkage of all assets’ alphas does
not aﬀect the Sharpe ratio. BH selects a narrower range of portfolios, most of which have zero
or near-zero weights, indicating a highly selective strategy. Lasso, although less conservative
than BH, also shows lighter colors on the heatmap, reﬂecting a signiﬁcant level of selection
and shrinkage in the portfolio weights.
Among all characteristics, those assigned higher positive weights by these methods include
portfolios sorted by dividend seasonality identiﬁed by Hartzmark and Solomon (2013), price
as discussed in Blume and Husic (1973), intangible return from Daniel and Titman (2006),
gross proﬁts to total assets analyzed by Novy-Marx (2013), and industry return of big ﬁrms
35This is diﬀerent from the cross-section R2 with observable characteristics reported for individual equities,
which represents the (in-sample) explanatory power for realized returns.
36Results for models with varying numbers of factors are included in Tables A1 and A2 in the appendix
for comparison.
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Figure 10: Sharpe Ratios of Portfolio Returns and Alphas
Note: This ﬁgure compares the histograms of the Sharpe ratios of portfolios’ returns and their alphas.
1970-01
1977-04
1984-08
1991-11
1999-02
2006-05
2013-09
2020-12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Cumulative Return
CSR
LASSO
BH
OPT
Figure 11: Normalized Cumulative Returns of Arbitrage Portfolios
Note: This ﬁgure compares the cumulative returns of OPT (black solid), CSR (red dotted), BH (green
dashed), and Lasso (blue dot-dashed) strategies. We normalize all returns by their realized volatilities
calculated by the square root of the sum of the squared returns over the entire sample, only for comparison
purpose. The base assets for each strategy are all portfolios sorted by characteristics.
studied in Hou (2007). Conversely, the characteristics with the most negative weights in42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

BH
CSR
LASSO
OPT
Portfolio Weights
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure 12: Average Weights Assigned to Portfolios by Diﬀerent Methods
Note: This ﬁgure displays a heatmap that shows the average portfolio weights over time for portfolios
sorted by characteristics, formed using BH, CSR, Lasso, and OPT methods.
clude portfolios sorted by spinoﬀs documented by Cusatis et al. (1993), past trading volume
from Brennan et al. (1998), initial public oﬀerings from Ritter (1991), size from Dharan and
Ikenberry (1995), and exchange switch as in Banz (1981).
4.3.2
Accounting for Publication Eﬀects
Many of the characteristics used in the construction of the portfolio return data set were
introduced to the academic literature later in the sample period. For this reason, the above
analysis may overstate achievable Sharpe ratios. If arbitrageurs were not aware of the predictive power of these characteristics in the early parts of the sample, these Sharpe ratios
were not truly achievable. Moreover, academics’ discovery of the predictive power of these
characteristics could potentially reﬂect ex-post selection bias, rendering the in-sample predictive power spurious. To address this issue, we revise our portfolio analysis to only include
characteristics from the year following their publication. Except for the 49 industry portfolios
(assumed) available since 1965, few portfolios were introduced in earlier years. As illustrated
in Figure 13, a signiﬁcant number of these characteristics were introduced after 2000.
With this adjusted approach, the Sharpe ratios for the OPT and CSR are now substantially lower at 0.61 and 0.66, respectively. These magnitudes align more closely with the
Sharpe ratios we obtained from individual stocks. The Lasso and BH strategies now achieve
only 0.45 and 0.35, respectively. Consistent with McLean and Pontiﬀ(2016), this suggests
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

that some of the initial discoveries of signals may have been “lucky,” performing well insample but then failing to replicate this success out-of-sample, or that competition among
arbitrageurs shrinks the alphas once the discoveries become public.
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Number of Portfolios
Original
Adjusted
Figure 13: Number of Portfolios Before and After Adjusting for Publication Years
Note: This ﬁgure plots two curves: one showing the total monthly count of characteristics-sorted portfolios
and the other displaying the count adjusted for only those portfolios whose characteristics have been
previously published.
Figure 15 shows infeasible Sharpe ratios estimated both before and after adjusting for
publication eﬀects. Before this adjustment, the infeasible Sharpe ratio is consistently above
20, but after this adjustment, including characteristics only after their publication year, it is
much lower in the early part of the sample, starting around 5 in the early 1970s. As more
signals are discovered over time, the infeasible Sharpe ratio increases, eventually reaching
levels similar to those estimated without adjustment.
Despite these adjustments, a signiﬁcant gap still exists between the theoretical infeasible
Sharpe ratios that range from 5 to 20 and the achievable Sharpe ratios, which are smaller than
0.7. This highlights the quantitative relevance of statistical limits of arbitrage in real-world
scenarios. The large reduction in Sharpe ratios suggests that statistical limits may play an
even more critical role than publication eﬀects for characterizing the investment opportunities
that are actually feasible for arbitrageurs.
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

1970-01
1977-04
1984-08
1991-11
1999-02
2006-05
2013-09
2020-12
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Cumulative Return
CSR
LASSO
BH
OPT
Figure 14: Normalized Cumulative Returns of Arbitrage Portfolios
Note: This ﬁgure compares the cumulative returns of OPT (black solid), CSR (red dotted), BH (green
dashed), and Lasso (blue dot-dashed) strategies. We normalize all returns by their realized volatilities
calculated by the square root of the sum of the squared returns over the entire sample, only for comparison
purpose. The base assets only include portfolios sorted by characteristics that were previously published.
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Sharpe Ratio
Original
Adjusted
Figure 15: Time Series Plots of Infeasible Sharpe Ratios
Note: This ﬁgure compares the Infeasible Sharpe ratios on the basis of portfolios before and after adjusting
for publication years.
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

5
Conclusion
Taking stock, our paper provides a new theoretical framework for understanding the implications of statistical learning in asset pricing. Rather than endowing arbitrageurs with perfect
knowledge of DGP parameters, we expose them to the challenge of learning about alphas.
Arbitrageurs in reality arguably face a high-dimensional world, with many assets and many
alpha signals, which can make statistical learning diﬃcult. These diﬃculties give rise to statistical limits of arbitrage, which manifest as a gap between the infeasible Sharpe ratio that
arbitrageurs could earn with perfect knowledge of alphas and the feasible Sharpe ratio that
arbitrageurs can attain with statistical learning.
While high-dimensional, the linear factor model environment that arbitrageurs face in our
analysis is still quite simple. The gap between feasible and infeasible Sharpe ratios would
further increase if arbitrageurs faced additional statistical challenges, e.g., model misspeciﬁcation, omitted factors, weak factors, or a large non-sparse idiosyncratic covariance matrix.
Our approach to characterizing the feasible Sharpe ratio is in important ways diﬀerent
from other analyses of statistical learning in asset pricing. Many papers applying machine
learning methods in the construction of trading strategies have documented impressive Sharpe
ratios.
Such strategies often rely on ad-hoc model design (e.g., a neural network with a
speciﬁc architecture) and tuning parameters selection. In this regard, the empirical analysis
can at best provide a “lower bound” on the performance of machine learning strategies. Our
paper provides a theoretical framework to understand the “upper bound” on the performance
of any statistical learning strategy in the speciﬁc context of arbitrage pricing theory.
In
an equilibrium model, this upper bound in turn would be tied to the compensation that
arbitrageurs require in equilibrium, giving it an important economic interpretation.
In addition to the optimal strategy that attains the feasible Sharpe ratio, we also examine,
theoretically and empirically, the performance of other portfolio construction approaches that
rely multiple testing correction, variable selection, and shrinkage. While these approaches are
well motivated statistically, they do not perform as well as the optimal strategy in economic
terms, as measured by the Sharpe ratio. This ﬁnding highlights that good statistical properties, such as, for example, with regards to Type I and Type II errors or the false discovery
rate, do not necessarily translate into good economic performance. For instance, a statistical
procedure that guards against false discoveries may be overly conservative for investment
purposes. This divergence between statistical and economic objectives suggests some caution
when applying statistical tools imported from other areas—as in the current machine learning
literature in asset pricing—without proper consideration of the economic objectives.
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

References
Andrews, D. W. K., X. Cheng, and P. Guggenberger (2020). Generic results for establishing
the asymptotic size of conﬁdence sets and tests. Journal of Econometrics 218(2), 496–531.
Andrews, R. L., J. C. Arnold, and R. G. Krutchkoﬀ(1972). Shrinkage of the posterior mean
in the normal case. Biometrika 59(3), 693–695.
Avramov, D. and G. Zhou (2010). Bayesian portfolio analysis. Annual Review of Financial
Economics 2(1), 25–47.
Bajgrowicz, P. and O. Scaillet (2012, December). Technical trading revisited False discoveries,
persistence tests, and transaction costs. Journal of Financial Economics 106(3), 473–491.
Banz, R. W. (1981). The relationship between return and market value of common stocks.
Journal of ﬁnancial economics 9(1), 3–18.
Barras, L., O. Scaillet, and R. Wermers (2010). False discoveries in mutual fund performance:
Measuring luck in estimated alphas. Journal of Finance 65(1), 179–216.
Bekker, P. A. (1994). Alternative approximations to the distributions of instrumental variable
estimators. Econometrica 62(3), 657–681.
Benjamini, Y. and Y. Hochberg (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological) 57(1), 289–300.
Berger, J. O. (1985). Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis. Springer.
Black, F. and R. Litterman (1992). Global portfolio optimization. Financial Analysts Journal 48(5), 28–43.
Blume, M. E. and F. Husic (1973).
Price, beta, and exchange listing.
The Journal of
Finance 28(2), 283–299.
Brennan, M. J., T. Chordia, and A. Subrahmanyam (1998). Alternative factor speciﬁcations,
security characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of ﬁnancial
Economics 49(3), 345–373.
Brown, L. D. and E. Greenshtein (2009). Nonparametric empirical Bayes and compound
decision approaches to estimation of a high-dimensional vector of normal means.
The
Annals of Statistics 37(4), 1685 – 1704.
47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Chamberlain, G. and M. Rothschild (1983). Arbitrage, factor structure, and mean-variance
analysis on large asset markets. Econometrica 51, 1281–1304.
Chen, A. Y. and T. Zimmermann (2020). Open source cross-sectional asset pricing. Available
at SSRN .
Chen, X., L. P. Hansen, and P. G. Hansen (2021a). Robust identiﬁcation of investor beliefs.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117(52), 33130–33140.
Chen, X., L. P. Hansen, and P. G. Hansen (2021b). Robust inference for moment condition
models without rational expectations. Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
Collin-Dufresne, P., M. Johannes, and L. A. Lochstoer (2016). Parameter learning in general
equilibrium: The asset pricing implications. American Economic Review 106(3), 664–698.
Connor, G., M. Hagmann, and O. Linton (2012). Eﬃcient semiparametric estimation of the
fama-french model and extensions. Econometrica 80(2), 713–754.
Connor, G. and R. A. Korajczyk (1986). Performance measurement with the arbitrage pricing
theory: A new framework for analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 15(3), 373–394.
Cusatis, P. J., J. A. Miles, and J. R. Woolridge (1993). Restructuring through spinoﬀs: The
stock market evidence. Journal of ﬁnancial economics 33(3), 293–311.
Daniel, K. and S. Titman (2006). Market reactions to tangible and intangible information.
The Journal of Finance 61(4), 1605–1643.
Dharan, B. G. and D. L. Ikenberry (1995). The long-run negative drift of post-listing stock
returns. The Journal of Finance 50(5), 1547–1574.
Donoho, D. and J. Jin (2004). Higher criticism for detecting sparse heterogeneous mixtures.
Annals of Statistics 32(3), 962–994.
Efron, B. (2011). Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 106(496), 1602–1614.
Efron, B. (2019). Bayes, Oracle Bayes and Empirical Bayes. Statistical Science 34(2), 177 –
201.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33(1), 3–56.
48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Fan, J., Y. Liao, and J. Yao (2015). Power enhancement in high-dimensional cross-sectional
tests. Econometrica 83(4), 1497–1541.
Frost, P. A. and J. E. Savarino (1986). An empirical bayes approach to eﬃcient portfolio
selection. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21(3), 293–305.
Gagliardini, P., E. Ossola, and O. Scaillet (2016). Time-varying risk premium in large crosssectional equity datasets. Econometrica 84(3), 985–1046.
Gibbons, M. R., S. A. Ross, and J. Shanken (1989). A test of the eﬃciency of a given portfolio.
Econometrica 29, 1121–1152.
Giglio, S., B. Kellly, and D. Xiu (2022). Factor models, machine learning, and asset pricing.
Annual Review of Financial Economics 14, 337–368.
Giglio, S., Y. Liao, and D. Xiu (2021).
Thousands of alpha tests.
Review of Financial
Studies 34(7), 3456–3496.
Giglio, S. and D. Xiu (2021). Asset pricing with omitted factors. Journal of Political Economy 129(7), 1947–1990.
Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2010). Limits of arbitrage. Annual Review of Financial Economics 2, 251–275.
Guijarro-Ordonez, J., M. Pelger, and G. Zanotti (2022). Deep learning statistical arbitrage.
Technical report, Stanford University.
Hansen, L. P. (2007). Beliefs, doubts, and learning: Valuing macroeconomic risk. American
Economic Review 97(2), 1–30.
Hansen, L. P. (2014). Nobel lecture: Uncertainty outside and inside economic models. Journal
of Political Economy 122(51), 945–987.
Hartzmark, S. M. and D. H. Solomon (2013). The dividend month premium. Journal of
Financial Economics 109(3), 640–660.
Harvey, C. R. and Y. Liu (2020).
False (and missed) discoveries in ﬁnancial economics.
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Harvey, C. R., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu (2016). ... and the cross-section of expected returns.
Review of Financial Studies 29(1), 5–68.
49
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Hou, K. (2007). Industry information diﬀusion and the lead-lag eﬀect in stock returns. The
review of ﬁnancial studies 20(4), 1113–1138.
Huberman, G. (1982). A simple approach to arbitrage pricing theory. Journal of Economic
Thoery 28(1), 183–191.
Imbens, G. W. and C. F. Manski (2004). Conﬁdence intervals for partially identiﬁed parameters. Econometrica 72(6), 1845–1857.
Ingersoll, J. E. (1984).
Some results in the theory of arbitrage pricing.
Journal of Finance 39(4), 1021–1039.
Johns, M. V. (1957). Non-parametric empirical bayes procedures. Annals of Mathematical
Statistics 28, 649–669.
Jorion, P. (1986). Bayes-stein estimation for portfolio analysis. The Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 21(3), 279–292.
Kan, R., X. Wang, and G. Zhou (2022). Optimal portfolio choice with estimation risk: No
risk-free asset case. Management Science, forthcoming.
Kan, R. and G. Zhou (2007). Optimal portfolio choice with parameter uncertainty. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42(3), 621–656.
Kelly, B., S. Pruitt, and Y. Su (2019). Some characteristics are risk exposures, and the rest
are irrelevant. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Kim, S., R. Korajczyk, and A. Neuhierl (2020). Arbitrage portfolios. Review of Financial
Studies, forthcoming.
Kozak, S. and S. Nagel (2023). When do cross-sectional asset pricing factors span the stochastic discount factor? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Leeb, H. and B. M. P¨otscher (2005).
Model selection and inference: Facts and ﬁction.
Econometic Theory 21(1), 21–59.
Martin, I. and S. Nagel (2021). Market eﬃciency in the age of big data. Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
McLean, R. D. and J. Pontiﬀ(2016). Does academic research destroy stock return predictability? The Journal of Finance 71(1), 5–32.
50
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Novy-Marx, R. (2013). The other side of value: The gross proﬁtability premium. Journal of
ﬁnancial economics 108(1), 1–28.
Pastor, L. (2000). Portfolio selection and asset pricing models. The Journal of Finance 55(1),
179–223.
Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2000). Comparing asset pricing models: An investment
perspective. Journal of Financial Economics 56, 335–381.
Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2009). Learning in ﬁnancial markets. Annual Review of Financial
Economics 1(1), 361–381.
Pesaran, H. and T. Yamagata (2017). Testing for alpha in linear factor pricing models with
a large number of securities. Technical report.
Ritter, J. R. (1991). The long-run performance of initial public oﬀerings. The journal of
ﬁnance 46(1), 3–27.
Robbins, H. (1956).
An empirical bayes approach to statistics.
Berkeley Symposium on
Mathematical Statistics and Probability 3, 157–163.
Robertson, T., R. Dykstra, and F. Wright (1988). Order restricted statistical inference. New
York: Wiley.
Rosenberg, B. (1974). Extra-market components of covariance in security returns. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 9(2), 263–274.
Ross, S. A. (1976).
The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing.
Journal of Economic
Theory 13(3), 341–360.
Shanken, J. (1992).
The current state of the arbitrage pricing theory.
Journal of Finance 47(4), 1569–1574.
Staiger, D. and J. H. Stock (1997). Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.
Econometrica 65(3), 557–586.
Tu, J. and G. Zhou (2010). Incorporating economic objectives into bayesian priors: Portfolio
choice under parameter uncertainty. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45(4), 959–986.
Tukey, J. W. (1976). The higher criticism. course notes, statistics 411. Technical report,
Princeton University.
51
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007

Zhang, C.-H. (1997). Empirical bayes and compound estimation of normal means. Statistica
Sinica 7(1), 181–193.
52
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4994007
