Trading AI: Machine Knowledge Capital and the Trading 
System 
Dan Ciuriak and Anna Artyushina 
11 July 2023 
Paper presented at the Trade Law 4.0 Conference 
Georgetown University and the University of Lucerne, Washington DC, May 25-26, 2023  
Abstract: The year 2022 has been dubbed “the year AI got smart”. The year 2023 meanwhile is 
witnessing an explosion of concern about the governance of AI as large language models bring the 
science fiction future into everyday reality.  Developments include a call from Geoffrey Hinton, 
one of the originators of this foundational technology, for a moratorium on further development; 
a call for regulation of AI from Sam Altman, the CEO of OpenAI, the firm which released 
ChatGPT, an AI system that quickly gained 100 million users worldwide, making it the fastest 
growing app of all time; and a drumbeat of legislation dropping in various jurisdictions to govern 
AI. The year 2023 also got a foretaste of the potential trade frictions that lie ahead as various 
authorities banned or temporarily blocked use of ChatGPT and various groups such as artists and 
writers mobilized to safeguard their professional niches from generative AI applications. 
Previously, AI was seamlessly integrated into the trading system as the ubiquity of traded “smart” 
devices attests; however, this was at a lower level of AI. The technological advances in the power 
of AI systems in the late 2010s and early 2020s materially changed matters, ushering in a new 
economic age, one of machine knowledge capital. The trading system has experience in developing 
standards and procedures for dealing with risks related to new technologies, including the use of 
scientific evidence, the impact and risk assessments, the role of international standards, and the 
precautionary principle. It also has some experience with sorting out whether trade restrictions are 
legitimately for national security or other policy rationales protected under the WTO’s general 
exceptions clause as opposed to ordinary trade protectionism. However, the trade system has not 
yet caught up with the digital transformation, appears to be entirely unprepared to deal with the 
large powerful AI systems now emerging, and stands to be overwhelmed, given the acceleration 
of innovation. This paper comments on these developments and suggests how the trading system 
can prepare to adapt.  
Keywords: artificial intelligence, machine knowledge capital, international trade, WTO, dispute 
settlement, precautionary principle, national security  
JEL Codes: O32, O33, O38, K20, K21, K24 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

1 
 
1 Introduction 
“Around 2002 I attended a small party for Google—before its IPO, when it only focused on 
search. I struck up a conversation with Larry Page, Google’s brilliant cofounder, who 
became the company’s CEO in 2011. “Larry, I still don’t get it. There are so many search 
companies. Web search, for free? Where does that get you?” …  I was not the only avid user 
of its search site who thought it would not last long. But Page’s reply has always stuck with 
me: “Oh, we’re really making an AI”.” 
⎯ Kevin Kelly (2014)   
2023: “You need to imagine something more intelligent than us by the same difference that 
we’re more intelligent than a frog.”  
⎯ Geoffrey Hinton (quoted in Hern 2023)   
“The shift of our economy and society online is taking place without referendum. What could 
go wrong?  As it turns out, plenty.”  
⎯ Ciuriak and Wylie (2018). 
This exposition could probably stop there and imaginations could be left to run wild. There is, after 
all, no way to determine if a considered reflection at this time would improve upon imaginations 
running wild.  In the 1940s, Thomas Watson, the head of IBM, famously dismissed the possibility 
of a computer having any possible general application (Rosenberg 1996). The name “computer” 
came from the job description of human computers (Hicks 2017) tasked with calculating ballistics 
trajectories for artillery during WWII, and we still call these gadgets “computers”, just like the 
British still call a radio a “wireless” because of its original function of replacing telegraph wire.. 
But let’s get to it.  
The technological advances in scaling AI systems in the late 2010s and early 2020s materially 
changed economic and technological conditions, ushering in a new economic age, one of machine 
knowledge capital, in which we industrialize the production of the machine equivalent of human 
capital. This is huge. Examination of previous such transitions driven by introduction of a new 
form of capital (from land to the machinery of mass production through the original industrial 
revolution, to intangible intellectual property through the industrialization of research and 
development in the 1980s, and to data through the industrialization of learning around 2010) shows 
that literally everything changes – the organization of the economy, the structure of society, the 
location of wealth and power, and the contours of conflict (what nations fight over).   
Being forewarned is not, however, to be forearmed in this case. This is because of the acceleration 
in the pace of innovation. As of the fourth quarter of 2022, Baidu’s AI development platform, 
PaddlePaddle, was being used by more than 5.35 million developers and 200,000 enterprises, 
ranking first in terms of market share among deep learning platforms in China (there are others).  
Enlyft reports 33,205 companies that use TensorFlow, Google’s AI development platform, which 
appears to have about one-third of the market in North America and Europe. Meta released its 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

2 
 
powerful Llama AI system to researchers (Mc Gowran 2023), it was almost immediately leaked 
online on 4chan (Vincent 2023), and is now out there in the wild as a powerful AI development 
tool that had not yet been fine-tuned – i.e., it is in protean form.  
To be sure, there have been spectacular flops in AI development such as Meta Platforms’ 
withdrawal of its science large language model (LLM), Galactica, after just three days online, amid 
scathing criticism (Wodecki 2022; Heaven 2022). As well, the metaverse concept on which 
Facebook bet the farm has hardly panned out, with Microsoft and Disney shuttering their virtual 
reality operations and Meta seeing its stock fall precipitously in 2022.1 However, the massively 
parallel development of AI applications at the private sector level and supported by massive 
financial support from governments motivated by the military and national security arm’s race 
foreshadows a rogue wave of applications hitting the market. For example, even in the troubled 
metaverse area, Apple is about to release its own offering in 2023 (Hayward 2023). As for Meta 
itself, its share price soared in 2023 after it announced a successful pivot back to established AIdriven monetization (Di Pizio 2023). 
The year 2023 is also witnessing an explosion of concern about the governance of AI as large 
language models threaten to automate many white-collar jobs, contribute to an explosive growth 
of disinformation and misinformation online, transform existing data into so called “synthetic” 
data that is not covered by existing legal frameworks, and create new weapons. These concerns 
are reflected in the  call for a moratorium on further development of LLMs (FLI 2023), supported 
by Geoffrey Hinton, one of the originators of this foundational technology, who now considers it 
an “existential threat” to humanity (Heaven 2023); the call for regulation of AI from Sam Altman, 
the CEO of OpenAI, the firm which released ChatGPT, an AI system that quickly gained 100 
million users worldwide, making it the fastest growing app of all time up to that point (Kang 2023; 
Naughton 2023); and the drumbeat of legislation dropping in various jurisdictions to govern AI.  
However, not all AI experts share this apocalyptic view. For example, Chief Scientist at Meta, 
Yann LeCun, who was a co-recipient of the Turing award with Hinton and Bengio, does not believe 
artificial intelligence to be capable of destroying humanity (Heaven 2023). Others, such as former 
Google ethical AI researchers, Margaret Mitchell and Temnit Gebru (Olson 2023) argue that the 
biggest harms of generative AI come from the skewed and biased data used in the training of these 
systems, as well as the lack of transparency in their deployment.  
 
1 One may recall the history of the dot.com bubble. Prominent flops of the dot.com era include: Pets.com, an online 
retailer for pet supplies that went from an IPO price of $11/share to $0.19 at liquidation in 268 days (Lamare 2019); 
@Home which went public with a $1.2 billion market valuation in July 1997 (Lazarus 1997) and reached $22 billion 
at its peak before filing for bankruptcy in September 2001 (Taffler and Tuckett 2003); eToys, an online version of 
Toy ‘R Us, which went public in May 1999, reached an eventual market capitalization of over $10bn, and was declared 
worthless in February 2001 (Taffler and Tuckett 2003); and Webvan, an on-line grocery home delivery business which 
went public in November 1999, reached a market capitalization of $8 billion, 20,000 times its annualized revenues, 
and filed for Chapter 11 in July 2001 (Taffler and Tuckettt 2003). The lessons from the dot-com bust were primarily 
about business models and the hype cycle. With recent AI system flops, such as Galactica, the issues are at an earlier 
stage, namely technical proof of concept combined with the ethical and political issues that the public release of these 
systems has caused. The cautionary note is that we are still at hype stage and yet to get to the business problems. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

3 
 
Yet even the experts who are sceptical about the existential risks of artificial intelligence argue 
that AI will bring serious social and economic repercussions and requires proper governance 
mechanisms given the anticipated impact of the automation of human labour, commerce, and 
public services. 
Accordingly, it is not surprising that the year 2023 has also provided a taste of the trade frictions 
that lie ahead as various authorities have banned or temporarily blocked use of ChatGPT (e.g., 
Reuters 2023a) and various groups such as artists and writers have mobilized to safeguard their 
professional niches from generative AI applications (e.g., Cullins and Kilkenny 2023; Brittain 
2023). Although not all creative workers see generative AI as a threat – and some see it as an aide 
(Lucas 2023) – perhaps the worriers are right to be worried: 
“It just doesn't make sense to pay an artist and to wait three weeks if you can get it for 
essentially nothing” 
⎯ Tomer Hanuka, quoted in Thomas (2023)  
The trading system has experience in developing standards and procedures for dealing with risks 
related to new technologies, including the use of scientific evidence, the factors to be considered 
in assessing risk, the role of international standards, and the precautionary principle. It also has 
some experience with sorting out whether trade restrictions are legitimately for national security 
or other policy rationales protected under the general exceptions clause in the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) Agreement rather than ordinary trade protectionism. Moreover, dealing with 
the distributional issues as technological innovation threatens the livelihoods of those toiling in 
particular industries has long been central to trade policy making.  
Further, as the ubiquity of “smart” devices in our daily lives attests, AI has to date been seamlessly 
integrated into the trading system (Ciuriak and Rodionova 2020). However, this was at a lower 
level of AI – AI embedded in products that incrementally changed the competitive advantage of 
products and companies – not AI as a new form of capital, machine knowledge capital.  
Regardless of which turn the expected AI revolution will take, the trading system seems illprepared since it has not yet caught up to more mundane aspects of the digital transformation let 
alone having worked out how to deal with the likely pervasive impacts of powerful LLMs on 
knowledge work, which is the basis for social organization in the advanced economies. 
AI governance faces the unenviable challenge of dealing with everything, everywhere, all 
at once. Literally – not in the movie sense. 
This note is organized as follows. The next section makes the case that we are in a new economic 
era based on the introduction of a new factor of production and draws out the implications based 
on previous economic transformations of the same scale. It argues that the trading system has yet 
to catch up to the digital transformation and is wholly unprepared for the next stage of economic 
and technological evolution. Section 3 reviews the legislative initiatives being mounted to regulate 
AI and the implications for trade rules.  Section 4 considers the major gaps in current approaches 
and suggests how the trading system can prepare to adapt. Section 5 concludes. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

4 
 
2 The Age of Machine Knowledge Capital 
2.1 
New forms of capital define new economic eras for trade policy 
Modern economic history has witnessed four major transitions based on the introduction of a new, 
essential form of capital that is relatively scarce and captures economic rent (supernormal profit). 
Each one had profound implications for trade policy. 
The first major shift was from the agrarian age when land was the key capital asset to the industrial 
age starting ca. 1820 when the machinery of mass production and mechanization of transportation 
transformed the economy. The share of agriculture in global GDP fell from somewhere around 
50% in 1820 to 7% in 1980.2 In the leading industrial economy, the United States, it fell to about 
2.3% (Yuskavage and Fahim-Nader 2005). The term “capitalism” was coined to describe the new 
economic dynamics. And trade policy responded. 
• The quintessential trade policy shift in trade policy history was the repeal of the Corn Laws 
in the UK in 1846 as it moved to exploit its first mover advantage in industrialization. David 
Ricardo joined the trade policy pantheon with his pamphlet arguing for free trade on the basis 
of the UK’s comparative advantage in manufactures. 
• The mature industrial economy of the postwar era saw the leading industrialized countries, 
which had formed a club under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), press 
trade liberalization in manufactures while leaving agriculture protected for domestic policy 
reasons.3  Land went from being the source of wealth to a petitioner for protection. 
The second major shift was from the industrial age into the knowledge-based economy (KBE), 
starting around 1980. This era was ushered in by a number of developments in the United States 
– the adoption of the Bayh-Dole Act incentivizing US universities to commercialize their 
knowledge production (1980), the introduction of the IBM personal computer (1981), and the 
release of CAD-CAM software for the PC (1981-1982), which revolutionized industrial design. 
The result was a steep increase in the pace of patenting and a commensurately steep increase in 
the share of intangible assets in the value of corporations. Trade policy changed.  
• The United States as the leading KBE jurisdiction pushed for strengthened intellectual 
property (IP) protection abroad to capture international rents, starting with the Special 301 
Report, first published in 1989; ambitious targets for IP protection in the Fast Track/Trade 
Promotion Authority provided by Congress for US trade negotiators; and the introduction of 
IP protection into trade agreements, starting with the US-Canada Free Trade Agreement 
(1989), the NAFTA (1994), and the WTO TRIPS Agreement (1995). The United States also 
pushed strongly for the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA), which failed to 
 
2 Angus Maddison provides an estimate for 1870 of 39% for the present OECD economies and 49% for Asia in 1950. 
The latter is probably a reasonable estimate for pre-industrial OECD countries. See Maddison (2008).  
3 The United States did not want its New Deal agricultural policies disturbed, while the European Communities needed 
flexibility for protection of agriculture to implement its Common Agricultural Policy, a request that the US 
accommodated in the Dillon Round of GATT negotiations (Curtis 2002). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

5 
 
achieve ratification and remains dormant, and the progressive ratcheting up of criminal 
penalties for IP infringement in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement and elsewhere.  
• Whereas trade in the industrial economy is win-win, increased protection for IP is not. Thus, 
whereas countries worldwide voted with their feet to join the “made in the world” production 
system under the WTO, even paying for this by accepting IP disciplines that implied income 
transfer abroad, there was no appetite for further strengthening of IP protection in the WTO. 
This contributed significantly to the collapse of the Doha Round, and led to the strategic shift 
of the leading IP jurisdictions to move the action into preferential trade agreements where they 
had more leverage. The era of mega-regional trade agreements – and mega-regulation 
(Kingsbury et al. 2018) – was underway. 
As an important aside for trade policy, a rules-based system is acceptable to governments to 
allocate production and govern trade as long as there are no significant rents in the system. The 
mature industrial economy pre-1980 was a largely rent-free zone, characterized by the Kaldor facts 
(Kaldor 1961) – constant returns to scale and a constant labour share of income. The Kaldor facts 
ceased to hold in the KBE era. Ironically, the WTO was introduced when its best use date had 
already expired. 
And manufacturing, once the source of top hats for industrial tycoons, became a petitioner for 
protection. Notably, the age of anti-dumping starts around 1980.  In 1992, Stanley Shih bemoaned 
that production line manufacturing had now become the low-rent district in the economy while 
economic rents were captured by IP in the form of patents at the front end of the process of 
developing products and by IP in the form of branding at the back end in marketing products; rust 
belts emerged and wealth was showered on university towns. 
The third major shift was from the mature KBE to the data-driven economy (DDE), starting around 
2010. This also was initiated in the United States, whose corporations introduced the technological 
changes that made data the new essential form of capital – the development of deep learning 
(2006), captured by Google; the release of the iPhone by Apple (2007), which launched the mobile 
age; and the application of GPUs to power neural nets (2009), which made Nvidia a crown jewel 
in America’s innovation ecosystem (on 24 May 2023, Nvidia saw a one-day gain in its market 
capitalization on release of its latest quarterly financials equal to 1.5 times the market cap of Intel, 
just to put this into perspective; Efrati 2023).  
To mention just a few of the transformative changes in the economy and society: the volume of 
data flowing into the cloud soared; the cloud, which had been conceptualized in the mid-1990s, 
became a key part of economic infrastructure (Lehdonvirta 2022); the share of intangible assets in 
the value of corporations continued to grow even as the earnings on traditional IP were flattening 
out; unicorns (private companies with $1 billion valuation) ceased to be rare and came to be 
accompanied by “decacorns” (private companies with $10 billion valuations) and “hectacorns” 
(private companies with $100 billion valuations); and data came to be characterized as the “new 
oil” in economic applications and the “new plutonium” when applied to social and political 
purposes, including as a force multiplier for information warfare (Ciuriak 2023a). Trade policy 
changed again.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

6 
 
• Measures were introduced into trade agreements to require the free flow of data (allowing 
the leading data economies to capture data rents), prohibit data localization, and increase 
protection of trade secrets (the IP form of relevance for data and algorithms), alongside new 
safeguards for personal privacy and articulation of exceptions for national security.  
• However, the scale of potential data rents was such that a breakdown of a rules-based order 
was virtually guaranteed, especially given the national security ramifications of the new 
foundational technologies, and the rules-based order broke down on cue with the outbreak 
of a full-fledged technology war (we can’t be sure which was the shot and which was the 
chaser – rents or security – but that point is now moot). 
Where the KBE industrialized R&D by putting powerful new industrial design tools on the 
desktops of researchers throughout the country, the DDE industrialized learning itself. The action 
shifted to the tech campuses. And signs of stress started to appear in the fabric of the KBE economy 
as this recent story in the New York Times neatly documents (recall, the DDE starts around 2010). 
“Since 2009, when it had 7,346 students, the university has shrunk by nearly half. With the 
drop in enrollment has come the loss of nearly 200 staff members, mostly through attrition. 
Last year, the school even lost its name, as it was merged with two of the 13 other universities 
in the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education, creating a multicampus university 
called PennWest (DePillis 2023).  
The fourth major shift is now underway, from the data-driven economy to the era of machine 
knowledge capital, where maturing AI development is now ubiquitous, promising the widespread 
introduction of AI as a new form of capital asset. Recent quotes for AI development workstations 
from NVidia, pre-installed with the major AI development tools such as TensorFlow and PyTorch, 
are available for US$4,416.50 and up.4 This is the garage band era for AI and the world will change 
for trade policy. This complements the AI development by the superstar firms on their own account 
and their cloud-based “Software as a Service” (SaaS) offerings to upscale startups. 
Notably, the data-driven economy was enormously concentrative because of the steep economies 
of scale, powerful economies of scope, network externalities in many areas, and above all 
pervasive information asymmetry that gave data-rich companies an enormous competitive 
advantage. To underscore the latter point, in 2023, Meta Platforms share price almost doubled 
following its pivot back to AI and the news that its use of AI had improved the monetization 
efficiency of its Reels product on Instagram by 30% and on Facebook by 40% (Di Pizio 2023).  
The era of machine knowledge capital might be different in this regard. To be sure, it is an 
extension of the data-driven economy, just as the data-driven economy was an extension of the 
knowledge-based economy. However, the idea of AI workstations on the desktop of millions of 
developers worldwide reminds of the transition in innovation wrought by the dawn of the KBE 
when IBM PCs with CAD-CAM software landed on researchers’ desks. But let’s hit the pause 
 
4 Source: https://www.exxactcorp.com/category/Deep-Learning-NVIDIA-GPU-Workstations, accessed 21 May 
2023.  Prices undoubtedly subject to change. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

7 
 
button on letting imaginations run wild and turn to the state of preparedness of the trading system 
to deal with what will be momentous changes. 
2.2 
The Trading System is Behind the Curve on the Digital Transformation 
On a number of counts, the trading system has yet to catch up with the digital transformation and 
is thus ill-prepared for the era of machine knowledge capital. 
Trade law has yet to settle the status of digital products. The current language remains stuck on 
“electronic transmissions” and the question of which transmissions fall under the GATT, which 
fall under the GATS, and which fall under neither (or perhaps TRIPS?) was left to a now 
dysfunctional dispute settlement system (Ciuriak 2022). Accordingly, even low-level AI 
embedded in a digital product is not clearly sorted into one of the houses. Strike one. 
The value of data is nowhere in the economic or trade accounts or in trade agreements.  Trade 
agreements to date deal only with the cross-border flow of data related to the business of a covered 
party, and restrictions on data localization, but not with the value. National economic accounts 
also fail to capture the value of data and the trade accounts are silent on it. As protected IP, it does 
not show up even on the books of corporations as a line item, given the way it is acquired.  The 
WTO negotiations towards an e-commerce agreement do not broach the issue of the value of data 
(Ciuriak 2022). Strike two. 
While the OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework has addressed the issue of the capture of profits 
through virtual operations in a country, it also falls short by not addressing the value of data 
(Ciuriak and Eurallyah 2021). However, it did establish the basis for governing the virtual 
operations of a corporation in a country in which the corporation may have no physical, taxable 
presence. This is a generalizable problem of governing the virtual presence of foreign entities. As 
Ciuriak (2023b) argues: 
“If we generalize the issue addressed in the Investment Canada Act reform it is “Operations 
in Canada”, some of which come through investments that create a physical presence, and 
others that come through virtual operations that raise the same concerns but are not captured 
in the scope of the Act. Accordingly, the digital transformation has rendered the traditional 
framework developed to monitor and regulate the operations of foreign companies in Canada 
and to address Canada’s national security concerns not fit for purpose. There is a digitaleconomy-sized hole in Canada’s framework for exercising control over the national security 
implications of its international economic engagement.” 
These issues are resonating in the trading system and indeed even within the private sector as not 
only nations but also corporations restrict the use of ChatGPT. There are restrictions on the 
operation in at least seven countries, including a non-adversarial country, Italy (Reuters 2023a). 
There are also at least seven corporations that have restricted use of ChatGPT by their employees 
(including most recently Apple; O’Brient 2023).  
The failure to deal adequately with the governance of virtual presence in the data-driven economy 
era leaves the system ill-prepared for the era of machine knowledge capital when data has morphed 
into something with agency.  Strike three. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

8 
 
3 The Race to Govern AI 
Just as AI has gone from science fiction to reality, so has the concept of AI law.  First there were 
Isaac Asimov’s 3 Laws of Robotics. Now, the EU’s Artificial Intelligence Act has already been 
adopted by the European Parliament; the Biden administration has tabled a Blueprint for an AI 
Bill of Rights (alongside a series of related initiatives, including the National Artificial Intelligence 
Research & Development Plan, a roadmap for establishing a National AI Research Resource, and 
an AI Risk Management Framework); and Canada’s Parliament is considering the Artificial 
Intelligence and Data Act. China has not yet tabled a comprehensive law on AI but has addressed 
several aspects of AI regulation through various statutes, including the Personal Information 
Protection Law, the Cybersecurity Law, and the Data Security Law (Schildkraut and Zhang 2023). 
It is of interest to consider the extent of convergence in these emerging legal frameworks and the 
implications for trade. 
Before considering where the lawmaking stands, it is useful to consider the basis on which these 
laws are being framed.  There has been a longstanding development of regulation of AI systems, 
starting with the expert systems developed in the 1970s and 1980s. This process has had to contend 
with the issues of validation and reliability (including performance testing); trustworthiness; data 
privacy; algorithmic transparency and explainability; accountability and liability; and ethical 
standards, bias, and fairness.  Regulatory development included both the formulation of horizontal 
standards and vertical or product-specific standards, both at the national and international levels 
(Ciuriak and Rodionova 2021).5 One result is that AI systems are pervasively in use in traded 
products – AI, actually, is all around and, yes, regulated.  
An example of how AI systems navigate regulatory standards and oversight processes is provided 
by a catastrophic failure – the Boeing 737 Max case. Modern aircraft incorporate a large number 
of systems that co-share flying operations with human pilots (Eliot, 2019), performing both 
mechanical and cognitive functions. These have been put in place by longstanding interaction 
between the companies’ technical experts and oversight authorities. One of these systems deployed 
in the Boeing 737 Max was the automated flight-control system, the Maneuvering Characteristics 
Augmentation System (MCAS). Unfortunately, a faulty sensor resulted in incorrect information 
being fed into the MCAS and the AI took over the plane from pilots who had not been informed 
about the MCAS. The result was two crashes (Kraus 2019). This put an international spotlight on 
the regulatory process by which the AI systems entered into production and deployment in the first 
place. An international panel of experts reviewed the case and made a dozen recommendations 
 
5 Some examples of initiatives on horizontal standards include: the high-level OECD Principles on Artificial 
Intelligence (OECD 2019); UN recommendations on ethical issues raised by the development and application of AI 
(UNESCO 2020; Pielemeier 2019); and the ISO/IEC CD 23053 (“Framework for Artificial Intelligence Systems 
Using Machine Learning”) and the ISO/AWI TR 23348 (“Statistics – Big Data Analytics – Model Validation”).  All 
the major jurisdictions have active initiatives on addressing regulatory issues pertaining to AI.  See Ciuriak and 
Rodionova (2021) for a detailed discussion and sources. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

9 
 
(Bellamy III 2019), which established de facto conditions for the re-entry into service of this 
Boeing aircraft around the world, including its AI systems.  
In principle, national legislatures have a rich body of experience and proposed guidelines to work 
with in formulating full-fledged AI laws – including the recent endeavours to deal with factchecking and content moderation triggered by the public release of LLMs.  In this section, we now 
review how this process is going and where it stands. 
3.1 
The EU AI Act 
On 11 May 2023, the European Parliament adopted the AI Act, the first law on artificial 
intelligence by a major regulator (European Parliament 2023). There are many historic provisions 
in this legislation, including the mandatory watermarks for AI products and their outputs, partial 
ban on remote biometric surveillance in public spaces, mandatory human-rights-based impact 
assessments, and the requirement for technology vendors to audit the downstream uses of their 
technologies.  
The AI Act assigns applications of AI to four risk categories (Artificial Intelligence Act, 2022).  
• First, applications and systems that pose no or minimal risks to individuals. There are no 
restrictions applied to this category.   
• Second, there are technologies that pose limited risks to individuals. These applications 
and systems are subject to some transparency requirements, for instance, a chatbot should 
contain a watermark to inform users that they are interacting with a machine.  
• Third, there are high-risk technologies; the AI Act classifies these into eight categories: 
from biometric technologies used at the borders to algorithms used to calculate insurance 
premiums. The high-risk algorithms are subject to many stringent requirements: data they 
are trained on should be accurate; they are subject to human-rights-based and impact 
assessments; all the activities should be logged and could potentially have to be reported 
to the regulators; and detailed documentation should explain to the users the functionality 
and limitations of the applications and systems.  
• The fourth category of algorithms are those that pose unacceptable risk to individuals, they 
will be banned in the EU (for example, government-run social scoring systems like the one 
used in China).  
The AI Act is a well-researched and a long-debated piece of legislation. One important step in the 
right direction is that it reflects a discussion about the ethical design of AI, where European 
researchers have argued for a human rights-based approach to the development and governance of 
algorithms (Wernick and Artyushina 2023). 
At the same time, the AI Act has met with a number of criticisms: 
• Its enforceability is questioned. Not even the creators of AI applications can foresee all 
possible harms these technologies can bring about. Moreover, if AI creators are to audit the 
downstream applications, who will audit the AI creators? 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

10 
 
• Banning government social credit scores in countries where social credit scores are privatesector run is arguably meaningless. 
• Measures addressing personal issues are not the high-risk area – what should be top of mind 
for regulators is applications that have collective or societal- shaping impact. 
The trade implications are varied.  For Category 1 AI products, the new AI laws pose no issues. 
That being said, the question may well be whether there will be any AI applications in this category 
in the first place as AI embedded in products becomes significantly more powerful and competent. 
For Category 2 AI products, there would be only conventional standards compliance issues for 
market entry. This is not to say this process would be free of friction as the history of standards 
and compliance across jurisdictions shows (e.g., due to differences in certification procedures and 
differences in specific standards). However, this seems to be charted territory. 
For Category 3 AI products, the more relevant history is that of genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs) where the EU’s precautionary approach has conflicted with US light touch regulation, 
resulting in protracted trade friction. Here, given the elevated societal concerns (i.e., the now 
widespread discussion in the mainstream media of AI as an “extinction event”), the frictional heat 
promises to be hotter and trade rules may have little say over the entry of AI systems into use 
across borders. 
3.2 
The US AI Governance Initiatives 
As noted, the United States does not have an AI Act on the books but it does have a range of 
initiatives. These include a Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights, and the AI Risk Management 
Framework. On 23 May 2023, the White House released the National Artificial Intelligence 
Research & Development Plan, which addresses many ancillary issues, including the lack of 
computing resources needed to train AI, unequal distribution of the benefits brought on by AI, job 
losses, and environmental costs of AI infrastructure. The R&D strategy complements the roadmap 
for establishing a National AI Research Resource. 
Taken together, these initiatives provide a reasonably clear picture of the Biden Administration’s 
strategy for AI:  the US plans to create shared AI infrastructure that will be available to American 
researchers and practitioners. The practical steps include grants for the researchers and research 
organizations working in AI, transferring state departments to cloud infrastructures, making heavy 
investments in public AI applications and systems, and opening up public datasets. These policies 
address two over-arching concerns: the risks to competition from the emergence of private 
monopolies, and the imperative of winning the global AI race. The latter concern goes beyond 
economics, as summarized by Graham Allison and Eric Schmidt at the dawn of the current age: 
• “China stands today as a full-spectrum peer competitor of the United States in commercial 
and national security applications of AI. Beijing is not just trying to master AI—it is 
succeeding. Because AI will have as transformative an impact on commerce and national 
security over the next two decades as semiconductors, computers and the web have had 
over the past quarter century, this should be recognized as a matter of grave national 
concern.”  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

11 
 
• “AI could [enable] a model of governance—a national operating system—superior to 
today’s dysfunctional democracies. … As former Google CEO Eric Schmidt has argued: 
‘if the Soviet Union had been able to leverage the kind of sophisticated data observation, 
collection and analytics employed by the leaders of Amazon today, it might well have won 
the Cold War’.” 
• “… the development of machines with intelligence vastly superior to humans will pose 
special, perhaps even unique risks. (we note that concerns were recently echoed by the call 
for a pause on development of large language models). 
• “China’s advantages in size, data collection and national determination have allowed it 
over the past decade to close the gap with American leaders of this industry. It is currently 
on a trajectory to overtake the United States in the decade ahead.” 
⎯ Allison and Schmidt (2019) 
These concerns layer on the national security and privacy concerns that emerged with the advent 
of the data-driven economy and that resulted in a major bifurcation of data realms with a unique 
Chinese system developing behind its “Great Firewall” and a global system dominated by US 
technology giants. 
The trade impacts of these concerns are already massive in the form of the technology embargo 
that the United States has attempted to impose on Chinese access to US technology that drives AI 
development, as articulated in the “Sullivan Doctrine” (Sullivan 2023), which weaponizes US 
control of intellectual property in a wide range of technologies that form part of the ecosystem for 
development of AI.   
3.3 
China 
In China, the Cyberspace Administration is responsible for the regulation of the internet and all 
digital technologies. China is predictably concerned about the “deep synthesis technologies” which 
can generate realistic deepfakes and spread disinformation (DigiChina 2023). While China has 
been regulating digital media since 2019, the Cyberspace Administration’s most recent regulations 
concern generative AI and synthetic media; specifically, it is prohibited to use AI without 
watermarks (Edwards 2022).  
Similar to the US and the EU, China is concerned about the lack of training data and computational 
resources needed to develop AI. China drifts away from the EU’s requirement for the AI vendor 
to monitor the downstream uses of technologies, yet before releasing an algorithm to the public it 
should be assessed and approved by a responsible government agency. 
Trade implications of China’s approach are pervasive, due to two fundamental facts: 
• Economic nationalism in the development of AI systems for deployment in China is 
pervasive in its “Made in China 2025” and “AI 2030” development programs, both by 
choice and in response to US export restrictions. 
• The virtual operation of foreign AI systems is already subject to relatively tight control 
under the restrictions imposed by the Great Firewall; for example, ChatGPT is banned in 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

12 
 
China (even as its own national champions develop competing products such as Baidu’s or 
“Wenxin Yiyan” or “Ernie Bot”). 
We return to the implications of regulatory alignment and national security for trade in increasingly 
powerful AI systems embedded in products below.  
3.4 
Canada 
The Artificial Intelligence and Data Act (AIDA) was proposed by the Government of Canada in 
2022 as part of a new privacy legislation, Bill-27 (Digital Charter Implementation Act). In 
summary, the AIDA proposes to “regulate international and interprovincial trade and commerce 
in artificial intelligence systems” by requiring the adoption of measures “to mitigate risks of harm 
and biased output” that might be caused by “high-impact artificial intelligence systems”. 
Specifically, the AIDA provides for transparency (public reporting and Ministerial authorization 
for obtaining records) and bans on possession and use of illegally obtained personal information 
for AI development or use.  
The AIDA has received a lukewarm reception from the Canadian academic and AI expert 
communities (Witzel 2022; Scassa 2023a; Lévesque and Martin-Bariteau 2023). First, the bill does 
not contain any specific provisions regarding the governance of AI; instead, it is designed as a 
skeleton that will be fleshed out with regulations to follow. Second, AIDA prioritizes data 
protection over the governance of algorithms: only if an algorithm exploits personal data acquired 
without consent, does it fall within the scope of the law.  
While the AIDA is modelled on the EU’s AI Act, it only adopts certain aspects of the EU’s riskbased approach. Unlike the EU’s four-tier classification of AI systems, Canada only proposes to 
regulate the high-risk technological systems, and policymakers have yet to define what constitutes 
a high-risk technology under the Canadian laws. 
Generally, Canada’s cautious and partial approach (Scassa 2023b) to AI regulation is consistent 
with the position of a developed economy that seeks to extract economic rents form new 
technologies; this is where AIDA’s “agile” and “anticipatory” governance approaches to AI come 
from. Another factor here is the constitutional division of power in the Canadian government 
where federal laws normally address the most pressing public issues while leaving the governance 
of commercial sector to the provinces. Moreover, historically, Canada has felt regulatory pressure 
from both the US and the EU through a complex network of agreements and international 
frameworks. Inevitably, however, Canada’s internal democratic choices will result in some degree 
of non-alignment with either the US or EU systems. In this regard, the Canadian debate on AIDA 
is of some general interest.  
First, as many critics have noted, the concentration of data and computing resources in the hands 
of a few large corporations raises alarms for small open economies (Artyushina 2021; Brandusescu 
2022). To train LLMs, one needs trillions of data points and computational power that only the 
likes of Alphabet, Microsoft and Meta possess. Scientists, small companies, and the public sector 
only access AI and the data needed to train them via companies' costly and limited licenses. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

13 
 
Second, there is a complex nexus of issues related to privacy and intellectual property. ChatGPT 
and its powerful competitors have been trained on the internet resources and open data, which 
limits the applications of the existing privacy laws but also raises questions of intellectual property 
in products produced using AI trained on copyrighted material. Addressing only “illegally” 
obtained information as the AIDA does is meaningless since almost all information used to train 
AI is scraped off the web.  
Third, protecting privacy in big data is a new area for legal scholars. One popular argument is that 
privacy legislation should focus on collective privacy instead of individual privacy (Viljoen 2021). 
Alternatively, one might put this as focusing concerns on the operations of AI in a jurisdiction in 
ways that are societally shaping and potentially malicious. 
4 The Way Ahead 
4.1 
Where does AI fit in the WTO framework? 
The WTO has not definitively resolved the issue of whether trade in digital products through 
electronic transmission should be categorised as trade in services or trade in goods; and it has not 
yet dealt with the value of data (which is clearly an electronic transmission but is not a formally 
traded product; Ciuriak and Ptashkina 2018) – including in the WTO plurilateral discussions on ecommerce.  Nor does there appear to be consensus on how to categorize the flow of intellectual 
property across borders in digital form (e.g., instructions for 3-D printing). Meanwhile, the 
OECD/G20 have addressed the issue of an operational presence in a country on a virtual basis for 
purposes of allocation of taxation rights but, as noted above, has not addressed the other issues that 
are raised by a virtual presence in an economy.  
Where does AI fall?  WTO rules are predicated on an “absolute dichotomy between those dealing 
with goods and those focusing on services trade.” (Janow and Mavroidis 2019; S2).  If AI is a 
service, then it falls under the GATS, which is technologically neutral6 and hence subject to 
existing trade commitments under the GATS. If it is a good, then it falls under the GATT, which 
is not technologically neutral,7 which means it could fall between the cracks or into litigation (see 
the Conconi and Pauwelyn (2011 discussion of this issue in China – Publications and Audiovisual 
Products). 
Following Ciuriak (2022), if access to an AI on a cross-border basis results in a product that is 
extinguished upon consumption then the AI is a service provider, the service falls under an existing 
GATS classification and is subject to GATS commitments.  If an AI system is shipped across 
borders embedded in a product (whether material or digital) that generates services on an ongoing 
 
6 WTO dispute panels in US – Gambling (DS285) and China – Publications and Audiovisual Products (DS363) have 
held that the GATS is in principle technologically neutral.  
7 See Conconi and Pauwelyn (2011) for a review of WTO decisions that have held that the GATT is not technologically 
neutral. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

14 
 
basis, then it is akin to a durable good that generates a flow of services, and thus should be 
considered to be a good. Technological neutrality cannot then be assumed.  
If it provides technological information used in production, then it is a production input of the 
nature of intellectual property and the payment for it would fall under payments for IP in the 
balance of payments accounts (see, e.g., Staiger 2018; and Janow and Mavroidis 2019 for 
discussions of 3-D printing instructions).   
4.2 
Standards 
To date, as noted, AI has been seamlessly integrated into a rules-based trading system that has 
well-established systems for certification of products against national standards that determine 
market access. Going forward, however, things look more problematic for the evolution of the 
rules-based system.  Two very different sets of concerns arise for trade within security realms 
versus trade across security divides. 
 Within Security Realms 
Within security realms (e.g., between the United States and the EU), the alternative approaches to 
AI regulation that have emerged already raise the issue of market access. For example, do products 
that conform to the US AI bill of rights conform to the EU’s category 2 market entry conditions? 
Mutual recognition agreements offer a way forward on such issues, at least in principle. However, 
the experience historically is far from encouraging. For example, an assessment of the 1999 
agreement on mutual recognition between the European Community and the United States of 
America (European Commission 2013: 19) concluded that the experience has been disappointing, 
citing in particular: 
• the lack of prior alignment or sufficient convergence of the parties’ regulations:  
• the lack of a mechanism to promote convergence; 
• the inability of regulators to build the degree of mutual confidence necessary to bring 
certain aspects of the agreement into operation; and 
• substantial administrative costs, including burdensome designation procedures and the 
need for regular updates of legislative references in the MRA's sectoral annexes.  
This experience reflects an attempt to deal with products far less controversial than AI and in the 
context of a highwater mark for the rules-based system. Things are likely to be much more 
problematic for AI. 
An additional hurdle for addressing conformity assessment issues using MRAs is that obtaining 
the certification mark is only one step in a more complex process that also includes post-market 
surveillance, which is costly in that it entails setting up effective post-market surveillance systems 
in the partner jurisdiction (European Commission, 2013: 13). The EU requirement for audit by AI 
creators of its applications appears to trigger this issue directly. 
Finally, there are differences in how conformity assessment is done: in some cases, third party 
conformity assessments is allowed while in others self-declaration of conformity is accepted. The 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

15 
 
problem is that the US and EU may not align in terms of which products are subject to these 
regimes: 
“For example, the US requires third party testing or certification for a number of products 
for which no equivalent requirement exists in the EU, in particular regarding safety of 
electrical products or machinery. The latter is of particular concern to EU business. There 
are also cases where the EU requires third-party certification, while in the US lawful 
commercialisation depends is based on a self-declaration of conformity (e.g., safety 
standards for motor vehicles).” (European Commission, 2013: 19) 
As a result, for a subset of products, there might be no capacity in each jurisdiction to perform the 
appropriate assessments to enter the counterparty’s market under the MRA and vice versa.  
Further, even assuming an AI MRA were concluded, it is likely that there are additional 
requirements that need to be met to get a product on the market in addition to meeting the MRA’s 
certification requirements. This may make it most convenient for a company seeking to enter the 
counterparty’s market to establish a commercial presence in that jurisdiction to deal with 
regulatory compliance as well as after-market service and liability issues. 
 Across Security Divides 
Across security divides, the problems of divergent standards is compounded by political risks. The 
founding WTO Agreement was framed for a unipolar world, in which “inert” goods and services 
were traded across borders that could be rigorously policed (Ciuriak 2021). With the digital 
transformation, which has served as a force multiplier for information warfare, the proliferation of 
smart products that feed personal data into the cloud, the transformation of the “backbone 
infrastructure” sectors (telecommunications, transportation, energy and finance) into an interactive  
central nervous system for a nation’s economy, and the emergence of a multipolar world featuring 
a major technological war over AI dominance, the commitments made in 1995 can no longer be 
presumed to be tenable.  
Restrictions on the flow of data for security reasons have long proliferated, threatening to bring 
down a “silicon curtain” along the geopolitical divide (Boehm, 2021). The issues with regard to 
AI are even more problematic for the rules-based system. As Mona Pinchis-Paulsen's (2020) put 
it, "For decades, article XXI GATT was rarely invoked; it lay like a dormant dragon beneath the 
mountain, still dangerous but fallen out of memory." That dragon is no longer dormant and it is 
threatening to burn down the rules-based framework.  
Complicating matters is that it will inevitably be unclear as to whether a restriction made invoking 
security is really about security or other grounds considered legitimate under the current rulesbased system (e.g., human rights, ethical uses, etc.) or about rent capture. 
The way forward is likely to require some combination of the following (Ciuriak 2021): 
• a détente agreement to narrow the range of issues subject to the new national security 
concerns, recognizing that the rules-based system provides a major public good for the 
global economy in non-contentious areas; 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

16 
 
• resurrection of an old tool, conditional “most favoured nation” (MFN) treatment, in areas 
where parties agree – or agree to disagree – on protocols to manage the risks in the digital 
environment and with respect to AI; 
• renegotiation of the bargain under the WTO Agreement, using GATT Article 
XXVIII/GATS Article XXI negotiations to withdraw commitments for MFN access where 
the flow of data or trade in AI across the security divide represents an unacceptable risk. 
The worst of all worlds would be to have a proliferation of arbitrary restrictions imposed in the 
context of an escalating technology war, such as is currently envisaged under the Sullivan Doctrine 
on the part of the United States or tit-for-tat measures by China. 
4.3 
Agency and the Grey Zone between Products and People 
Traditionally, trade rules have distinguished between regulating the movement of goods, services, 
workers, and investors. However, the emergence of AI systems with agency that are enabled to 
perform tasks, make decisions, and interact with users blurs the lines between products and 
workers. That this creates a grey zone for trade rules is underscored by the discussion of policies 
of taxing robots in parallel with payroll taxes on workers. The so-called “robot tax” would be 
levied on firms when they install a robot to replace a human.  
Machinery has long been favoured over human workers by fiscal and monetary policy. A basic 
guideline for fiscal policy is not to tax mobile factors of production and to shift the tax burden onto 
the relatively immobile factors (land and labour). Meanwhile, the use of interest rates for 
macroeconomic stabilization in the post-Bretton Woods era resulted in increasingly long periods 
of zero or negative real policy interest rates, reducing the carrying cost of capital and undermining 
the competitive position of workers. The advent of AI could be the straw that breaks the camel’s 
back in terms of the systemic incentivization of labour-replacing capital. The robot tax would in 
this sense represent a partial rebalancing, including raising revenues for governments to fund 
worker retraining, etc. (Seamans 2021). However, it would be only the first of many steps in 
reorganizing society (Araya 2020 for example anticipates a “digital renaissance”). 
It would be inconsistent for one area of public policy to treat AI as a product and another area to 
treat it as a worker. The option for trade rules would be to treat AI systems with agency, which 
have the ability to perform tasks autonomously, as entering a market under Mode 4 of the GATS. 
This would require rules changes, however, since robots do not fit within the definition of “natural 
persons” as understood in the context of GATS Mode 4.  
The issues of trading AI with agency only start the definitional problem. Korea recently showcased 
a robot conducting an orchestra (Reuters 2023b). While the sophistication of the robot conductor 
was found wanting, we are of course at early stages; the issue of membership in a musician’s union 
may not be far off. In the same vein, would commitments made under the GATS cultural 
exemption restrict the entry of a robot conductor? This points to a general issue of AI and the 
guilds. 
And then there’s the Spanish Inquisition. Actually, we’re only half joking here. There are already 
AI systems to test whether a particular work was generated by AI.  It is one thing for AI systems 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

17 
 
to deal with small claims disputes in the normal course of human activity (e.g., Stern et al. 2021). 
It is another when one AI is interrogating another AI in machine language space that is inaccessible 
to humans. No one ever expected the AI Inquisition. 
4.4 
Virtual operations 
The digital transformation has enabled operations by firms in a country on a virtual basis without 
a taxable local presence. That this raises issues for traditional governance of foreign participation 
in an economy has already been formally recognized in the OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework for 
taxation of multinational firms. Trade rules will undoubtedly also have to adapt. 
Countries routinely screen inward investment that enables local operations on a material basis. 
Countries may invoke national security concerns in respect of investments in critical infrastructure, 
sensitive technologies, or where confidential information is at stake. Similarly, sectors such as 
cultural industries may be safeguarded to preserve national identity and diversity.  
However, there is no parallel system for screening local operations on a virtual basis. This points 
to a digital-economy sized hole in established trade regulation. 
5 Conclusion 
The technological advances in the power of AI systems in the late 2010s and early 2020s materially 
changed matters, ushering in a new economic age, one of machine knowledge capital. The trading 
system has developed procedures for dealing with risks related to new technologies.. It also has 
some experience with sorting out whether trade restrictions are legitimately for national security 
or other policy rationales protected under the WTO’s general exceptions clause as opposed to 
ordinary trade protectionism.  
The first era of trade in AI unfolded almost without notice as smart products proliferated in a 
“made in the world” production system and developed and marketed by superstar firms, with 
global reach and sophisticated governance.  However, the trade system did  not come to terms with 
even the basics of the digital transformation and the quiet time is past. AI applications are now 
growing explosively in number, in capability, and in their societal penetration. AI has literally 
come for the arts, for the sciences, for the maths, for the guilded professions, for the manual labour, 
for the services jobs, for the warriors roles, and even for social companions (including 
companionship with benefits).  
Our advanced societies are organized around the accumulated qualifications acquired by formal 
training and experience that comprise “human capital”.  The machine version of this is now 
produced at scale, with minimum marginal costs, and an unknown economics and under-developed 
ethics. It is eminently tradable and will be dropping in a civilization riven by conflict over almost 
every conceivable issue. 
Happily, of course, it will all work out.  Don’t ask us how, we don’t know. It will be a miracle. 
But it might be advisable for the trade law community to organize an emergency session of 
“Friends of the WTO” to develop a provisional treaty to provide guidance on how to proceed.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

18 
 
References  
Agar, Jon. 2017. “Hidden Figures takes us back to a time when computers were people, women, 
and black,” The Conversation, 14 February. https://theconversation.com/hidden-figures-takesus-back-to-a-time-when-computers-were-people-women-and-black-72303 
Allison, Graham and Eric Schmidt. 2020. “Is China Beating the U.S. to AI Supremacy?” Paper, 
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School. August. 
https://www.belfercenter.org/publication/china-beating-us-ai-supremacy  
Araya, Daniel. 2020. “The Coming Digital Renaissance,” Forbes, 14 April. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/danielaraya/2020/04/14/the-coming-digitalrenaissance/?sh=2c8da70e759d 
Artyushina, Anna. 2021. “The future of data trusts and the global race to dominate AI,’ Blog of 
the Bennett Institute for Public Policy, June 10. Cambridge University. 
https://www.bennettinstitute.cam.ac.uk/blog/data-trusts1/.  
Bellamy III, Woodrow. 2019. “International Regulators Submit Joint Technical Review of 737 
MAX Flight Control System to FAA,” Aviation Today, 14 October. 
https://www.aviationtoday.com/2019/10/14/international-regulators-submit-joint-technicalreview-737-max-flight-controls-faa/  
Brandusescu, Ana. 2021. “Artificial Intelligence Policy and Funding in Canada: Public 
Investments, Private Interests,” Centre for Interdisciplinary Research, McGill University. 
file:///Users/anna/Downloads/SSRN-id4089932.pdf.  
Brittain, Blake. 2023. “Lawsuit says OpenAI violated US authors' copyrights to train AI 
chatbot,” Reuters, June 29. https://www.reuters.com/legal/lawsuit-says-openai-violated-usauthors-copyrights-train-ai-chatbot-2023-06-29/  
Ciuriak, Dan. 2023a. “How the Digital Transformation Changed Geopolitics,” Discussion Paper, 
06 July. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4378419 
Ciuriak, Dan. 2023b. “The Investment Canada Act Reforms and the Digital Transformation,” 
Brief for the House of Commons Standing Committee on Industry and Technology for the 
study on Bill C-34, An Act to amend the Investment Canada Act, 9 May 2023. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4444261 
Ciuriak, Dan. 2022. “Digital Economy Agreements: Where Do We Stand and Where Are We 
Going?” Working Paper, 30 July. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4217903  
Ciuriak, Dan. 2021. “The Challenge of Updating Institutions for Digital Trade,” Opinion, Centre 
for International Governance Innovation, 16 July. https://www.cigionline.org/people/danciuriak/  
Ciuriak, Dan and Akinyi J. Eurallyah. 2021. “Taxing Capital in the Age of Intangibles,” Opinion, 
Centre for International Governance Innovation, 5 November. 
https://www.cigionline.org/articles/taxing-capital-in-the-age-of-intangibles/.   
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

19 
 
Ciuriak, Dan and Vlada Rodionova. 2021. “Trading Artificial Intelligence: Economic Interests, 
Societal Choices and Multilateral Rules,” Chapter 4 in Shin-Yi Peng, Ching-Fu Lin and 
Thomas Streinz (eds), Artificial Intelligence and International Economic Law: Disruption, 
Regulation, and Reconfiguration. Cambridge University Press: 70-93.  
Ciuriak Dan and Bianca Wylie. 2018. “Data and Digital Rights: More Questions Than Answers – 
But Enumerating the Questions is Essential,” Commentary, Ciuriak Consulting. Available on 
SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3300263 
Ciuriak, Dan, and Maria Ptashkina. 2018. “The Digital Transformation and the Transformation of 
International Trade,” RTA Exchange. Geneva: International Centre for Trade and Sustainable 
Development 
(ICTSD) 
and 
the 
Inter-American 
Development 
Bank 
(IDB). 
www.rtaexchange.org/ Available on SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3107811  
Conconi, Paola and Joost Pauwelyn. 2011. “Trading Cultures: Appellate Body Report on China - 
Audiovisuals (WT/DS363/AB/R, adopted 19 January 2010)." World Trade Review 10(1): 95- 
118. 
Cullins, Ashley and Katie Kilkenny. 2023. “As Writers Strike, AI Could Covertly Cross the 
Picket Line,” The Hollywood Report, 3 May.  
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/business/business-news/writers-strike-ai-chatgpt1235478681/  
Curtis, John M. 2002. “The Role of Contextual Factors in the Launching of Trade Rounds.” In 
Trade Policy Research 2002, edited by John M. Curtis and Dan Ciuriak. Ottawa: Foreign 
Affairs and International Trade Canada: 33-70. 
DePillis, Lydia. 2023. “Colleges Have Been a Small-Town Lifeline. What Happens as They 
Shrink?” The New York Times, 13 March.  
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/03/13/business/economy/college-towns-economy.html 
Deutsche Welle. 2023. “EU lawmakers take first steps toward tougher AI rules,” Deutsche 
Welle, 11 May. https://www.dw.com/en/eu-lawmakers-take-first-steps-toward-tougher-airules/a-65585731 
DigiChina. 2023. “How will China’s Generative AI Regulations Shape the Future? Experts react 
to China's draft Measures governing AI-generated content services.” A DigiChina Forum, 
Stanford University. https://digichina.stanford.edu/work/how-will-chinas-generative-airegulations-shape-the-future-a-digichina-forum/. 
Di Pizio, Anthony. 2023. “Here's What Mark Zuckerberg Got Wrong About the Metaverse. 
Where Does Meta Go From Here?” The Motley Fool, 8 May. 
https://www.fool.com/investing/2023/05/08/heres-mark-zuckerberg-wrong-metaverse-metago-here/  
Edwards, Benj. 2022. “China bans AI-generated media without watermarks,” ArsTechnica, 
December 12. https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2022/12/china-bans-aigenerated-media-without-watermarks/.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

20 
 
Efrati, Amir. 2023. “The Briefing: Nvidia’s AI Victory Lap,” The Information, 24 May. 
Eliot, Lance. 2019. “Boeing 737 MAX 8 and Lessons for AI: The Case of AI Self-Driving Cars,”  
AI Trends, 22 March. https://lance-eliot.medium.com/boeing-737-showcases-crucial-lessonsfor-ai-and-driverless-cars-nine-key-imperatives-408069eed3fe  
European Commission 2021. Proposal For a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the 
Council Laying Down Harmonised Rules for Artificial Intelligence and Amending Certain 
Union Legislative Acts. Brussels, 21.4.2021. COM(2021) 206 final. 
https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/the-act/. 
European Commission. 2013. “Commission Staff Working Document: Impact Assessment 
Report on the Future of EU-US Trade Relations.” COM(2013) 136 final. Strasbourg: 
European Commission. 
European Parliament. 2023. “AI Act: a step closer to the first rules on Artificial Intelligence,” 
Press Release, 11 May. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/pressroom/20230505IPR84904/ai-act-a-step-closer-to-the-first-rules-on-artificial-intelligence  
FLI. 2023. “Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter,” Future of Life Institute, 
https://futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/  
Hayward, Andrew. 2023. “Apple and the Metaverse: Everything We Know So Far,” Decrypt, 11 
January. https://decrypt.co/112030/apple-metaverse-everything-we-know-so-far   
Heaven, Will Douglas. 2023. “Geoffrey Hinton talks about the “existential threat” of AI,” 
Interview, MIT Technology Review, 3 May. 
https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/05/03/1072589/video-geoffrey-hinton-google-airisk-ethics/  
Heaven, Will Douglas. 2023. “How existential risk became the biggest meme in AI,” MIT 
Technology Review, June 19, 2023. 
https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/06/19/1075140/how-existential-risk-becamebiggest-meme-in-ai/.  
Heaven, Will Douglas. 2022. “Why Meta’s latest large language model survived only three days 
online,” MIT Technology Review, 18 November. 
https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/11/18/1063487/meta-large-language-model-ai-onlysurvived-three-days-gpt-3-science/  
Hern, Alex. 2023. “‘We’ve discovered the secret of immortality. The bad news is it’s not for us’: 
why the godfather of AI fears for humanity,” Interview, The Guardian, 5 May. 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/may/05/geoffrey-hinton-godfather-of-aifearsfor-humanity  
Hicks, Marie. 2017. Programmed Inequality. How Britain Discarded Women Technologists and 
Lost Its Edge in Computing. MIT Press. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

21 
 
Janow, Merit E. and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2019. “Digital Trade, E-Commerce, the WTO and 
Regional Frameworks,” World Trade Review 18 S1: s1-s7 
Kaldor, Nicholas. 1961. “Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth,” in F.A. Lutz and D.C. 
Hague (eds), The Theory of Capital. St. Martins Press: 177–222. 
Kang, Cecilia. 2023. “OpenAI’s Sam Altman Urges A.I. Regulation in Senate Hearing,” The 
New York Times, 16 May.  https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/16/technology/openai-altmanartificial-intelligence-regulation.html  
Kelly, Kevin. 2014. “The Three Breakthroughs That Have Finally Unleashed AI on the World,” 
Wired, 27 October. https://www.wired.com/2014/10/future-of-artificial-intelligence/ 
Kingsbury, Benedict, David Malone, Paul Mertenskötter, Richard B. Stewart, Thomas Streinz, 
and Atsushi Sunami (eds). 2018. Megaregulation Contested. Oxford University Press. 
Kraus, Rachel. 2019. “'Aggressive and riskier' A.I. — and bureaucracy — caused the Boeing 
crashes, report says,” Mashable, 02 June. 
Lamare, Amy. 2019. “From IPO To Complete Liquidation In 268 Days. How Pets.com Became 
The Biggest Disaster Of The Dotcom Bubble,” Celebrity Net Worth, 6 May. 
https://www.celebritynetworth.com/articles/entertainment-articles/took-pets-com-just-268days-go-ipo-complete-liquidation-thats-disaster/ 
Lazarus, David. 1997. “@Home Makes Splash with IPO,” Wired, 11 July. 
https://www.wired.com/1997/07/home-makes-splash-with-ipo/ 
Lehdonvirta, Vili. 2022.  Cloud Empires: How Digital Platforms Are Overtaking the State and 
How We Can Regain Control. MIT Press.  
Lévesque, Maroussia and Florian Martin-Bariteau (2023) “AI Regulation Should Not Be a Blank 
Cheque for Government.” Centre for International Governance Innovation, April 27. 
https://www.cigionline.org/articles/ai-regulation-should-not-be-a-blank-cheque-forgovernment/. 
Light, Jennifer S. 1999. “When Computers Were Women,” Technology and Culture 40(3), July: 
455-483.  
Lucas, Scott Alan. 2023. “While Hollywood Writers Fret About AI, Visual Effects Workers 
Welcome It,” The Information, 20 May. https://www.theinformation.com/articles/whilehollywood-writers-fret-about-ai-visual-effects-workers-welcome-it   
Maddison, Angus. 2008. “Shares of the Rich and the Rest in the World Economy: Income 
Divergence between Nations, 1820-2030,” Asian Economic Policy Review 3(1), June: 67-82. 
Mc Gowran, Leigh. 2023. “Meta rolls out large language model amid Big Tech’s AI push,” 
Silicon Republic, 27 February. https://www.siliconrepublic.com/machines/meta-ai-llamalarge-language-model-research  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

22 
 
National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Task Force. 2023. Strengthening and 
Democratizing the U.S. Artificial Intelligence Innovation Ecosystem: An Implementation Plan 
for a National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource. National Science Foundation and 
Office of Science and Technology Policy. https://www.ai.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2023/01/NAIRR-TF-Final-Report-2023.pdf. 
Naughton, John. 2023. “When the tech boys start asking for new regulations, you know 
something’s up,” The Guardian, 20 May. 
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/may/20/when-the-tech-boys-start-askingfor-new-regulations-you-know-somethings-up-ai-chatgpt?CMP=share_btn_link 
NIST. 2023. AI Risk Management Framework. National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
26 January. https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework.  
O’Brient, Samuel. 2023. “7 Companies That Have Banned Employees From Using ChatGPT,”  
InvestorPlace, 20 May.  https://investorplace.com/2023/05/7-companies-that-have-bannedemployees-from-using-chatgpt/  
OECD. 2019. “Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence. Paris: 
OECD/LEGAL/0449. 
https://www.oecd.org/science/forty-two-countries-adopt-new-oecdprinciples-on-artificial-intelligence.htm  
Olson, Parmy. 2023. “Don’t Go Down That AI Long-termism Rabbit Hole,” Bloomberg, May 
23. https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-05-19/ai-longtermism-alarmists-aredragging-us-all-down-existential-rabbit-hole#xj4y7vzkg. 
Pielemeier, Jason. 2019. “AI & Global Governance: The Advantages of Applying the International 
Human Rights Framework to Artificial Intelligence,” United Nations University Center for 
Policy Research, 26 February. https://cpr.unu.edu/ai-global-governance-the-advantages-ofapplying-the-international-human-rights-framework-to-artificial-intelligence.html  
Pinchis-Paulsen, Mona. 2020. “Trade Multilateralism and U.S. National Security: The Making of 
the GATT Security Exceptions,” Michigan Journal of International Law 41: 109 
https://repository.law.umich.edu/mjil/vol41/iss1/4 
Reuters. 2023a. “Italy blocks OpenAI’s ChatGPT, opens probe over privacy failings,” 31 March. 
https://www.france24.com/en/europe/20230331-italy-blocks-openai-s-chatgpt-opens-probeover-privacy-failings  
Reuters. 2023b. “Robot takes podium as orchestra conductor in South Korea,” Reuters, 3 July. 
https://www.cnn.com/2023/07/03/style/south-korea-robot-orchestra-conductor/index.html  
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1996. “Uncertainty and technological change” in Ralph Landau, Timothy 
Taylor, and Gavin Wright (eds), The Mosaic of Economic Growth. Stanford University Press. 
Seamans, Robert. 2021. “Tax not the robots,” Research Report, Brookings, 25 
August.  https://www.brookings.edu/articles/tax-not-the-robots/ 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

23 
 
Scassa, Teresa. 2023a. Explaining the AI and Data Act.” Teresa Scassa’s blog, March 21. 
http://www.teresascassa.ca/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=369:explaining-theai-and-data-act&Itemid=80.  
Scassa, Teresa. 2023b. “Regulating AI in Canada. A Critical Look at the Proposed Artificial 
Intelligence and Data Act.” The Canadian Bar Review 101(1): Emerging Issues in 
Technology Law and Intellectual Property: 1-30. 
https://cbr.cba.org/index.php/cbr/article/view/4817/4539. 
Schildkraut, Peter and Hazel Zhang. 2023. “What To Know About China's New AI 
Regulations,” Law360, 19 April. https://www.law360.com/articles/1597427/what-to-knowabout-china-s-new-ai-regulations  
Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence of the National Science and Technology Council. 
2023. National Artificial Intelligence Research and Development Strategic Plan. Executive 
Office of the President of the United States. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2023/05/National-Artificial-Intelligence-Research-and-DevelopmentStrategic-Plan-2023-Update.pdf.  
Smuha, Nathalie A. 2021. “Beyond the individual: governing AI’s societal harm,” Internet 
Policy Review 10(3): 1-32. https://doi.org/10.14763/2021.3.1574 
Staiger, Robert W. 2018. “On the implications of digital technologies for the multilateral trading 
system,” Opinion Piece, World Trade Report 2018, World Trade Organization: 150. 
Stern, Rachel E., Benjamin L. Liebman, Margaret Roberts and Alice Z. Wang. 2021. 
“Automating Fairness? Artificial Intelligence in the Chinese Court,” Columbia Journal of 
Transnational Law 59: 515-553. 
https://scholarship.law.columbia.edu/faculty_scholarship/2940 
Sullivan, Jake. 2023. “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan on Renewing 
American Economic Leadership at the Brookings Institution,” The White House, 27 April. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2023/04/27/remarks-bynational-security-advisor-jake-sullivan-on-renewing-american-economic-leadership-at-thebrookings-institution/  
Taffler, Richard J. and David A. Tuckett. 2003. “Internet stocks as “phantastic objects”: A 
psychoanalytic interpretation of shareholder valuation during dot.com mania,” in Boom and 
Bust: The Equity Market Crisis. London: European Asset Management Association: 150-162. 
Thomas, Zoe. 2023. “Artists Worry About Survival as AI Changes the Game for Creative 
Work,” Artificially Minded Podcast Transcript, Wall Street Journal, 17 April. 
https://www.wsj.com/podcasts/tech-news-briefing/artists-worry-about-survival-as-ai-changesthe-game-for-creative-work/0d43687d-e9b8-4d8c-a275-08adbdc7422f  
UNESCO. 2020. “Elaboration of a Recommendation on the ethics of artificial intelligence,” 
UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/artificial-intelligence/ethics  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114

24 
 
Viljoen, Salome. 2021. “A Relational Theory of Data Governance,” The Yale Law Journal, 
131(2): 573-654. 
Vincent, James. 2023. “Meta’s powerful AI language model has leaked online — what happens 
now?” The Verge, 8 March. https://www.theverge.com/2023/3/8/23629362/meta-ai-languagemodel-llama-leak-online-misuse  
Wernick, Alina & Anna Artyushina. 2023. “Future-proofing the city: A human rights-based 
approach to governing algorithmic, biometric and smart city technologies.” Internet Policy 
Review 12(1): 1-14. DOI: https://doi.org/10.14763/2023.1.1695 
White House. 2023. Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights. The White House. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/ai-bill-of-rights/.  
Witzel, Mardi. 2022. “A Few Questions about Canada’s Artificial Intelligence and Data Act,” 
Centre for International Governance Innovation, August 11. 
https://www.cigionline.org/articles/a-few-questions-about-canadas-artificial-intelligence-anddata-act/.  
Wodecki, Ben. 2022. “Meta’s Galactica AI Criticized as ‘Dangerous’ for Science,” AI Business, 
17 November. https://aibusiness.com/nlp/meta-s-galactica-ai-criticized-as-dangerous-forscience  
Yuskavage, Robert E. and Mahnaz Fahim-Nader. 2005. “Gross Domestic Product by Industry for 
1947–86: New Estimates Based on the North American Industry Classification System,” 
Survey of Current Business, December: 70-84. US Bureau of Economic Analysis. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4507114
