Trading Pauses, High-Frequency Activity, and Market Quality
William W. Xiong*
First draft: July 2022
This version: November 2024
Abstract
Trading pauses on individual stocks under the Limit Up-Limit Down (LULD) Plan are key
volatility circuit breakers in the US market, designed to prevent future disastrous market events
similar to the 2010 Flash Crash. However, unnecessary pauses could harm market quality.
Since July 2016, the 10th Amendment to the LULD Plan (A10) has dramatically reduced superfluous trading pauses due to deceptive opening prices. Henceforth, the pre-pause liquidity improves, and there is less room for the post-pause liquidity to increase compared to the
pre-pause level. Short-term volatility spikes around trading pauses after A10, and the postpause volatility increases. Furthermore, it is crucial to understand the role that high-frequency
traders play around trading pause. Post A10, high-frequency quoting peaks closely around
trading pauses, especially after trading resumptions. Suggestive evidence indicates that highfrequency quoting is related to improved liquidity around trading pauses, notably post A10
and before trading pauses, but not necessarily linked to increased short-term volatility.
Keywords: trading pause, high-frequency trading, market quality, liquidity, volatility
JEL Classification: G10, G14, G18, D47
*Wei (William) Xiong is with the School of Management, Binghamton University - SUNY. This manuscript was completed when I was a student at the Johnson Graduate School of Management, SC Johnson College of Business, Cornell
University. I am grateful for feedback and suggestions from Andrew Karolyi, Maureen O’Hara, Gideon Saar, Scott
Yonker, Jawad Addoum, Lawrence Jin, Yifei Mao, Nick Guest, and participants in Cornell Finance PhD Forum (internal). I thank NYSE for providing the Daily Trade and Quote (DTAQ) data, and NasdaqTrader.com for providing U.S.
market trading pauses data. I appreciate Craig Holden and Stacey Jacobsen for sharing their SAS codes on DTAQ data.
All errors remain my own. E-mail addresses: <wxiong3@binghamton.edu> and <william.w.xiong@outlook.com>.
Postal address: Academic Building A, School of Management, SUNY Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA.
1
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Trading Pauses, High-Frequency Activity, and Market Quality
Abstract
Trading pauses on individual stocks under the Limit Up-Limit Down (LULD) Plan are key
volatility circuit breakers in the US market, designed to prevent future disastrous market events
similar to the 2010 Flash Crash. However, unnecessary pauses could harm market quality.
Since July 2016, the 10th Amendment to the LULD Plan (A10) has dramatically reduced superfluous trading pauses due to deceptive opening prices. Henceforth, the pre-pause liquidity improves, and there is less room for the post-pause liquidity to increase compared to the
pre-pause level. Short-term volatility spikes around trading pauses after A10, and the postpause volatility increases. Furthermore, it is crucial to understand the role that high-frequency
traders play around trading pause. Post A10, high-frequency quoting peaks closely around
trading pauses, especially after trading resumptions. Suggestive evidence indicates that highfrequency quoting is related to improved liquidity around trading pauses, notably post A10
and before trading pauses, but not necessarily linked to increased short-term volatility.
Keywords: trading pause, high-frequency trading, market quality, liquidity, volatility
JEL Classification: G10, G14, G18, D47
1
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

1
Introduction
An active debate exists among scholars and policy makers about the role and economic consequences of trading pause mechanisms on market quality and price stability. Some believe trading
halts (or “circuit breakers”) can mitigate volatility, and facilitate liquidity provision. Other beneficial effects include reducing information asymmetry, resolving order imbalances, improving price
discovery, and stabilizing prices. In contrast, some others argue that trading pause mechanisms
may not reduce volatility but only defer it to the period after the man-made interruption. They
also think that enforced pauses may result in magnified shocks and increased volatility. A third
school of views takes an intermediate position and emphasizes the origin of volatility from informed trading and uninformed trading. They point out that trading interruptions counter the
negative effects from uninformed trading but may harm information dissemination and price discovery when price movements are triggered by informed trading.
The current prevailing stock-level trading pause mechanism in the US market is under the
Limit Up-Limit Down (LULD) plan, which contains straddle states, limit states, trading pauses,
and clearly erroneous trades. Its predecessor is the single-stock circuit breaker (SSCB) mechanism
which was introduced by SEC and FINRA in June 2010, while the LULD Plan was approved in
May 2012 and gradually replaced SSCB rules starting from April 2013 in two phases.1 These rules
are introduced to address sudden and extreme price fluctuations of individual stocks across the
market in a short time window, as those that occurred during the “Flash Crash” on May 6, 2010.
They are designed to protect against extreme price volatility which is potentially harmful to the
market, while the LULD Plan is an improved version.2
The LULD Plan trading pause is set to prevent individual stocks in the National Market System
(NMS) from being traded beyond a certain price band, but it will allow trading to restart if the
price deviation is transient. The price band for a stock is calculated by the Securities Information
Processors (SIPs) based on an evolving reference price. The initial reference price is decided by the
first trade price of a stock on its primary listing exchange if that trade occurs within 5 minutes from
market opening. When there is no opening trade satisfying the above criteria, the initial reference
1Alternatively, single-stock circuit breakers (SSCB) are also known as single-stock trading pauses (SSTP). And limitup limit-down pauses may be referred to as LUDP.
2See Moise and Flaherty (2017) and Hughes, Ritter, and Zhang (2017).
2
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

price is the midquote of the best bid and ask prices on that stock’s primary listing exchange, in
the era before the implementation of Amendment 10 to the LULD Plan. However, LULD Plan
participants noticed that in the latter case, using the mid-quote of the best bid and ask on the
primary listing exchange leads to problematic opening reference price. That could start the price
band away from the reasonable range of intrinsic price levels and triggers trading pauses even
after someone submits a bid or offer quote at a reasonable price close to the intrinsic value.3
To address the unrealistic opening reference price issue, Amendment 10 of the LULD Plan
came into effect on 18 July 2016 with the approval of the SEC.4 When a stock’s primary listing
exchange opens with quotes, now the opening reference price is set to be the previous day’s closing
price of the stock on its primary listing exchange. If the closing price does not exist, the last sale on
the primary listing exchange reported by the SIP will be used instead as the first reference price.
In this way, a large amount of unnecessary trading pauses related to the problematic opening
reference price could have been avoided, as these trading pauses do not suggest extraordinary
market volatility. As documented in Hughes (2017), the occurrence of trading pauses decreased
significantly after the implementation of Amendment 10, especially in the 30-minute window
from market opening.
This effective regulatory change provided a unique opportunity to study how unneeded trading pauses affect market quality and price stability compared to necessary ones, and whether
Amendment 10 has additional beneficial effects on liquidity and volatility. It also created a chance
to study whether high frequency traders or strategic liquidity providers step up to fill the gap
when there is a mechanism flaw or whether they take advantage of this hole. Hypothetically,
they may be able to trigger trading pauses especially in the pre-Amendment 10 (A10) period by
exploiting the mechanism defect related to the problematic opening reference price decision. On
the other hand, the improved LULD trading pauses mechanism in the post-A10 era may promote
3For example, if a stock has a 20% opening price band expanded from its reference price and there is no opening
trading on its primary listing exchange, then the best bid at $3 and offer at $19 will make the mid-quote $11 as the initial
reference price, with a lower bound of $11×(1-20%)=$8.8 and an upper bound of $11×(1+20%)=$13.2. Now, if someone
submits a buy order at $3.5, then the limit state is triggered and the LULD trading pause on this stock is set to happen
15 seconds later (without other changes). Suppose that the closing price on the previous trading day is $3.5, this quote
today at $3.5 is a reasonable price (based on the previous closing price) while it still triggered the trading pause. That is
not sensible. See Hughes (2017) for more discussion of the unrealistic opening reference price issue before Amendment
10.
4See Hughes (2017), Amendment 10 order: https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nms/2016/34-77679.pdf, and Amendment 10 notice of filing: https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nms/2016/34-77205.pdf.
3
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

high-frequency acitvity around trading pauses in a good way, which is beneficial to market quality. It is intriguing to examine whether high-frequency trading (HFT) activities around trading
pauses change after the implementation of Amendment 10, and whether HFT activity is related
to market quality improvement and price stability around trading pauses. To my best knowledge,
there are no readily available studies investigating the important yet understudied aspects above.
Empirical results in this paper show that, in the pre-A10 era, liquidity measured by percentage
quoted spread starts to improve from 14 minutes before trading pauses till 2 minutes before trading pauses, compared to the base bin level 1 hour before trading pauses. It improves even more
after trading resumes, and the improvement is significant throughout the 1 hour window after
the resumption. However, in the post-A10 era, liquidity improvement, relative to the base bin at 1
hour before trading pauses, starts from 23 minutes after trading resumes and the magnitude is less
than half of that of their counterparts in the pre-A10 era. Difference-in-differences results further
affirm that the liquidity improvement after trading resumes in the post-A10 era is significantly
less than that in the pre-A10 era, for about 8 to 9 percentage points, compared to their base bin
levels 1 hour hour before trading pauses, respectively, although the base bin level of liquidity is
higher in the post-A10 era.
The short-term volatility measure HighLow only increases significantly at the minute just before trading pauses and at the minute right after trading resumes, compared to the base bin level,
in the pre-A10 era. However, there are 3 more minute-level bins with a significant increase of
HighLow before trading pauses and 22 more minute-level bins after trading resumes in the postA10 era compared to the counterparts of the pre-A10 era. The magnitudes are larger, especially at
the τ = +1 minute bin and at the τ = −1 minute bin. Difference-in-differences results also confirm
that short-term volatility increases more in the window of a few minutes around trading pauses
in the post-A10 era than those in the pre-A10 era relative to their base bin levels, respectively, especially after trading resumes. Especially, in the minute right after trading resumes, the difference
in the magnitude of excess short-term volatility relative to the base bin level is the largest, and the
post-A10 magnitude is significantly higher.
For high-frequency quote updates HFQU, there are a dozen significant 1-minute bins that
show an increase from the base bin level an hour before trading pauses in the pre-A10 era. After
trading resumes, there are only 3 significant bins with an increase from the base bin level. Among
4
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

those significant bins around trading pauses, the 1-minute bin right before trading pauses and
the 1-minute bin right after trading resumes are much higher than the rest. In the post-A10 era,
only the 1-minute bin right before trading pauses and the 1-minute bin right after trading resumes
have a significantly higher level of HFQU from the base bin level. And their increased levels of
HFQU from the base bin are much higher than their pre-A10 counterparts, especially in the exact
minute after trading resumes. Difference-in-differences results further support that the difference
between the excess increase of HFQU from base bin level between the post-A10 era and the preA10 era is the largest in the minute right after trading resumes, with the post-A10 one being much
larger.
High-frequency quote updates are correlated with a decrease in the percentage of quoted
spread before and after trading pauses in both the pre-A10 era and the post-A10 era. That implies a liquidity improvement. The magnitude of quoted spread is larger during the hour before
trading pauses in both eras. In the post-A10 era both before and after trading pauses, there are
more 1-minute bins with a significant decrease of percentage quoted spread from the base bin
level than in the pre-A10 era, especially in the hour before trading pauses. This indicates that after
the implementation of Amendment 10 to the LULD Plan, high-frequency quoting activity in the
2-hour window around trading pauses correlates more with liquidity improvement than before.
In both the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras, high-frequency quote updates are only positively correlated with short-term volatility HighLow in just a few 1-minute bins in the hour before trading
pauses and they are all in the [−25, −1] minutes window. After trading resumes, there are a few
more bins with significantly positive correlation between high-frequency quote updates and shortterm volatility throughout the 1 hour interval in the Pre-A10 era. However, in the post-A10 era,
only a handful of bins show a significantly positive correlation, and they are concentrated in the
[+21, +34] minutes window. This suggests that, after the implementation of Amendment 10, highfrequency quote updates are less likely to be positively correlated with the increase in short-term
volatility during the 2-hour window around trading pauses, especially in the hour after trading
resumes.
The remainder of the chapter follows this structure. Section 2 reviews the literature on trading
pauses and mechanisms in practice. Then testable hypotheses are proposed based on the relevant literature and the purpose of this study. Section 3 describes the data, the measurements of
5
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

liquidity, volatility, and high-frequency activity. Section 4 documents the empirical results on the
effects of trading pauses on market quality in the pre- and post-Amendment 10 periods. Section
5 depicts the evolution of high-frequency quoting activity around trading pauses before and after
Amendment 10 and explores its correlation with market quality around trading pauses in the two
periods. Section 6 concludes.
2
Literature Review, Regulatory Rules, and Hypotheses
2.1
Theory and Empirical Studies of Trading Halts
The effect of trading halts is debatable. Brady et al. (1988) and Kyle (1988) indicate that they can
help ease market tensions with a soothing effect and coordinate market forces. They argue that circuit breakers can reduce volatility, protect liquidity providers, decrease order imbalances, lessen
credit risk, promote information processing, facilitate repositioning, and help to cover incurred
losses by margins. They believe that the additional level of protection is beneficial to market quality. Consistent conclusions can be found in Greenwald and Stein (1991), claiming that trading halts
can assist in balancing immediacy and complete information dissemination among participants in
a continuous market. Similarly, Madhavan (1992) states that in times of severe information asymmetry, continuous trading should be replaced by periodic trading instead, which is more practical,
allowing accumulation in both liquidity demand and liquidity supply.
In contrast, Fama (1988) pointed out that trading halts can only delay volatility instead of reducing it, causing a spillover effect in the period after trading resumes. Subrahmanyam (1994)
states that man-made limits on price changes may aggravate market failures instead of saving
them from happening. That paper further claims that trading suspensions induce traders to revoke positions and leave the market, magnifying shocks to stock prices. The mechanism is also
known as the magnet effect of price limits, which promotes volatility and propels the stock prices
toward the trading suspension threshold.
There can be a middle ground between the above two schools. Harris (1997) divides the causes
of volatility into informed and uninformed trading. The former is fundamental, while the latter
is transitory. In the circumstance of uninformed trading-driven volatility, trading halts may help
to reduce it by absorbing order imbalances. However, when volatility is caused by fundamental
6
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

trading, the price limits may harm the price discovery and hence the trading halts may prevent
necessary information circulation.
Among those undecided theoretical implications, the empirical literature mostly addressed the
impact of an earlier mechanism, trading “halts”, which differs from the later trading “pauses” or
price limits. The former trading “halts” interrupt all activities in the order book and are imposed
at the will of exchanges with longer halting intervals. Trading “pauses”, however, only restrict
trading executions but still allow quoting. In addition, the trading “pauses” are triggered under
explicitly known rules, and they span 5 minutes precisely. The existing influential trading “halts”
literature include Lee, Ready, and Seguin (1994), Corwin and Lipson (2000), and Christie, Corwin,
and Harris (2002), while Harris (1997) and Cho et al. (2003) cover trading “pauses” and prices
limits instead.
Lee, Ready, and Seguin (1994) find that the trading volume increases after trading halts. Regarding stock returns after trading resume, Bhattacharya and Spiegel (1998) obtain evidence that
return consistency can be obtained after news-induced trading halts, while return reversal occurs
after trading halts which are triggered due to order imbalances. Corwin and Lipson (2000) and
Christie, Corwin, and Harris (2002), display that the post-halt volatility and bid-ask spreads are
at a higher level and can last for two hours or longer. The above studies are based on NYSE data.
Meanwhile, Abad and Pascual (2010) study data from the Spanish Stock Exchange and observe
an increasing dispersion of the trading volume and mid-quote price during sampling intervals of
trading interruptions (i.e., “volatility call auctions”), but they regress to their original levels during
the next two hours.
There are some papers on modern automated trading control mechanisms. Zimmermann
(2013) focuses on Deutsche Boerse Xetra exchange’s volatility interruptions, a mechanism comparable to Nasdaq’s trading pauses, and notices that the interruptions have a positive effect on
price discovery as the pre-halt price uncertainty decreases. Brogaard and Roshak (2016) study the
effects of trading pauses on extreme price movements (EPMs) and compare stock returns in the
per-regulation and post-regulation periods. They document that trading pauses can mitigate the
degree of extreme price movements while suppressing necessary price reactions.
Hautsch and Horvath (2019) study the effects of trading pauses under the SSCB and LULD
mechanisms during the pre-Amendment 10 period on liquidity, volatility, and price discovery in
7
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

the 120-minute window around trading pauses. The existence of those mechanisms makes the
market participant behave differently with the expectation of trading pauses to occur. Trading
pauses may facilitate price discovery during the interruption, but hurt price stability and liquidity
in the post-pause period. They also find that on average trading pauses fail to calm down the
market but instead induced volatility. Although trading pauses may play a protective role in extreme market events, their average negative effects on market quality require additional attention
as well.
2.2
High-Frequency Activity, Extreme Price Movements, and Market Quality
Hasbrouck and Saar (2013) propose a low-latency trading measure that is a prominent representative of proprietary trading activities by HFT firms, although it could also involve a small portion
of agency algorithms. Their measure is intended to capture high-frequency trading behavior and
has been further tested and compared with other HFT proxies in Boehmer, Li, and Saar (2018) to
show its relative advantage.
The low-latency trading measure by Hasbrouck and Saar (2013) can be taken as a proxy for
HFT activity. They use it to study low-latency trading’s impact on market quality both in normal
times and during turbulent periods with economic uncertainties. Their measure, RunsInProcess,
is built upon “strategic runs” as a chained sequence of order submissions, cancelations, and executions which are presumably components of a dynamic algorithmic trading strategy, as well as
being identifiable through order-level data with public availability. It is calculated as the timeweighted number of “strategic runs” longer than 10 messages in each interval. The measure is
highly correlated with the estimates from the Nasdaq 2008-2009 HFT dataset. They find that lowlatency trading activity can improve market quality measures in terms of decreasing spreads, increasing depths, and reducing short-term volatility. They also imply that low-latency trading need
not harm the interest of long-term investors. Their low-latency trading measure is a publicly available HFT proxy which can be constructed from the Nasdaq TotalView-ITCH data. Researchers
can compute the low-latency measure themselves instead of relying on exchanges provided HFT
datasets that cover a limited time span.
Boehmer, Li, and Saar (2018) compare the low-latency trading measure RunsInProcess with
8
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

the other three HFT proxies that are computable based on publicly available data to see which may
be the best to capture general HFT activity. Those three comparison measures include Ord2V ol,
Cancel2Trd, and CancelRatio.5 The first two have been widely used in HFT and algorithm trading literature such as Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011), Hagströmer and Nordén (2013),
Boehmer, Fong, and Wu (2021). The CancelRatio measure is designed to reflect the characteristic
of HFT firms which is related to the large amount of orders submitted which are canceled shortly
thereafter. The comparison results in Boehmer, Li and Saar (2018) show that RunsInProcess is a
reasonable HFT activity proxy and has even better performance when time intervals are longer.
The Canel2Trd and CancelRatio are also doing well, especially during short intervals.
Listed below are more papers about the background knowledge of latency and algorithm trading, which are two related factors of low-latency trading.
Looking at data from different markets, Hendershott and Moulton (2011) find that the expansion of automatic expansion and the reduction of execution time lead to decreased liquidity, while
Riordan and Storkenmaier (2012) notice that a reduction in latency is accompanied by enhanced
liquidity. The latency change may affect the market quality conditional on its impact on the competitions within the liquidity supply side and on how sophisticated the liquidity demanders are,
which may help to explain the seemly contradicted results.
Regarding how algorithm trading affects the market, there are papers such as Hendershott,
Jones, and Menkveld (2011), Boehmer, Fong, and Wu (2021), Chaboud et al. (2014), Hendershott
and Riordan (2013). Especially, Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011), use the electronic message arrival rate to measure the overall proprietary algorithm and trading algorithm activities,
and find that algorithmic trading results in mixed results in different measures of market quality
such as spreads and depths. In contrast, Hasbrouck and Saar (2013) find their low-latency trading
measure lead to positive results in all their measures of market quality, given that their measure
is intended to capture high-frequency proprietary trading as much as possible instead of agency
algorithm. In addition, those two papers inspected different data sources in different years with
regulation changes, which may contributed to some of the differences in conclusions as well.
Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015) propose a high-frequency quotation measure based on the
5The measures are defined as: (1) Ord2V ol := number of submitted limit orders / (1 + value of trades); (2)
Cancel2Trd := number of canceled limit orders / (1 + number of trades); (3) CancelRatio := number of canceled
limit orders / (1 + number of submitted and canceled limit orders).
9
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Daily TAQ data. They calculate “high-frequency quote updates” by counting the number of any
changes in prices or sizes of the best bid or offer (BBO) quotes during a given time interval on
each exchange and then aggregated across all of them. That does not depend on the official National Best Bid and Offer (NBBO), and the venue selection is endogenous in liquidity-supplying
or demanding algorithms. Their measure considers legitimate changes to the tip of the liquidity
supply curve of each exchange.
2.3
Limit Up-Limit Down Plan and its Amendment 10
The Flash Crash of May 6, 2010 has induced actions from the regulators such as the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
to prevent future extreme market events and enhance market stability.6 On June 10, 2010, the SEC
and the U.S. Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) approve the implementation of the
single-stock circuit breaker (SSCB) pilot program to address extraordinary volatility.7 The SSCB
pilot program is supposed to be expired on July 31, 2012, and the SEC approves an improved
replacement plan to SSCB on May 31, 2012.8 The new plan is the National Market System (NMS)
Plan to Address Extraordinary Market Volatility, which is also know as the Limit Up-Limit Down
(LULD) Plan.9 The LULD Plan is implemented in different phases, and the full implementation to
all stocks is on May 12, 2014.10
Briefly speaking, the LULD Plan prohibits trades from happening outside evolving price bands
that are formed around reference prices to handle extraordinary market volatility in stocks.11 For
a stock, in general, its reference price in force is dynamically decided based on the previous reference price in force and the preceding 5-minute moving average of transaction prices, except for
the initial reference price (that is, opening price) and the reference price after trading pause (that
is, reopening price).12 The reference price and price bands evolve throughout the market hour
6See https://www.sec.gov/news/studies/2010/marketevents-report.pdf.
7See https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/finra/2010/34-62251.pdf.
8See https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nms/2012/34-67091.pdf.
9The full details of the LULD mechanism can be found in the original LULD Plan at https://www.sec.gov/rules/
sro/nms/2012/34-67091.pdf, and in the amendments to the LULD Plan at https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nms.htm.
10More details can be found in Angel (2015), Hughes, Ritter, and Zhang (2017), and Moise and Flaherty (2017).
11The stocks in this paper are all NMS securities (including ETFs) in the U.S. securities market.
12The immediately preceding 5-minute moving average of transaction prices is called the pro-forma reference price.
10
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

from 9:30 am to 4:00 pm unless during trading pauses.13 A price band is formed as the percentage
deviations above and below the reference price. The band width is decided by factors such as
stock tiers, time of the day, and the previous day closing price.14 Especailly, the price band during
9:30-9:45 am and during 3:35-4:00 pm is doubled from that during 9:45 am - 3:35 pm as there is
usually higher volatility during the open and close.15 Trades are allowed to occur at quotes within
the price band, but not at any bid or offer quote outside the band. If the National Best Offer (NBO)
reaches the lower band or the National Best Bid (NBB) reaches the upper band, a limit state is imposed on the stock.16 The limit state could end if the quote prices are back within the price band.
If a limit state lasts for 15 seconds, the stock enters a 5-minute trading pause, and the primary listing exchange could extend the pause for another 5 minutes under certain circumstances.17 After
a trading pause, the trading on the stock reopens according to the reopening rules.18
The key component in the LULD mechanism is the reference price. It is recalculated every 30
seconds, but in practice the reference price is not updated unless it deviates from the pro-forma
reference price by at least 1%.19 And, when the market opens, both the reference price and the pro
forma reference price start at the initial reference price. 20
Therefore, whether the initial reference price is set up in a sensible way has a significant impact
on the evolution of reference price and price band, which then determines what kinds of quotes
will trigger the limit states and trading pauses. However, the setup mechanism of the initial
reference price before the implementation of Amendment 10 is problematic.21 Before Amendment
10, on a trading day, the first reference price for a stock is the trade price in the opening auction
13The time zone in this paper is the Eastern Time, i.e. EDT/EST.
14See Footnote 9 and Footnote 10.
15However, Amendment 18 removes the doubling rule of price band during 9:30-9:45 am for all stocks, and during
3:35-4:00 pm for all Tier 2 stocks with prices higher than $3. See Table 1 in Moise (2022) and see Amendment 18 in
https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nms/2019/34-85623.pdf.
16There is another state called “straddle state”. See Footnote 9 and Footnote 10.
17Toward the end of trading hours, the trading resumption or reopening rules could be different, and hence the
trading pause lengths. Therefore, it is possible to see that trading pauses last for a different length from 5 minutes or 10
minutes. See Footnote 9 and Footnote 10.
18See Footnote 9 and Footnote 10.
19The pattern of the reference price looks like a step function, while the pro-forma reference price is the 5-minute
moving average of preceding transaction prices which fluctuates continuously. See Figure B.1 in Moise and Flaherty
(2017) and Figure 2 in Moise (2022) for more details. And see footnote 12 for the definition of a pro forma reference
price
20The initial reference price is also called the “first reference price”. See the Amendment 10 notice of filling at https:
//www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nms/2016/34-77205.pdf and Amendment 10 order of approval at https://www.sec.gov/
rules/sro/nms/2016/34-77679.pdf.
21More detailed discussion of the problem can be found in Angel (2015) and Hughes (2017) . See also the Amendment
10 notice of filling and the Amendment 10 order of approval as in Footnote 20.
11
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

(i.e., opening trade) on its primary listing exchange in the first 5 minutes from market opening.
If no such opening trade exists and the stock opens with a quote, the first reference price is the
midpoint of the bid and ask quote. 22 The problem is that using the bid and ask midpoint of the
opening quote on the primary listing exchange as the opening price results in a skewed initial
reference price, especially when the trading interest in that stock is thin or null, which makes it
illiquid. That happens if the opening quote bid-ask spread is wide or the quote is skewed, which
in turn drives the opening price far away from the stock’s fair value. Hence, the midpoint of the
opening quote may not represent the true market of that stock, and it is highly affected by “crazy”
quotes or “fat fingers”.
To fix the problematic quote-based opening price, Amendment 10 redefines the opening price
when the stock opens with quotes on its primary listing exchange, based on feedback and backtesting analysis from participants in the LULD Plan.23 When a stock does not open with a trade in
the first 5 minutes, the new opening price is defined as the closing price of the stock on its primary
listing exchange on the previous trading day. If the closing price does not exist, then the last sale
on the primary listing exchange will be used. The new opening price should represent the fair
value of the stock at the opening, especially for less liquid stocks, in a much more sensible way.
Angel (2015) composes a joint assessment on the LULD mechanism prior to A10 and points
out issues such as the problematic opening reference price which induces unnecessary trading
pauses especially during the first 30 minutes of market hour.24 This assessment is prepared for
the reference of LULD operating committee and contributes to the making and implementation of
Amendment 10 to the LULD Plan. Hughes (2017) studies the real world effect of Amendment 10
and shows that it indeed dramatically reduces unnecessary trading pauses related to the opening
price issue, and the decrease of trading pauses in general is also significant.25
22And if there is no such opening trade or quote on the primary listing exchange by 9:35 a.m., the open reference
price is the arithmetic mean of the prices of eligible reported transactions for that stock over the preceding 5-minute
period across all NMS markets.
23See Angel (2015) and see the Amendment 10 notice of filling at https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nms/2016/
34-77205.pdf.
24See https://www.sec.gov/comments/4-631/4631-39.pdf.
25Other SEC Division of Economic and Risk Analysis (DERA) white papers also evaluate the LULD mechanism
before Amendment 10, such as Moise and Flaherty (2017) and Hughes, Ritter, and Zhang (2017). However, they do not
focus on the initial opening reference price issue.
12
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

2.4
Testable Hypotheses
Most of the trading pauses in the pre-A10 era are the unnecessary ones in terms of not being
indicative of extraordinary market volatility on single stocks. However, the trading pauses in the
post-A10 era are more closely in compliance with the spirit of the LULD Plan. The Amendment 10
to the LULD Plan provides an unique opportunity to investigate how different the market quality
evolution around the “ought-to-be” trading pauses is from that around the unneeded trading
pauses, especially after trading resumptions. It is also a valuable opportunity to comparably study
the high-frequency activity around the “ought-to-be” trading pauses and the unneeded ones, and
to examine and to examine the influence of high-frequency activity on market quality in those two
different scenarios.
However, there is little documentation in the literature on trading mechanisms or in the highfrequency trading literature on the above important questions. Hence, this paper proposes the
following hypotheses and empirically examines them. The results in this paper should be helpful
to regulators in re-visiting or making future trading halts and circuit breaker rules, as well as in
further understanding high-frequency activity and its impact on market quality.
The first two hypotheses focus on market quality. They investigate the evolution of liquidity
and short-term volatility before and after trading pauses and how their post-A10 patterns differ
from their pre-A10 patterns.
Hypothesis 1: There is more improvement in post-TP liquidity in the pre-A10 era compared to
the post-A10 era, and it is because pre-TP liquidity is lower in the pre-A10 era.
Hypothesis 2: The short-term volatility around trading pauses in the post-A10 era is higher
than that in the pre-A10 era, especially after trading pauses.
The next three hypotheses consider high-frequency quoting and its interaction with market
quality measures. They explore how high-frequency quoting activity evolves before and after
trading pauses, and the difference of that in the pre-A10 era and post-A10 era. They also investigate into the correlation between high-frequency quoting activity and market quality around
trading pauses, in terms of liquidity and short-term volatility.
Hypothesis 3: High-frequency quoting activity before and after trading pauses is higher in the
post-A10 era than that in the pre-A10 era, especially in the minutes around trading pauses and
13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

after trading pauses.
Hypothesis 4: High-frequency quoting activity is positively correlated with liquidity improvement in the 2-hour window around trading pauses, especially before trading pauses, and this
correlation is more profound in the post-A10 era than in the pre-A10 era.
Hypothesis 5: High-frequency quoting activity only occasionally positively correlates with
short-term volatility in the 2-hour window around trading pauses, and it is even less so in the
post-A10 era than in the pre-A10 era, especially after trading pauses.
3
Data, Measurement, and Descriptive Statistics
3.1
Limit Up-Limit Down Trading Pauses Overview
This paper adopts two ways to access LULD trading pauses data. Following Hautsch and Horvath
(2019), the LULD trading pauses data can be obtained from NasdaqTrader.com, which is a website
affiliated with Nasdaq. Alternatively, similar to Moise (2022), the LULD trading pauses data can
be inferred and extracted from administrative massages files from Daily TAQ.
Figure 1 panel (a) depicts the distribution of daily LULD trading pauses and involved stocks in
the [-6,+6] calendar months window around the implementation of the LULD Plan Amendment
10. There is a sharp decrease in the frequency of trading pauses occurrence and also in the count
of how many stocks experience any number of trading pauses per day after Amendment 10 comes
into effect. The decrease actually started a few days before July 18, 2016, according to the trend
by the 5-day moving average. In the post-A10 era, both the daily number of trading pauses and
the daily number of stocks experiencing trading pauses stay low and never bounce back to the
pre-A10 level, with much smaller fluctuations as well. Panel (a) also shows that the pre-A10
daily number of trading pauses is about 40 higher than the daily number of stocks experiencing
trading pauses. The pre-A10 daily average count of trading pauses is about 80 while that of stocks
experiencing trading pauses is about 40. Also, the frequency of daily trading pauses in the pre-A10
era is much more volatile than that of stocks experiencing trading pauses per day. However, the
frequency of daily trading pauses after A10 and the daily number of stocks experiencing trading
pauses overlap almost all together, with the frequency of trading pauses slightly higher and more
volatile in some days. In general, the frequency of post-A10 trading pauses and the count of
14
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

stocks experiencing trading pauses are both much less volatile than those in the pre-A10 era. Panel
(a) indicates that Amendment 10 successfully reduces the daily occurrence frequency of trading
pauses and the stocks experiencing trading pauses per day. It also reduced the ratio of daily
trading pauses to stocks experience trading pauses per day. Therefore, in the post-A10 era, there
are fewer stocks which are likely to experience trading pauses per day, and a stock is less likely
to experience multiple trading pauses on the same day. After the implementation of Amendment
10, there are also fewer day-to-day fluctuations in trading pauses or stocks involved.
Next, Figure 1 Panel (b) shows the frequency of monthly trading pauses from the full implementation of the LULD Plan in May 2014 to September 2021, which shows a much longer horizon
compared to panel (a).26 Similar to Panel (a), Panel (b) shows that the frequency of occurrence
of monthly trading pauses before A10 is much higher than that in the post-10 era. The pre-A10
average monthly level is about 1000 trading pauses per month, while that in the post-A10 era
(but before the Covid-19 outbreak) is approximately in the 100 to 200 range. The decrease in the
frequency of trading pause in the post-A10 era is consistent and lasting beyond the first 6 months
post-10, until the US Covid-19 outbreak in March 2020. There is an unprecedentedly huge spike
in March 2020, indicating that the market is extremely turbulent in that month and that the LULD
trading pauses are triggered many times among many stocks, in addition to the four occurrence of
the market-wide circuit breaker (MWCB).27 The monthly occurrence of trading pauses increases in
the post-Covid era, and the month-by-month fluctuation is also larger compared to the post-A10
but pre-Covid era. However, the average monthly frequency of trading pauses after March 2020 is
still lower than that in the pre-A10 era. In an unreported figure showing the ratio of monthly trading pauses and involved stocks, the ratio is much higher in the pre-A10 era than in the post-A10
era, and it has a clear drop after the implementation of Amendment 10. The pre-A10 ratio fluctuates between 2.8 and 6.5 approximately. The ratio does not bounce back even in the Covid-19
outbreak (in March 2020) and afterwards, and it varies approximately in the range of 1.5 to 4.
In the Appendix, Figure A.1 compares the number of trading pauses with VIX and Equity
Market Uncertainty (EMU) and indicates that the dramatic decrease in trading pauses after the
26The most recent data update of this study in the current draft covers from May 2014 to September 2021.
27The four market-wide circuit breaker (MWCB) halts happened on the 9th, 12th, 16th, and 18th of March
2020.
See https://www.nyse.com/publicdocs/nyse/markets/nyse/Report_of_the_Market-Wide_Circuit_Breaker_
Working_Group.pdf.
15
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

implementation of Amendment 10 is not due to changes in market volatility or uncertainty. The effect of Amendment 10 on reducing the occurrence of trading pauses is also documented in Hughes
(2017). Figure A.2 plots the monthly market volatility and uncertainty indices, VIX, Equity Market
Volatility (EMV), infectious disease EMV, and EMU.28 Comparing those indices with the monthly
trading pause frequency as in Figure 1 panel (b), it can be seen that changes in market volatility
and uncertainty are not the causes for trading pauses to occur less after the implementation of
Amendment 10. Before the Covid-19 outbreak, the post-A10 level of market volatility and uncertainty roughly fluctuated in the same range as the pre-A10 level. There is no significant drop in
any of those indices when Amendment 10 comes into effect, but the occurrence of trading pauses
is dramatically reduced and stays low until the Covid-19 outbreak. In contrast, the March 2020
spike in trading pauses as in Figure 1 is driven by Covid-19-induced volatility and uncertainty as
in Figure A.2. In addition, Amendment 18 of the LULD plan does not have a significant effect on
increasing the frequency of trading pauses, which can be shown in Figure 2.
The top panel of Figure 2 depicts the daily average intraday quarter-hour evolution of the
trading pauses in the [-20, +20] trading days window and [-6, +6] months window before and after
the implementation of Amendment 10. In the pre-A10 era, most of the trading pauses happen in
the first 30 minutes since market open, i.e. the 9:30-9:45 a.m. and the 9:45-10:00 a.m. quarter-hours.
In the top left plot (i.e. the [-20, +20] trading days window), the pre-A10 average count of trading
pauses from all stocks is slightly more than 13 in the 9:30-9:45 a.m. quarter-hour interval. Then
it increases to slightly less than 21 in the 9:45-10:00 a.m. quarter-hour interval. In the 10:00-10:15
a.m. quarter-hour interval, the daily average of trading pauses drastically drops to about 5.5 and
gradually decreases to 2 approximately in the 11:00-11:15 a.m. quarter-hour interval. Afterward, it
stays in the 1 to 2 range until 3:00 p.m. and then further decreases toward 0 in the last quarter-hour
interval before market closes. It is a similar case in the [-6, +6] months window for the pre-A10
daily average trading pauses. The minor differences are that the 9:30-9:45 a.m. value is about 15
and the 9:45-10:00 a.m. value is approximately 17.5. And the value of 10:00-10:15 a.m. is about
5. That is, the daily averages of the first quarter hour of trading pauses in the [-6, +6] months
28The VIX data is from the CBOE website https://www.cboe.com/tradable_products/vix/vix_historical_data/, and
it is converted to monthly data from the original daily level data. The EMV and EMU indices are from the Economic
Policy Uncertainty website by Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, https://www.policyuncertainty.
com/. The monthly EMV indices (including the infectious disease EMV) are adopted directly, while the monthly EMU
data is converted from the original daily EMU index.
16
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

window is slightly higher than that in the [-20, +20] trading days window, while the peak at the
9:45-10:00 am interval is about 3 trading pauses lower on average per day. The 10:00-10:15 am.
level is about half the trading pauses less than that in the [-20, +20] trading days window, and the
decrease since then is slightly smoother throughout the day. However, the evolution patterns of
the post-A10 daily average of trading pauses are even more similar in the [-20, +20] trading days
window and [-6, +6] months window. Both peaks occur in the 9:45-10:00 a.m. interval at around
2.5 trading pauses on average per day, while the 9:30-9:45 a.m. level is approximately 1.5 in the
[-20, +20] trading days window and about one in the [-6, +6] months window. From 10:00 a.m. to
market close, the daily average trading pauses stay in the 0 to 1 range and close to the null side,
in both windows.
In short, the top panel of Figure 2 demonstrates that Amendment 10 significantly reduces the
occurrence of trading pauses, especially in the 9:45-10:00 a.m. quarter-hour interval and in the first
30 minutes since market opening. It also reduces the trading pause frequency throughout the rest
of the day, but the degree is much smaller because the pre-A10 level of trading pauses after 10 a.m.
is much less than the that in the opening half-hour. The eliminated trading pauses by Amendment
10 are the ones linked to the problematic initial reference price issue when stocks open by quotes
instead of trades. Those problematic trading pauses in the pre-A10 era are mostly likely to happen in the first hour of trading, especially in the first 30 minutes and after the LULD price band
shrinks to half beginning at 9:45 a.m. Amendment 10 has significantly improved the issue and
reduced unnecessary trading pauses linked to the previous problematic opening reference price
mechanism.
The middle and bottom panel of Figure 2 shows that the effect of Amendment 10 on reducing
the occurrence of trading pauses in the opening hour is persistent, even in a longer horizon from
May 12, 2014 (full implementation of the LULD Plan) to September 30, 2021, beyond the [-20, +20]
trading days window and [-6, +6] months window. Similar to what has been shown in the top
panel, the effect of Amendment 10 in reducing trading pauses especially in the opening hour is
persistent all the way till Feb 2020 when LULD Plan Amendment 18 (A18) comes into effect as
well as the March 2020 Covid-19 outbreak. The pre-A10 pattern and the post-A10 but pre-A18
pattern are very similar to those in the top panel, although the pre-A10 highs are slightly lower.
In addition, comparing the two plots in the middle panel, it can be seen that Amendment 18 of
17
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

the LULD Plan (in force in February 2020 as shown in Figure 1) slightly increases the number of
trading pauses in the 9:30-9:45 a.m. quarter-hour interval by 5 on average per day due to the LULD
price band shrinking. In addition, the middle right plot and the bottom plot consider the effect
of Covid-19 outbreak in March 2020 on the frequency of trading pauses, by removing March 2020
and by singling out March 2020 respectively. In March 2020, the impact of the Covid-19 outbreak
dramatically increases the frequency of occurrence of trading pauses in each of the quarter-hour
intervals, especially during the 9:30-11:00 a.m. period. The 9:45-10:00 a.m. and 9:30-9:45 a.m.
values are the highest.
3.2
Trading Pauses Screening Process
There are 5 filtering and screening steps starting from all LULD trading pauses recorded in the
[−20, +20] trading days window to the eligible ones used in the empirical analyses part of this
paper. The filters are based on Hautsch and Horvath (2019).
Firstly, each LULD trading pause needs to follow the LULD Plan rules regarding the trading
pausing timestamp (i.e. starting time), trading resumption timestamp (i.e. ending time), and time
duration of the pause. On a given day, a legitimate LULD trading pause must have its starting
time and ending time within the regular trading hours and have a legitimate duration regulated
by the rules depending on the starting time.29 This first filter results in the number of legitimate
LULD trading pauses (i.e., “TP events”) and the involved stocks (i.e., “TP stocks”) as shown in the
first row of Table 1 Panel (A).
Next, from the remaining trading pauses, only those that last for 5 minutes are kept. That
is, for the purpose of unifying comparison since trading pauses with different lengths may have
different impacts on market quality and other aspects of interests. This second screening process
leads to the second row in Table 1 Panel (A).
Third, to avoid the overlapping effect, if there are multiple trading pauses on a stock on a given
day, only those that are 2 hours apart from each other are selected.30 The remaining eligible TP
29Most of the LULD trading pauses last for 5 minutes in length. Some can be extended for another 5 minutes. Some
other have irregular time lengths. For example, for LULD trading pauses that start towards the market closing time,
their ending time may be combined with the market closing time. Some others may have a resumption time recorded
after the market closes. Those cases will result in their pause durations being longer than 5 minutes
30Christie, Corwin, and Harris (2002) find that the increased level of bid-ask spreads and volatility last for at least 2
hours after trading halts.
18
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

events and TP stocks after the third filter are demonstrated in the third row of Table 1 Panel (A).
The fourth filter requires that the trading pauses need to resume at least 20 minutes before
market closes, so as to leave enough minutes after trading resumptions to start the post-TP market
quality and other aspects of interests. That screening step results in the counts of TP events and
TP stocks in the fourth row of Table 1 Panel (A).
Lastly, the fifth filter requires eligible trading pauses to be at least 5 minutes after market opening, which will create at least 5 minutes of measurement units for market quality measures and
proxies for other aspects of interest before trading pauses. This fifth filter leads to the last row in
Table 1 Panel (A).
3.3
Time Window around Trading Pauses and Measurement Units of Variables
Following Hautsch and Horvath (2019), the focus time range is 1 hour before trading pauses and 1
hour after trading resumptions. However, what happen during the trading pauses is not covered.
The 2-hour window should leave enough time to study how market quality and high-frequency
activity evolve towards trading pauses and after trading resumptions, while avoiding the overlapping effects of two nearby trading pauses on the same stock.31 The time length for each of the
bins before and after trading pauses could be 1 minutes, 3 minutes, or 5 minutes, which is also
referred to as the bin interval in this paper. For 1-minute bins, there will be 60 bins before trading
pauses and 60 bins after trading resumes, which constitute the [-60, +60] 1-minute bins window
around trading pauses. Similarly, for the 3-minute bins, there will be 20 bins before and 20 bins
after trading pauses in the [-20, +20] window composed of 3-minute bins around trading pauses.
And for the 5-minute bins, there will be 12 bins fore and 12 bins after trading pauses in the [-12,
+12] window composed of 5-minute bins around trading pauses. Note that there is no “bin 0”
in any of the window. The current version of this paper focuses on the 1-minute bins. Each bin
serves as the time unit upon which the market quality and high-frequency activity measurements
are computed.
In this paper, the following notations are used to denote trading pauses and time bins in the 2hour window around. A unique stock-date-time tuple (s, d, t) identifies a trading pause. The letter
s stands for stock, d for date, and t for the time of day when a trading pause occurs. Taking the
31See Footnote 30.
19
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

[−60, +60] window of 1-minute bins around trading pauses, for example, the proxies for variables
are measured in each time bin τ, where τ = −60, −59, . . . , −2, −1, 1, 2, . . . , 59, 60 are for each 1minute bin in the [−60, +60] window.32 Bin “τ = 0” would represent the time when a trading
pause is in progress, but this interval of time is not included in the study. Both the notations
(s, d, t) and τ will be used as subscriptions in the equations in Section 4.1 and Section 5.2 to identify
trading pauses and bins where the variables are computed.33
3.4
Trading Pauses Sample Summary Statistics
As described in the previous section, the trading pause data is obtained from the DTAQ administrative messages files and from the NasdaqTrader.com via a cross-validation approach. The
current version of this paper focuses on LULD trading pauses in the US stock market in the [-20,
+20] trading days window around July 18, 2016, the implementation date of Amendment 10.
Table 1 summarizes the distribution of trading pauses in the [-20, +20] trading days window
around the implementation of Amendment 10, from different aspects. Day 1 is on July 18, 2016,
and Day 0 can be considered as the hours after market close on the previous trading day and
before market opening time on July 18, 2016. To understand Table 1 Panel (A), it is necessary
to first understand the filters for selecting eligible trading pauses in this paper, as described in
Section 3.2.
Table 1 Panel (A) displays the count of trading pauses and the count of stocks with trading
pauses, after applying each filter cumulatively. The final eligible sample in the [−20, +20] trading
days window after applying the 5 filters contains 566 trading pauses in the pre-A10 era and 105
trading pauses in the post-A10 era. Consequently, there are 240 unique stocks involved in the
above trading pauses in the pre-A10 era and 60 unique stocks involved in the post-A10 era. Those
trading pauses and stocks involved are the ones used in Panel (C) and Panel (D), and throughout
the remaining sections in this paper.
Table 1 Panel (B) displays the hourly distribution of TP events and TP stocks in the 20 trading
days pre-A10 and 20 trading days post-A10 respectively. To account for the filters of 5 minutes
after market open and 20 minutes before market close as described above, the first row represents
32This is subject to change depending on the bin length. For example, if each bin lasts for 3 minutes instead, then
τ = −20, −19, . . . , −2, −1, 1, 2, . . . , 19, 20.
33See Section 4.1 and Section 5.2 for more details.
20
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

the 9:35-10:00 a.m. interval instead of an hour, and similarly, the last row is for the 3:00-3:40 p.m.
interval. The rest of the rows are for each hour from 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., sequentially. The
distribution of trading pauses is highly similar to the top-left plot in Figure 2, indicating that the
9:35-10:00 a.m. interval has the most masses and there is a significant drop starting from 10:00
a.m. and gradually decaying throughout the day with minor fluctuations. This pattern applies to
both trading pauses in the pre-A10 era and in the post-A10 era, but the post-A10 trading pauses in
each interval are much less than their counterparts in the pre-A10 era, especially in the 9:35-10:00
a.m. interval and early hours. This further reinstates the effect of Amendment 10 in reducing the
frequency of occurrence of trading pauses that are related to the problematic opening reference
price in the pre-A10 era.
Table 1 Panel (C) summarizes how many minutes exist before and after fully filtered trading
pauses during market hours in the [−20, +20] trading days window around the implementation
of Amendment 10. It reflects the happening time of those trading pauses during market hours
from a specific angle. In the sample of pre-A10 trading pauses, there are 29.90 of the 1-minute
bins before trading pauses on average, and 59.72 of those after trading resumptions. The pre-TP
standard deviation of the count of the 1-minute bins is 19.51, while the post-TP standard deviation
is 2.90. The means and standard deviations tell that most trading pause events have the complete
60-minute span after trading resumptions, both in the pre-A10 era and post-A10 era. However,
they also indicate that most of the trading pause events do not have a complete 60-minute span
before trading pauses, and the span varies between different TP events. In the pre-A10 20 trading
days, there is on average a nearly 30-minute pre-TP span, but the median is only 16 minutes while
the 75th percentile is 59 minutes. That indicates that the majority of pre-TP 1-minute bins span
less than 30 minutes in the pre-A10 era and probably concentrated at the 15 to 16-minute range.
It further implies that many of the trading pauses occur in the 9:45-9:46 a.m. range, right after the
LULD price band shrinks to half of level in the opening 15 minutes.34 In the post-A10 era, the
mean of pre-TP 1-minute bins span is 38.92, which is about 9 minutes longer than in the pre-A10
era. And now the median is 50 of the 1-minute bins with the 75th percentile being 60, while the
34As stated in the captions of Figure 1 Panel (C), the timestamps on trading pause and resumption are rarely at 9:35:00
am and 3:40:00 pm sharp. Therefore, the marginal time gap residuals are treated as extra 1-minutes bins when market
opens and closes. Hereby, the minimum pre-TP and post-TP bins span are 6 of the 1-minute bins and 21 of the 1-minute
bins instead of 5 and 20. And the 16 of 1-minute bins as seen in the 25th and 50th percentiles may actually mean a span
of 15 to 16 minutes. And so on and so forth.
21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

25th percentile is now 16. Those indicate that most of the trading pauses in the post-A10 era have
a longer pre-TP bins span, and that those trading pauses happen later than their counterparts in
the pre-A10 era. The minimum, maximum, and other percentiles validate the above inferences.
Panel (C) results further support the effect of Amendment 10 on reducing trading pauses that are
linked to a problematic opening reference price, especially those that would occur in the first few
quarters.
Table 1 Panel (D) describes the actual coverage of the event window of minutes around each
trading pause in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras, respectively. It also depicts the happening time
of trading pauses indirectly from a different aspect than that in Panel (C) above. The statistics
are produced in this way. First, for each of the 120 time bins in the [−60, +60] minutes window,
count how many trading pause events actually cover that 1-minute bin in their 120-minute event
windows.35 There will be 120 counts of trading pauses, 60 in the pre-TP window, and 60 in the
post-TP window. Next, compute the time-series summary statistics across the 60 bins in the preTP window and across the 60 bins in the post-TP window, respectively. And, the previous two
steps are applied to the fully filtered trading pauses in the 20 trading days pre-A10 and in the
20 trading days post-A10, respectively. The above steps result in the 4 rows in this panel. In the
pre-A10 era, before trading pauses, there are 282.02 trading pauses involved in a 1-minute bin
on average across the 60 bins and the standard deviation is 165.09. The minimum is 141 trading
pauses involved in a 1-minute bin, and the maximum is 566 trading pauses involved in a bin,
which are all the fully filtered trading pauses in the 20 trading days before A10. In the 60 minutes
after trading pauses, there are on average 563.37 trading pauses involved in a 1-minute bin with
the standard deviation of 2.35. The minimum is 560 trading pauses windows which are involved
in a bin and the maximum is 566. That indicates that not all the 120 bins are covered in each of the
trading pauses events, especially the earlier bins before trading pauses. However, almost all the
60 bins post-TP are covered in all the trading pauses event windows. In the post-A10 era, there are
105 fully filtered trading pauses, and on average there are 102.77 trading pause windows which
cover a bin in the 60 minutes after trading pauses. That is similar to the case in the pre-A10 era,
meaning that almost all trading pause event windows cover all the 60 bins after trading resumes.
For the 60 bins before trading pauses in the post-A10 era, on average a bin is covered in 68.12 TP
35Please also refer to the caption in 1 Panel (D) for a better understanding.
22
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

event windows, and the standard deviation is 20.84. The bin with the least coverage of the TP
event window is covered by 45 TP event windows, while the maximum bin is covered by all 105
TP event windows.
3.5
Liquidity Measure and Descriptive Analysis
The main liquidity measure in this study is the percentage quoted spread, which is calculated
following the methodology in Holden and Jacobsen (2014).
The QSpreadτ for each time bin τ (as described in Section 3.3) is computed on the basis of all
the National Best Bid (NBB) and National Best Ask (NBO) in force in that time bin τ. A stockdate-time tuple (s, d, t) uniquely identifies a trading pause. The letter s stands for stock, d for
date, and t for the time of day when a trading pause occurs. The measure is defined for each
time bin τ around each trading pause (s, d, t). The stock-date-time tuple (s, d, t) is omitted from
the subscripts that follow the formulas for parsimony. For each quote n which has any length of
in-force time within bin τ, denote the National Best Bid as Bidn, and National Best Ask as Askn.36
Suppose there are Nτ quotes which are ever in force in time bin τ, and the in-force time intervals
for each of those quotes are denoted as ln.
MidQuoten = (Askn + Bidn)
2
(1)
Then, for the time bin τ, the dollar quoted spread and percentage quoted spread are:
QSpreadτ =
Nτ
P
n
(Askn −Bidn) ln
Nτ
P
n
ln
(2)
QSpread (%)τ =
Nτ
P
n
[(Askn −Bidn) /MidQuoten] ln
Nτ
P
n
ln
(3)
Table 2 presents the time-series average of the cross-sectional summary statistics for the spread
36This includes any quote which has a portion of in-force time outside bin t and the other portion of in-force time
within bin t. For this type of quote, only the in-force time within the bin t is counted. There can be two scenarios: (1)
a quote which becomes in force before the time bin t and is still in force after entering the bin t for a certain period of
time; (2) a quote which becomes in force within the time bin t and lasts beyond it.
23
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

quoted (%). It is based on the [-60, +60] 1-minute bin window around trading pauses. First,
the percentage quoted spread is computed for each available bin around each trading pause.
Next, the summary statistics are calculated at all the bin levels for qualified trading pauses crosssectionally.37 Then, the time-series average is taken across each bin in the pre-TP [-60, -1] interval
or the post-TP [+1, +60] interval over the previously acquired bin-level summary statistics. For the
time-series average, the data are grouped into four intervals along the pre- and post-A10 dimension and along the pre- and post-TP dimension: (1) pre-A10 and pre-TP, (2) pre-A10 and post-TP,
(3) post-A10 and pre-TP, and (4) post-A10 and post-TP. Those correspond to the four rows in Table
2.
In the pre-A10 era, the time-series average of pre-TP mean of the bin-level percentage quoted
spread is 7.09 which is much larger than 1.65 in the post-TP interval. So is the time-series average
of pre-TP median, 1.51, compared to the post-TP median of 0.65. The mean and median indicate
that the percentage quoted spread is on average smaller after trading resumes than before trading
pauses in the pre-A10 era. That is a preliminary signal of liquidity improvement after trading
resumes compared to the level before trading pauses. The time-series average of cross-sectional
standard deviation, 13.86, is also much larger in the pre-TP interval than 3.94 in the post-TP interval. It points out that the pre-TP liquidity measured by percentage quoted spread is on average
quite volatile across different trading pauses, whereas the post-TP quoted spread is on average
much more stabler across trading pauses.
In the post-A10 era, the time-series average of the pre-TP mean is 3.57, which is smaller than
its counterpart, 7.09, in the pre-A10 era, but it is larger than the time-series average of the post-TP
mean, 1.70, in the post-A10 era. The time-series average of the post-TP mean is similar in the
pre-A10 era and the post-A10 era, while the latter is larger by 0.05. The time-series average of
the pre-TP median is 1.02 in the post-A10 era, and the post-TP median is 0.70, which is smaller.
Compared to their pre-A10 era counterparts, the pre-TP median is smaller by 0.49 while the postTP median is slightly larger by 0.05. The time-series average of the pre-TP standard deviation, 6.19,
is larger than the post-TP standard deviation 3.11. It is also smaller than its counterpart, 13.86, in
the pre-A10 era. The time-series average of the post-TP standard deviation in the post-A10 era is
0.83 smaller than its counterpart in the pre-A10 era.
37See Section 3 for the filtering process for qualified trading pauses.
24
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 3 Panel (a) compares the cross-sectional mean and median of the percentage quoted
spread before and after trading pauses in the pre-A10 and post-A10 periods. It can support the
summary statistics in Table 2. The post-A10 evolution of the cross-sectional mean in the [-60,
+60] 1-minute intervals is stabler than that in the pre-A10 evolution. For the cross-sectional mean
at the bin level after A10, there are more fluctuations in the 60-minute pre-TP interval than in
the post-TP interval. The triangle-shaped scatter plot of the bin-level percentage quoted spread
and its 5-minute moving average (both in grey color) in the left plot of Figure 3 Panel (a) also
indicates that the pre-TP quoted spread is about 5%-6% higher than the post-TP level, especially
in the [-60, -15] minutes window before trading pauses. The evolution of the post-TP percentage
quoted spread is less fluctuated from bin to bin while it varies much more dramatically in the
[-60, -15] minutes window before trading pauses and quickly decreases thereafter. The pre-A10
cross-sectional mean of the percentage quoted spread is at a higher level at the [-60, -15] minutes
interval before trading pauses and is more volatile compared to its post-A10 counterpart. It goes
down around 15 minutes before trading pauses and converges to the post-A10 cross-sectional
mean evolution. The post-A10 liquidity improvement after trading pauses are not as large as that
in the pre-A10 era, because the post-TP liquidity level is much similar to the pre-TP liquidity level
in the post-A10 era. However, the improvement in post-TP liquidity in the pre-A10 era is more
dramatic, especially compared to the level in the [-60, -15] minutes interval before trading pauses.
There is a spike in the quoted spread in the minute right before the trading pauses in both the
mean plot and the median plot, as shown in Figure 3 Panel (a). The median plot is less volatile
compared to the mean plot, while there is a little hill at the [-30, -15] window before the trading
pauses in the pre-A10 era. The post-A10 median plot of percentage quoted spread is almost similar
to a flat line except that it slightly goes up right around trading pauses.
Figure 3 Panel (b) shows the evolution of the cross-sectional mean and median of the quoted
spread in dollar terms. The post-A10 evolution patterns of the post-A10 mean and median are similar to that in the percentage term as in Panel (a), while the post-A10 mean and median evolution
patterns have more larger spikes right before trading pauses.
25
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

3.6
Short-Term Volatility Measure and Descriptive Analysis
The short-term liquidity measure is the HighLow, following the spirit of Hasbrouck and Saar
(2013), which is computed as the difference of the highest ever in-force mid-quote in the bin τ minus the lowest ever in-force mid-quote in the same bin τ, divided by the mid-point of the highest
and the lowest, times 10000. As before, the measure is defined for each time bin τ around each
trading pause (s, d, t). The stock-date-time tuple (s, d, t) is omitted from the subscripts that follow
the formulas for parsimony. Follow the notations of n and Nτ and the definition of MidQuoten as
in Section 3.5, I define HighLow in bin τ as below.
HighLowτ =
max
n∈Nτ {MidQuoten} −min
n∈Nτ {MidQuoten}

max
n∈Nτ {MidQuoten} + min
n∈Nτ {MidQuoten}

/2
× 10000
(4)
Figure 4 shows the cross-sectional mean and median of HighLow around trading pauses in
the pre- and post-Amendment 10 periods, respectively. The plot on the left depicts the evolutions
of the minute-by-minute cross-sectional mean in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras. In the [-60, -10]
1-minute interval before trading pauses, the pre-A10 HighLow is mostly higher than the post-A10
HighLow. Starting from about 10 minutes before trading pauses, they cross paths, and the postA10 HighLow becomes higher than the pre-A10 HighLow mostly. The post-TP cross-sectional
mean of HighLow is higher in the post-A10 era. The spike during the [-5, +5] 1-minute window
around trading pauses in the post-A10 era is also much greater than that in the pre-A10 era. The
patterns depicted above indicate that the mean of short-term volatility measured by HighLow is
higher in the pre-A10 era before about 10 minutes until trading pauses and then it is higher in
the post-A10 afterward. The short-term volatility also significantly shoots up during the [-5, +5]
1-minute window around trading pauses in the post-A10 era, then decreases afterward, but stays
higher above the level in the pre-A10 era after trading pauses.
Table 3 displays the time-series average of the summary statistics for HighLow in the minutelevel bins before and after trading pauses in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras. In the pre-A10 era, the
time-series average of the minute-level cross-sectional means before trading pauses is 26.47, which
is smaller than its counterpart, 18.24, in the interval after trading pauses. The pre-TP median is 4.24
26
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

in the pre-A10 era, which is higher than the post-TP median of 2.56. The above statistics suggest
that short-term volatility, measured by HighLow, decreases after the trading pauses in the pre-A10
era. In other words, the trading pauses in the pre-A10 era seem to have an effect of cooling down
short-term volatility on average, after trading resumes, compared to the 1-hour interval before
trading pauses. In addition, the time-series average of standard deviation reduces from 51.50 in
the pre-TP interval to 33.19 in the post-TP interval. In the post-A10 era, the time-series average of
cross-sectional means increases from 21.47 in the pre-TP interval to 30.89 in the post-TP interval;
the median increases from 3.51 pre-TP to 14.12 post-TP. Those suggest that, on the contrary, in the
post-A10 era, short-term volatility increases after trading pauses. In other words, in the post-A10
era, trading pauses seem to magnify short-term volatility instead of cooling it off. The post-A10
time-series average of standard deviation before and after trading pauses are very similar. The
pre-TP standard deviation is 42.17 while the post-TP standard deviation is 42.02.
3.7
High-Frequency Quoting Measure and Descriptive Analysis
The key proxy for high-frequency activity in this paper is the measure of high-frequency quote
updates HFQU based on Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015). Taking the 1-minute bin as an example, for each 1-minute bin of the [-60, +60] minutes window around a trading pause of a ticker,
any changes in the quote price or size of the best bid or best offer are counted on each exchange
and aggregated across all exchanges.
There are several merits of using HFQU as a measure of high-frequency activity in this study.
First, HFQU is a quote-based proxy for high-frequency activity. The triggering mechanism of
LULD trading pauses also depends on quote prices. Therefore, using HFQU as the high-frequency
activity proxy can better capture the potential correlation between high-frequency quoting activity and extreme quote price movements, which can trigger trading pauses. Secondly, the HFQU
measure can be calculated from the Daily TAQ data, which is the same data source for the main liquidity and volatility measures used in this study. This way, consistency is maintained throughout
these different measures and there is no need to concern about the matching rate or data loss when
merging different data sources together. Last but not least, HFQU is a relatively straightforward
measure to compute and understand, while it can effectively capture high-frequency quotation
27
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

activity as shown in Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015).
Similar to the liquidity measure and the short-term volatility measure defined in the previous sections, the HFQU measure is also defined for each time bin τ around each trading pause
(s, d, t). The stock-date-time tuple (s, d, t) is omitted from the subscripts that follow the formulas
for parsimony. Denote each exchange by e and the set of all exchanges as E. Suppose that there
are Me,τ quotes on the exchange e at time bin τ, and each quote qm is a tuple containing 4 elements, i.e. qm = (bidm, bidsizem, askm, asksizem), where m, m+1 ≤Me,τ. And it is nature to have
qm̸ = qm+1 if any of the 4 elements is different in this two quotes. For the mth quote on exchange e
in time bin τ, note that bidm is the best bid price; bidsizem is the best bid size; askmis the best ask
price; asksizem is the best ask size. As indicated in Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015), they need
not to be the national best bid or national best ask.
HFQUe,τ =
Me,τ
X
m
1 {qm̸ = qm+1}
(5)
HFQUτ =
E
X
e
HFQUe,τ
(6)
Figure 5 presents the cross-sectional mean and median for each of the 1-minute bins in the [-60,
+60] minutes interval around trading pauses, before and after the implementation of Amendment
10.
In the pre-A10 era, the cross-sectional mean of HFQU stays around 10 to 30 during the [-60,
-15] minutes window before trading pauses. Then, it goes up from around 15 minutes before
trading pauses and climbs to the level around 50 until a spike of approximately 100 occurs 1
minute before trading pauses and follows by another spike around 80 in the minute right after
trading resumes. Afterward, it quickly drops to the level close to 50 and goes slightly down to
about 40 during the [+1, +60] minutes interval after the trading resumes.
In the post-A10 era, the cross-sectional mean of HFQU is higher than its counterpart in the preA10 era, oscillates from about 90 to 25, and stays mostly around 50 during the [-60, -15] minutes
window before trading pauses. That suggests that high-frequency quotation activity is higher in
the post-A10 era during the [-60, -15] minutes window before trading pauses. Strikingly, the postA10 cross-sectional mean of HFQU increases about 10 minutes before trading pauses and reaches
28
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

above 250 in the minute right before trading pauses. It even reaches the 350 level in the minute
after trading resumes and quickly declines to about 160 about 5 minutes after trading resumes
and then oscillates around 110 till 20 minutes after trading resumes. Afterward, it drops to about
80 and gradually goes town towards 50.
Comparing the evolution of the post-A10 mean and that of the pre-A10 mean of HFQU, it is
obvious that the mean high-frequency quoting activity is almost consistently higher in the postA10 era throughout the [-60, +60] 1-minute window before and after trading pauses, except for the
short interval of [-15, -10] minutes approximately before trading pauses, where they cross paths
and stay close around the level of 50.
As for the median, both the pre-A10 and post-A10 medians stay around 0 until after 20 minutes
before trading pauses when they climb up to above 5 and then the post-A10 median shoots up and
reaches about 45 in the minute right before trading pauses while the pre-A10 median is at about
35. The post-TP median in the pre-A10 era quickly drops from about 25 in the minute right after
trading resume to 5 in a minute later and oscillates around 5 to 10 in the remaining 59 minutes
after trading resumes. The median in the post-A10 era is close to 60 in the minute right after
trading resumes, and it quickly goes down and oscillates around 35 to 15 during until 10 minutes
after trading resumes. It then fluctuates and keeps decreasing to a level between 10 and 5 towards
60 minutes after trading resumes. From the median plot, it is clear that the post-TP median is
much higher than the pre-TP median from about 5 minutes before trading pauses to 60 minutes
after trading resumes.
It is also obvious that, according to both the mean plot and the median plot, there are huge
spikes of high-frequency quoting updates from about 5 minutes before trading pauses and 10
minutes after trading resumes in the post-A10 era. There is only a milder spike 1 minute before trading pauses and 1 minute after trading resumes in the pre-A10 era. In other words, after
Amendment 10 implementation, high-frequency quoting update activity dramatically increases
right before trading pauses and goes even higher in the minute right after trading resumes then it
decays but still remains at a higher level than the pre-TP high-frequency quoting update intensity,
and also much higher than its counterparts in the pre-10 era after trading resumes.
Table 4 shows the time-series average of the cross-sectional summary statistics of HFQU before and after trading pauses in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras. In the pre-A10 era, the time-series
29
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

average of the pre-TP cross-sectional mean is 27.70, which is smaller than its counterpart 39.71
in the post-TP interval. The times-series average of the median also shows an increase from the
pre-TP level of 1.85 to 6.73 in the post-TP interval. In the pre-TP interval, the time-series average
of standard deviation is 119.73, which slightly increases to 122.27 in the post-TP interval. Those
are consistent with what is shown in Figure 5. In the post-A10 era, both the pre-TP mean and
the post-TP mean are higher than their counterparts in the pre-A10 era. The pre-TP mean is now
60.02 and the post-TP mean is 83.85. Similarly, the pre-TP median is now 2.81 and the post-TP
median is 13.10. In other words, both the post-TP mean and median are higher than their preTP counterparts in the post-A10 era. In addition, the mean and median in the post-A10 era are
higher than those in the pre-A10 era both in the pre-TP interval and in the post-TP interval. The
time-series average of the standard deviation in the post-TP interval is 223.51 in the post-A10 era,
higher than 155.50 in the pre-TP interval. Overall, these support the observation that the HFQU
evolution post A10 is higher than that in the pre-A10 era both before trading pauses and after trading pauses. The HFQU is also more volatile in the post-A10 era around trading pauses, especially
after trading resumes.
4
Market Quality around Trading Pauses pre and post the Amendment
10
4.1
Liquidity around Trading Pauses
This section empirically examines the evolution of liquidity before and after trading pauses in the
pre-A10 era and in the post-A10 era. It also compares the difference between the post-A10 and
post-A10 liquidity evolution patterns around trading pauses. Whether Amendment 10 induces
liquidity improvement in the 2-hour window around trading pauses compared to those in the
pre-A10 era is another intriguing question.
The methodology in this section is inspired by Hautsch and Horvath (2019) but is re-designed
for the purpose of this research.
The single difference regression is estimated by Eq. (9) for trading pauses in the pre-Amendment
10 and post-Amendment 10 periods, respectively. Potential first-order autocorrelations in resid30
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

uals are corrected using the Prais and Winsten (1954) method. Standard errors are clustered into
four consecutive but distinct 30-minute groups per trading pause throughout the [−60, +60] minutes window. This way, the heteroskedastic-consistent variance-covariance matrix is assumed to
have no correlation across trading pauses but intra-group correlation is allowed within each of the
four half-hour groups per trading pause.
y(s,d,t),τ = α(s,d,t) +
X
τ

βτ + βTP
τ

Dτ + ϵ(s,d,t),τ
(7)
y(s,d,t),−1 = α(s,d,t) + ϵ(s,d,t),−1
(8)
Taking the difference between Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) yields the single difference regression,
y∗
(s,d,t),τ =
X
τ

βτ + βTP
τ

Dτ + ϵ∗
(s,d,t),τ
(9)
where y∗
(s,d,t),τ ≡y(s,d,t),τ −y(s,d,t),−1 and ϵ∗
(s,d,t),τ ≡ϵ(s,d,t),τ −ϵ(s,d,t),−1. The subscripts s stands
for stock, d for date, and t for the time of day when a trading pause occurs. The definitions of the
subscripts (s, d, t) and τ have been introduced in Section 3.3 before. A stock-date-time tuple (s, d, t)
uniquely identifies a trading pause. For each trading pause, the outcome of interest is measured
at each time bin τ, where τ = −60, −59, . . . , −2, −1, 1, 2, . . . , 59, 60 are for each 1-minute bin in
the [−60, +60] minutes window around trading pauses.38 Bin “τ = 0” would represent the time
when a trading pause is in progress and it is not included in the study. The base bin is the minute
one hour before trading pauses happen, i.e. τ = −60. Therefore y∗
(s,d,t),τ captures the relative
difference of the outcome variable at bin τ from that at the base bin. The dummy variable Dτ
takes value 1 if it is bin τ and 0 otherwise. The sum of coefficients
 βτ + βTP
τ

captures a combined
effect of high-frequency trends around trading pauses and the impact of trading pauses on the
outcome measures at each bin τ, where
 β−60 + βTP
−60

≡0 by default for the base bin at τ = −60.
Regression results for trading pauses in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras are estimated separately
by Eq. (9), corresponding to
 βτ + βTP
τ

Pre-A10 and
 βτ + βTP
τ

Post-A10 respectively. For the case
of the liquidity outcome QSpread (%) as the dependent variable, the estimated coefficients are
38See Footnote 32.
31
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

graphically presented in the top and middle panels of Figure 6 with different colors for significance
levels.
The difference-in-differences regression below extends the single-difference setup from above
to illustrate the effect of Amendment 10 on trading pauses.
y∗
(s,d,t),τ =
X
τ

βτ + βTP
τ

Dτ + βA101 {Post A10} + βTP
A10,τ1 {Post A10} Dτ + ϵ∗
(s,d,t),τ
(10)
When 1 {Post A10} = 0, Eq. (10) resembles Eq. (9) but it is for trading pauses before Amendment 10 only; when 1 {Post A10} = 1, the coefficient βA10 indicates the shift in common trends
after Amendment 10, while the coefficient βTP
A10,τ captures the effect of Amendment 10 on trading pauses at each bin around. For the liquidity outcome variable QSpread (%) as the dependent
variable, the estimated βTP
A10,τ for each bin τ is plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 6 with colordifferentiated significance levels.
The results of the single differences and difference-in-differences regressions of liquidity measures QSpread (%) are displayed in Figure 6. The single differences results in the pre-A10 era can
be found in the top panel, while the post-A10 results are in the middle panel.
The top panel presents the single difference results for the pre-A10 period. The vertical bars
correspond to the estimated

ˆβτ + ˆβTP
τ

Pre-A10 as in Eq. (9). The base bin is at 60 minutes before trading pauses. The height of the bar represents the magnitude of the estimated coefficients,
while the color corresponds to the significance level. Dark blue means significant at the 1% level,
medium blue for 5%, light blue for 10%, and white for insignificance (i.e. p-value > 10%). The significance cut-off point is 5% by convention. This top panel shows that there starts to be significant
(i.e. at least at the 5% significance level) liquidity improvement from 14 minutes before trading
pauses until about 2 minutes before trading pauses, for more than 5 percentage points of decrease
in quoted spread from the base bin level. The percentage quoted spread is not significantly different from the base bin level before the interval of [−14, −2] minutes, except that the quoted spread
at τ = −59 is slightly higher than the base bin level for about 1 percentage point. The improvement is more so in both magnitude and significance level after trading resumes. After trading
resumes, the percentage quoted spread is more than 10 percentage points less than the base bin
level 60 minutes before trading pauses, and slowly decreasing toward 12 percentage points less
32
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

than the base bin level when it is 60 minutes after trading pauses.
The middle panel shows the single difference results from the base bin after the A10 period,
measuring how different the percentage quoted spread is at each bin from the base bin level. They
are the estimated coefficients

ˆβτ + ˆβTP
τ

Post-A10 as in Eq. (9). At bin τ = −59, −58, −57, and −56,
the quoted spread increases slightly from the level of the base bin. Afterwards, the bin-level
quoted spread is not significantly different from the base level until about 23 minutes after trading resumes. From 23 minutes after trading resumes, the percentage quoted spread is about 3
percentage points less than the base bin level, and going toward 5 percentage points less than the
base bin level. The different is significant at at least the 5% level, which indicates a significant
improvement in liquidity from 23 minutes after trading pauses and afterward. However, compared to the pre-A10 case, the liquidity improvement starts much later and the magnitude is less
dramatic.
The estimated difference-in-differences results, ˆβTP
A10,τ, displayed in the bottom panel show
that compared to their base bin levels of percentage quoted spread, respectively, the liquidity
improvement after trading resumes in the pre-A10 era is more significant and dramatic than that
in the post-A10 era. Note that the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras may not have the same base bin
quoted spread levels as indicated in the summary statistics mean and median plots in Section
3.5. Since trading resumes, the estimated coefficients are all significant at the level 1% and slightly
decrease from about 8 to 6 percentage points throughout the [+1, +60] minute bins. This is because
the post-A10 liquidity improvement compared to the base bin liquidity level is much lower than
that in the pre-A10 era. Therefore, compared to the pre-A10 liquidity improvement, the post-A10
liquidity appears to be “deteriorating” after trading resumes in the bottom panel, as the difference
in the percentage quoted spread from the base-bin spread. However, the middle panel can show
that this is actually not the case.
This striking difference in the bottom panel could be caused by two different reasons. First, the
liquidity levels of the base bin in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras may not be the same. From the
left plot in Figure 3 Panel (a), it can be seen that the mean percentage quoted spread of the base bin
is approximately 5 percentage points lower in the post-A10 era than that in the pre-A10 era. The
mean plot in Figure 3 Panel (a) also shows that the mean percentage quoted spreads after trading
resumes in the pre-A10 era and in the post-A10 era are actually highly overlapped. Secondly, in
33
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

the post-A10 era, the liquidity level at the bins in [-59, +60] minute interval is less different from
the liquidity level at the base bin τ = −60 minutes before trading pauses. However, in the pre-A10
era, there is a dramatic decrease, about 6 percentage points, of quoted spread (i.e., improvement
of liquidity) from approximately 15 minutes before trading pauses. Therefore, the bottom panel
does not suggest that LULD trading pauses hurt liquidity more after the trading resumes in the
post-A10 era compared to those in the pre-A10 era.
4.2
Short-Term Volatility around Trading Pauses
To study the impact of trading pauses on short-term volatility around trading pauses in the preand post-Amendment 10 eras, the same methodology as in Section 4.1 is applied. The dependent
variable is now the short-term volatility measures HighLow. Figure 7 shows the estimated results.
The top panel presents the estimated coefficients

ˆβτ + ˆβTP
τ

Pre-A10 as in Eq. (9) for HighLow
in the pre-A10 era. It captures on average how different the short-term volatility is from the base
bin level at τ = −60 minutes before trading pauses. In the pre-A10 area, the short-term volatility
HighLow only increases significantly from the base bin level in 1-minute bins just before and after
trading pauses. It is close to 40 basis points above the base bin level in the minute before trading
pauses and about 35 basis point about the base bin level in the minute right after trading resumes.
The post-A10 results of the estiamted

ˆβτ + ˆβTP
τ

Post-A10 are shown in the middle panel. There
are more bins showing significantly increased short-term volatility around trading pauses, especially after trading resumes, compared to the significant pre-A10 coefficients. There are 5 significant minute-level bins before trading pauses and 23 bins after trading resumes. The HighLow
is about 10 basis points lower than the base level at the τ = −39 minute bin. Close to trading
pauses, HighLow is ranging from about 30 to 90 basis points higher than the base bin level at the
τ = −5, −3, −2 and −1 minute bins. That indicates that the short-term volatility increase dramatically since it is 5 minutes before trading pauses in the pre-A10 era. In the 5 minutes after trading
resumes, the short-term volatility is even higher. At the 1 minute bin right after trading resumes,
HighLow is about 130 basis points higher than the level of the base bin. Then it drops to about
40 basis points higher than the base bin level at the τ = 2 minute bin and goes down to about
30 basis points higher than the base level at the τ = 5 minute bin. After 5 minutes from trading
34
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

resumes, the short-term volatility oscillates around the level of 20 basis points higher than the
base level to about 15 basis points higher than the base level until the τ = 24 minute bin. Only the
τ = 8 minutes and τ = 11 minutes bins are not significant. The τ = 27 minutes bin is also significantly higher than the base bin, about 18 basis points. In general, in the post-A10 era, short-term
volatility HighLow rises much higher and dramatically both within a few minutes before trading
pauses and after trading resumes. Especially, the positive difference from the base bin level is
more profound and longer lasting after trading resumes in the post-A10 era.
The bottom panel displays the estimated difference-in-difference coefficients ˆβTP
A10,τ. The single
differences from their respective base bins are denoted as the excess differences. The bottom panel
compares how the excess differences in the post-A10 era are different from those in the pre-A10
era. The post-A10 excess differences in the last 3 minutes are about 40 to 60 basis points higher
than those in the pre-A10 era. In the first minute after trading resumes, the excess difference is
about 100 basis points higher than its counterpart in the pre-A10 era. During the τ = 2, 3, 4, and
5 minute level bins after trading resumes, the excess differences in the post-A10 era are about 50
to 30 basis points higher than their counterparts in the pre-A10 era. Afterwards, occasionally the
differences in excess differences are significant at bin τ = 10, 13 and 22 after trading resumes,
ranging from 40 to 30 basis points.
The bottom panel shows that a few minutes before and after trading pauses, the post-A10
period short-term volatility increased significantly for about 40 to 100 basis points more in magnitude compared to the pre-A10 periods increase relative to their base bin levels, respectively. Note
that the base-bin levels may be different on average in those two periods. According to the mean
plot in Figure 4, the average base bin HighLow is about 30 basis points in the pre-A10 era, while
that is about 10 in the post-A10 era, which is about 20 basis point lower. However, the mean plot
also demonstrates the pattern that the post-A10 era HighLow in the [-10, +10] minute window is
much higher than that of the pre-10 era, which is consistent with the results in Figure 7. These
dramatic differences in excess differences of HighLow are both driven by a lower base level for
the post-A10 era and a much higher spike around trading pauses in the post-A10 era.
Altogether, Figure 4 and Figure 7 results suggest that short-term volatility measured by HighLow
shoot up significantly around trading pauses, especially after trading resumes, in the post-A10 era
compared to the pre-A10 era. Cross-sectionally, on average, short-term volatility is lower during
35
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

the [-60, -10] minute bins before trading pauses in the post-A10 era than in the pre-A10 era, while
it is higher during the [-10, +60] minute bins. LULD Plan Amendment 10 might be correlated with
an unexpected result in dramatically increasing short-term volatility, starting from a few minutes
before trading pauses to a few minutes after trading resumes. Short-term volatility HighLow is
also higher in the hour after trading resumes compared to that in the pre-A10 era.
5
High-Frequency Quoting and Its Role
This section studies the behavior of high-frequency trading and quoting activities before and after
trading pauses in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras. It is intriguing to know how high-frequency
activities evolve as trading pauses approach and after trading resumes. Whether high-frequency
activities around trading pauses have changed after the implementation of Amendment 10 is also
worth investigating. And if so, the possible reasons behind the change are awaiting to be explored.
Another question to be examined in this section is whether high-frequency activities interact
or correlate with market qualities around trading pauses. Is a higher high-frequency activity intensity correlated with a higher liquidity provision around trading pauses? Does high-frequency
activity induce higher short-term volatility before and after trading pauses? Can high-frequency
activity help explain or provide suggestive evidence on the changes of liquidity and volatility
around trading pauses in the pre-A10 era and the post-A10 era?
There could also be implications for future regulatory policy making. When the SEC was making Amendment 10, LULD Plan Amendment 10, they did not aim at regulating high-frequency
trading or quoting activity around trading pauses.
It would be helpful to understand highfrequency trading behavior around trading pauses and anticipate their future behavior and impact on market quality around trading pauses. When updating new LULD Plan trading pause
rules, the conditional effects of trading pauses with the presence of high-frequency trading before
trading pauses and after trading resumes should be worth considering.
5.1
High-Frequency Quoting around Trading Pauses
Section 5.1 adopts the same methodology as in Section 4.1 to study the evolution of high-frequency
quoting activity around trading pauses. The main regressions are the single-difference regressions
36
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

for the pre-A10 period and post-A10 period, respectively, and difference-in-differences regression
for comparing the high-frequency quotations around trading pauses after Amendment 10 implementation and before that. The estimated results are presented in the top, middle and bottom
panels of Figure 8, respectively.
In the pre-A10 period, compared to the base bin level, the high-frequency quoting measure
HFQU starts to rise significantly from the τ = −12 minute bin before trading pauses to the
τ = −1 minute bin. There are about 25 to 30 more high-frequency quote updates during the [-
12, -2] minute window before trading pauses, compared to the base-bin level in the pre-A10 era.
During the exact 1 minute bin right before trading pauses, the excess high-frequency quote updates compared to the base bin level is about 80. Immediately after trading resumes, in the τ = 1
minute bin, the excess HFQU compared to the level of the base bin is about 60 to 70, slightly lower
than the level of the 1-minute bin right before trading pauses, but higher than those in the [-12,
-2] minute window. Afterward, the excess HFQU is significantly higher than the base-bin level in
bins τ = 10 and τ = 11, for about 25 more high-frequency quote updates. The top panel shows that
the excess increase of HFQU from the base bin level is concentrated in the [-12, -1] minute window before trading pauses and the minute right after trading resumes, plus two 1-minute bins
about 10 minutes later. It is unclear whether the excess HFQU increases before trading pauses
contributes to the happening of trading pauses or not. Alternatively, high-frequency traders can
frequently update their quotes to provide liquidity and prevent unnecessary trading pauses from
occurring. If it is an information-driven trading pause, there may be information involved in the
arising HFQU before trading pauses. After trading resumes, the high excess HFQU at the τ = 1
minute bin could represent that high-frequency traders (HFTs) digest information during trading
pauses and quickly adjust their position immediately after trading resumes. The excess HFQU at
the τ = 10 and τ = 11 may reflect some further adjustments made by HFT.
In the post-A10 period, only the τ = −1 minute bin right before trading pauses and the τ = 1
minute bin right after trading resumes have significant and dramatic excess HFQU compared to
the base bin level. The excess HFQU in the minute right before trading pauses is about 170, and it
even increased to about 250 in the minute right after trading resumes. These two spikes are much
more dramatic than the milder increases in excess HFQU before trading pauses and after trading
resumes in the pre-A10 era. And, the differences in magnitude are not induced by differences in
37
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

the mean base level HFQU, as shown in Figure 5. The post-A10 base bin level of the mean HFQU
is even about 75 higher than that in the pre-A10 era, but the spikes of HFQU are just too dramatic
closely before and after trading pauses. This is fascinating as it may suggest that, in the post-A10
era, without those unnecessary trading pauses in the pre-A10 era, HFTs only need to dramatically
update their quotes frequently in the minute right before and after trading pauses in a much more
efficient manner. The dramatic HFQU right before trading pauses and after trading resumes after
more likely to be information-driven in the post-A10 era. It is not clear whether the spike in the
minute before the trading pause can be viewed as “triggering” trading pauses or not. This awaits
further study.
When comparing the differences after A10 and before A10 as shown in the bottom panel of
Figure 8, only the 1-minute bins immediately after trading resumes are significantly different in
the two eras. In the 1-minute bin after trading resumes, there are much more high-frequency
quote updates in the post-A10 period than in the pre-A10 period, relative to their base-bin level
at 60 minutes before trading pauses. The difference in excess HFQU levels from their own base
bin level is about 200, indicating that there are on average 200 more excess high-frequency quote
updates from base bin level in the post-A10 era than in the pre-A10 era. Note that, as described
above, the mean plot in Figure 5 shows that the mean of the pre-A10 base bin HFQU is about 75
lower than that of the post-A10 era. However, this does not undermine the dramatic differences
in excess HFQU in the minute immediately after trading resumes in the post-A10 and pre-A10
eras. It suggests that the revised trading pause mechanism in the post-A10 era can better serve
as a window for HFTs to digest information and adjust their positions. They update their quotes
significantly more frequently at the minute right after trading resumes without those unnecessary
trading pauses in pre-A10. This may suggest a better mechanism for information transmission in
the post-A10 era, and now the trading pauses may serve their original purposes better.
5.2
High-Frequency Quoting and Liquidity
By comparing Figure 3 and Figure 5, the evolution patterns of the mean and median around trading pauses are different in percentage quoted spread and HFQU, either in the pre-A10 era or in
the post-A10 era. It is intriguing and important to empirically inspect the relationship between
38
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

high-frequency quoting activity and liquidity both before trading pauses and after trading resumptions. In particular, are high-frequency quoting updates positively correlated with liquidity
improvement around trading pauses? Does Amendment 10 bring about any changes to the above
relation? This section formally studies these questions in detail.
The following regression equation is used to study the correlation between market quality outcomes and high-frequency quoting for each of the 1-minute bin in the [-60, +60] minutes window
around trading pauses.
y(s,d,t),τ = ατ +
X
τ
βτDτHFQU(s,d,t),τ + ϵ(s,d,t),τ
(11)
The dependent variable y stands for outcome of interest. In this section, it represents the liquidity measured by QSpread(%). The independent variable is the measure of high-frequency activity
HFQU. Similar to the notations in Eq. (7), the subscripts s represent the stock, d the date, and t
the time of day when a trading pause occurs. The definitions of the subscripts (s, d, t) and τ have
been introduced in Section 3.3 before. A stock-date-time tuple (s, d, t) uniquely identifies a trading pause. For each trading pause, the outcome of interest is measured in each time bin τ, where
τ = −60, −59, . . . , −2, −1, 1, 2, . . . , 59, 60 are for each 1-minute bin in the [−60, +60] minutes window around trading pauses.39 Bin “τ = 0” would represent the time when a trading pause in
progress and it is not included in the study. The dummy variable Dτ takes value 1 if it is bin τ and
0 otherwise. The constant term at each time bin is denoted as ατ. Standard errors are clustered
into four consecutive but distinct 30-minute groups per trading pause throughout the [−60, +60]
minutes window, following Hautsch and Horvath (2019). The coefficient βτ captures how much
variation in the outcome variable is associated with changes in the dependent variable HFQU
for high-frequency quoting. For liquidity as the outcome variable, the estimated coefficients ˆβτ
are plotted in Figure 9, with magnitude along the vertical axis and color-coded significance levels.
The magnitude of estimated coefficients is scaled up by a multiplier of 100 for better readability.
The darker color means higher significance levels or lower p-values. The dark blue is for p-value
< 1%, medium blue for p-value < 5%, light blue for p-value ≤10%, and transparent for p-value >
10%.
39This is subject to change depending on the bin length. For example, if each bin lasts for 3 minutes instead, then
τ = −20, −19, . . . , −2, −1, 1, 2, . . . , 19, 20.
39
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

The top panel of Figure 9 presents the correlation regression results between the percentage
quoted spread QSpread (%) and the high-frequency quote updates HFQU for each bin during
the [−60, +60] minutes window around trading pauses in the pre-A10 era. Note that only the
medium-blue and dark-blue bins are significant at least at the 5% significance level. In the hour
before trading pauses, there are 24 significant bins in which high-frequency quote updates are
correlated with liquidity improvement. Those significant bins are concentrated in the [−60, −50]
minute window and in the [−25, −1] window. The coefficients are negative, and the magnitude
spans from 0 to less than 0.04, meaning that one more high-frequency quote update is associated
with 0 to less than 0.04 percentage point decrease of quoted spread. This is an obvious drop of
the magnitude of the coefficient around 15 minutes before trading pauses, and the liquidity improvement before that is more dramatic. The coefficient pattern in the [−15, −1] minute window
before trading pauses is already very similar to that after trading resumes. In the hour after trading resumes, there are 34 bins throughout the [+1, +60] minutes window showing a significant
negative correlation between percentage quoted spread and high-frequency quote updates, indicating liquidity improvement. The coefficients are all negative and the magnitude is consistently
smaller than 0.01, meaning that one more high-frequency quote update in the 1-minute bin is associate with less than 0.01 percentage point quoted spread decrease. This suggests that even after
trading resumes, HFQU is positively correlated with liquidity improvement throughout the hour,
with smaller magnitude but more significant 1-minute bins, compared to the hour before trading
pauses.
The post-A10 era results are plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 9. In the hour before trading
pauses, there are 43 bins with significant estimated coefficients, which are negative, and the magnitude ranges from 0 to 0.03. They are mostly evenly spread out during the 1-hour interval before
trading pauses. The magnitude of coefficient is larger and more volatile during the [−60, −10]
minute interval, while the coefficients in the [−10, −1]minute bins mostly fluctuate between 0 and
-0.01. The pattern before trading pauses show that, in the post-A10 era, high-frequency quote
updates are positively correlated with liquidity improvement in most of the 1-minute bins in the
hour before trading pauses, and one more high-frequency quote update is associated with 0 to
0.03 percentage point reduce of quoted spread. After trading resumes, there are 46 bins that are
significant. They are all negative and the magnitude is mostly within the 0 to 0.005 range. It indi40
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

cates that, in the hour after trading resumes, one more high-frequency quote update in a 1-minute
bin is associated with a decrease of less than 0.005 percentage points in the quoted spread.
When comparing the post-A10 results with the pre-A10 results, there is a high similarity in
the coefficient pattern after trading resumes in both eras. Most of the bins are significant, but the
magnitude is small and relatively fluctuating in a stabler range compared to their pre-TP counterparts. That suggests a consistent, stable, but mild positive relation between the high-frequency
quote update and liquidity improvements after trading resumes. In the post-A10 era after trading
resumes, there are 12 more 1-minute bins that are significant compared to those in the pre-A10
era, indicating that there are more minutes in which HFQU contributes significantly to liquidity
improvement, although the overall magnitude in the pkost-A10 era is smaller.
The main difference between the post-A10 and pre-A10 results appears in the hour before
trading pauses. There are 43 bins in the post-A10 era that are significant, 19 bins more than those
in the pre-A10 era. However, significant bins in the post-A10 era before trading pauses span a
smaller range of 0 to -0.03 instead of 0 to -0.04 as in the pre-A10 era. This suggests that there are
more minutes during the hour before trading pauses in the post-A10 era that high-frequency quote
updates are associated with liquidity improvement, although they may have a smaller magnitude
compared to those significant liquidity improvements related to HFQU in the pre-A10 era before
trading pauses.
In general, there are more 1-minute bins both before trading pauses and after trading resumes
in the post-A10 era such that high-frequency quoting is significantly correlated with liquidity
improvement.40 In some of the 1-minute bins before trading pauses in the pre-A10 era, the magnitude of liquidity improvement associated with high-frequency quote updates is greater than those
in the post-A10 era. Figure 9 suggests that high-frequency quoting may have a net liquidity provision effect around trading pauses. This effect is more profound in the 2-hour window around
trading pauses after the implementation of LULD Plan Amendment 10, and especially in the hour
before trading pauses.
The implementation of LULD Plan Amendment 10 may have brought about an unexpected
beneficial effect on liquidity improvement conditional on the high-frequency quoting activity in
the 2-hour window around trading pauses and resumptions. Figure 5 indicates that the high40The significance level cutoff is 5%.
41
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

frequency quotation measure HFQU has been elevated in the post-A10 area throughout the 2hour window compared to that of the pre-A10 era. The regression plots in Figure 9 show that
high-frequency quote updates in the post-A10 era are more likely to be significantly associated
with improved liquidity in the 2-hour window, and the magnitude of the correlation is greater
before trading pauses. However, a higher intensity of HFQU may not be associated with a higher
correlation between high-frequency quote updates and quoted spread reduction. The highest average intensity of HFQU shows up around the [−10, +10] minute window around trading pauses
as in Figure 5, but the largest magnitude of the significant coefficients does not show up during
that window in Figure 9.
5.3
High-Frequency Quoting and Short-Term Volatility
In addition to investigating the relationship between high-frequency quoting and liquidity around
trading pauses in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras, it is also worthwhile to examine the relation
between high-frequency quoting and short-term volatility during the same window around trading pauses in those two eras. Both Figure 4 and Figure 5 appear to show a certain degree of
comovement between the short-term volatility measure HighLow and high-frequency quote updates HFQU, especially in the post-A10 era. First, there is a huge spike closely before trading
pauses and after trading resumes in short-term volatility HighLow. A similar spike also appears
in high-frequency quote updates HFQU in the same interval. The spikes around trading pauses
exist in both the pre-A10 era and the post-A10 era, especially in the post-A10 era. Secondly, from
about 1 minute before trading pauses to 1 hour after trading resumes, both HFQU and HighLow
are higher in the post-A10 era than in the pre-A10 era. Do all these indicate that high-frequency
quote updates are highly positively correlated with short-term volatility around trading pauses,
especially in the [−10, +10] minutes window? Does the implementation of LULD Plan Amendment 10 stimulate high-frequency quoting activity around trading pauses, which in turn drive up
the short-term volatility around trading pauses? This section formally investigates these concerns
empirically.
Applying the same methodology as in Section 5.2, this section studies how short-term volatility
in the 2-hour window around trading pauses is correlated to high-frequency quoting in the pre42
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

A10 and post-A10 eras, respectively. The outcome of interest y in Eq. (11) is now the short-term
volatility measure HighLow. The estimated coefficients ˆβτ are shown in Figure 10. The magnitude
of coefficients are scaled up by a multiplier of 100.
In the pre-A10 era, during the hour before trading pauses, there are only 8 bins with significant
coefficients, which are the τ = −25, −19, −18, −17, −14, −11, −8 and −7 minute-level bins. The
magnitude of those 8 bins ranges from 0 to less than 0.003, which means that one more highfrequency quote update in a 1-minute bin correlates with an increase of less than 0.003 basis points
of short-term volatility HighLow. This indicates that high-frequency quote updates are not a
notable contributing factor to short-term volatility in the hour before trading pauses. In the hour
after trading resumes, there are 20 significant bins, concentrated in the [+8, +26] minutes window
and the [+35, +54] minutes window. The range of magnitude is even smaller, ranging from 0 to
0.0015, which means that in these 20 bins, one more high-frequency quote update in a 1-minute
bin contributes to an increase of less than 0.0015 basis points in the short-term volatility measured
by HighLow. After trading resumes, HFQU is more likely to be positively correlated with shortterm volatility than before trading pauses, although the magnitude of the correlation is smaller.
In the post-A10 era, there are only 7 bins with significant coefficients before trading pauses,
which are the τ = −25, −24, −23, −22, −11, −3 and −1 minute bins. The signs of the coefficients
for those significant bins are all positive, and the magnitude ranges from 0 to less than 0.002.
That means that one more high-frequency quote update is associated with a less than 0.002 basis
point increase of HighLow in each of those 7 significant bins before trading pauses. After trading
resumes, there are 6 bins with significant coefficients, which are the τ = +21, +23, +24, +31, +33
and +34 minute bins. The coefficient signs are all positive and their magnitudes are all less than
0.001. That indicates that one more high-frequency quote update is associated with a less than
0.001 basis point increase of HighLow in those 6 significant bins after trading resumes.
Comparing the post-A10 result with the pre-A10 result, it is clear that the number of significant bins is smaller in the post-A10 era both before trading pauses and after trading resumes,
especially in the hour after trading resumes. In addition, the magnitude of the coefficients is on
average smaller in the post-A10 era. All of these suggest that the positive correlation between
high-frequency quote updates HFQU and short-term volatility HighLow around trading pauses
and resumptions is less profound in the post-A10 era compared to that in the pre-A10 era. Es43
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

pecially after trading resumes, in the post-A10 era, high-frequency quote updates are much less
likely to contribute to short-term volatility.
In summary, both in the pre-A10 and post-A10 eras, in the hour before trading pauses, there are
only a few bins in which short-term volatility is significantly and positively correlated with highfrequency quoting. During the hour after trading resumes, 1/3 of the 60 bins show a significant
and positive correlation between high-frequency quote updates and short-term volatility in the
pre-A10 era, but it is much less so after the implementation of the LULD Plan Amendment 10.
This suggests that high-frequency quoting is not significantly correlated with short-term volatility
most of the time during the [-60, +60] minutes window around trading pauses. After Amendment
10, high-frequency quoting is even less likely to be associated with the increase of short-term
volatility either before trading pauses or after trading resumptions.
6
Conclusion
Trading pauses under the LULD Plan are the key volatility circuit breakers for individual stocks
across the US stock market. Their existence is to prevent events similar to the Flash Crash in
May 2010 from happening again, and indeed that kind of event never occurs after the LULD trading pauses came into effect. This mechanism has been subjected to revisions and improvements
throughout the years since its implementation in May 2014. Especially, LULD Plan Amendment 10
has dramatically reduced the occurrence of unnecessary trading pauses which are due to problematic opening reference price, while no other LULD plan amendments so far have such a dramatic
and consistent impact on the frequency of trading pauses. In addition to the reduction of trading
pauses, it is important to examine how market quality around trading pauses changes after the
implementation of Amendment 10.
Meanwhile, high-frequency activities and their roles in market quality have been highly debatable since the emergence of high-frequency trading. The relation between high-frequency activities and extreme price movements is an intriguing question, especially the interaction between
high-frequency activities and trading pauses on individual stocks. Little has been documented
about high-frequency quoting activity around trading pauses and its correlations with market
quality in the same window. The implementation of Amendment 10 provides a unique opportu44
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

nity to study high-frequency activities around unnecessary trading pauses and around necessary
trading pauses. It also offers a change to gauge how high-frequency activities around trading
pauses have changed after Amendment 10 came into effect, although Amendment 10 was not
aimed at altering high-frequency activities around trading pauses.
In conclusion, this paper empirically examines market quality and high-frequency quoting activity around trading pauses in the pre-Amendment 10 era and in the post-Amendment 10 era. In
addition, it explores how market quality around trading pauses changes in the two eras and how
high-frequency quoting activity is related to the change. The post-trading pauses reduction of
illiquidity, measured by the percentage quoted spread, relative to 1 hour before trading pauses, is
less after the implementation of Amendment 10 compared to that in the pre-Amendment 10 era.
Short-term volatility HighLow becomes higher around trading pauses, especially after trading
resumptions, in the post-Amendment 10 era than in the pre-Amendment 10 era. High-frequency
quote updates HFQU are much higher right before and after trading pauses in the post-Amendment
10 era, particularly after trading resumptions. There are more minutes in the 2-hour window
around trading pauses in the post-Amendment10 era that high-frequency quote updates are positively correlated with liquidity improvement, especially before trading pauses. There are fewer
minutes in the 2-hour window around trading pauses in the post-Amendment 10 era that highfrequency quote updates are positively correlated with short-term volatility, especially after trading resumptions.
45
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

REFERENCES
Abad, David, and Roberto Pascual, 2010, Switching to a temporary call auction in times of high
uncertainty, Journal of Financial Research 33, 45–75.
Angel, James J., 2015, Limit up – limit down: National market system plan assessment to address
extraordinary market volatility, Technical report, Georgetown University.
Bhattacharya, Uttpal, and Matthew Spiegel, 1998, Anatomy of a market failure: NYSE trading
suspensions (1974–1988), Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 16, 216–226.
Boehmer, Ekkehart, Kingsley Fong, and Juan Julie Wu, 2021, Algorithmic trading and market
quality: International evidence, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 56, 2659–2688.
Boehmer, Ekkehart, Dan Li, and Gideon Saar, 2018, The Competitive Landscape of HighFrequency Trading Firms, The Review of Financial Studies 31, 2227–2276.
Brady, Nicholas F., James C. Cotting, Robert G. Kirby, John R. Opel, and Howard M. Stein, 1988,
Report of the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms: Submitted to the President of the United
States, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board (U.S. Dept. of the
Treasury and U.S. Government Printing Office).
Brogaard, Jonathan, and Kevin Roshak, 2016, Prices and price limits, Available at SSRN 2667104 .
Chaboud, Alain P, Benjamin Chiquoine, Erik Hjalmarsson, and Clara Vega, 2014, Rise of the machines: Algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange market, The Journal of Finance 69, 2045–2084.
Cho, David D., Jeffrey Russell, George C. Tiao, and Ruey Tsay, 2003, The magnet effect of price
limits: evidence from high-frequency data on taiwan stock exchange, Journal of Empirical Finance
10, 133–168, Emerging Markets S.I.
Christie, William G., Shane A. Corwin, and Jeffrey H. Harris, 2002, Nasdaq trading halts: The
impact of market mechanisms on prices, trading activity, and execution costs, The Journal of
Finance 57, 1443–1478.
Conrad, Jennifer, Sunil Wahal, and Jin Xiang, 2015, High-frequency quoting, trading, and the
efficiency of prices, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 271–291.
Corwin, Shane A, and Marc L Lipson, 2000, Order flow and liquidity around nyse trading halts,
The Journal of Finance 55, 1771–1801.
Fama, Eugene F., 1988, Perspectives on october 1987, or, what did we learn from the crash?, Working paper, University of Chicago.
Greenwald, Bruce C., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1991, Transactional risk, market crashes, and the role
of circuit breakers, Journal of Business 443–462.
Hagströmer, Björn, and Lars Nordén, 2013, The diversity of high-frequency traders, Journal of
Financial Markets 16, 741–770.
Harris, Lawrence, 1997, Circuit breakers and program trading limits: what have we learned?,
Technical report, Wharton School Center for Financial Institutions, University of Pennsylvania.
46
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Hasbrouck, Joel, and Gideon Saar, 2013, Low-latency trading, Journal of Financial Markets 16, 646–
679, High-Frequency Trading.
Hautsch, Nikolaus, and Akos Horvath, 2019, How effective are trading pauses?, Journal of Financial
Economics 131, 378–403.
Hendershott, Terrence, Charles M Jones, and Albert J Menkveld, 2011, Does algorithmic trading
improve liquidity?, The Journal of finance 66, 1–33.
Hendershott, Terrence, and Pamela C Moulton, 2011, Automation, speed, and stock market quality: The nyse’s hybrid, Journal of Financial Markets 14, 568–604.
Holden, Craig W., and Stacey Jacobsen, 2014, Liquidity measurement problems in fast, competitive markets: Expensive and cheap solutions, The Journal of Finance 69, 1747–1785.
Hughes, Paul, 2017, The effect of amendment 10 of the "limit up-limit down" pilot plan, White
paper, SEC DERA.
Hughes, Paul, John Ritter, and Hao Zhang, 2017, Limit up-limit down pilot plan and extraordinary
transitory volatility, White paper, SEC DERA.
Kyle, Albert S., 1988, Trading halts and price limits, Review of Futures Markets 7, 426–434.
Lee, Charles MC, Mark J Ready, and Paul J Seguin, 1994, Volume, volatility, and new york stock
exchange trading halts, The Journal of Finance 49, 183–214.
Madhavan, Ananth, 1992, Trading mechanisms in securities markets, the Journal of Finance 47, 607–
641.
Moise, Claudia E., 2022, Circuit breakers, illiquidity, and the covid-19 crisis, Working paper, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Moise, Claudia E., and Paca Flaherty, 2017, Limit up-limit down pilot plan and associated events,
White paper, SEC DERA.
Prais, Sigbert J, and Christopher B Winsten, 1954, Trend estimators and serial correlation, Working
paper, Cowles Commission discussion paper Chicago.
Riordan, Ryan, and Andreas Storkenmaier, 2012, Latency, liquidity and price discovery, Journal of
Financial Markets 15, 416–437.
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, 1994, Circuit breakers and market volatility: A theoretical perspective, The Journal of Finance 49, 237–254.
Zimmermann, Kai, 2013, Price discovery in european volatility interruptions, Available at SSRN
2365772 .
47
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 1
Distribution of Trading Pauses and Stocks around Amendment 10
Panel A: Monthly Trading Pauses and Involved Stocks
This table compares the [-20, -1] and [+1, +20] trading days windows before and after the Limit-Up Limit-Down (LULD) Plan Amendment 10 (A10) comes into force. The implementation date, 18 July 2016, is Day 1. Each row corresponds to a filter for LULD trading
pauses (TPs). The row below inherits the filters from the rows above. The last row represents the sample used in the empirical analysis
section. [All legitimate LULD TPs] means the happening of these TPs follows the rules of the LULD Plan and their resumption time is at
4 pm on the same day. With the next-level filter of the [5-min length] length, only TPs lasting 5 minutes are considered for comparison
purposes. Furthermore, for [≥2 hours apart], if there are multiple LULD TPs for the same stock-day, only the ones which are at least
2 hours apart from each other are selected. Next, [≥20 min before mkt close] means the LULD TPs need to resume at least 20 minutes
before market closes (i.e., 4 p.m.). In the final level, [≥5 min after mkt open] requires the LULD TPs to be at least 5 minutes after market
opening (i.e., 9:30 a.m.).
Cumulative Filters
LULD TP Events Count
Unique LULD TP Stocks Count
Pre A10
(-20 tr days)
Post A10
(+20 tr days)
Pre A10
(-20 tr days)
Post A10
(+20 tr days)
[All legitimate LULD TPs]
1400
199
303
97
& [5-min length]
1328
181
281
83
& [≥2 hours apart]
716
117
265
68
& [≥20 min before mkt close]
715
117
265
68
& [≥5 min after mkt open]
566
105
240
60
Panel B: Hourly Distribution of Trading Pauses and Involved Stocks in the Empirical Analysis Sample
This table presents the distribution of Limit-Up Limit-Down (LULD) trading pauses (TPs) and involved stocks in hourly interval
across the [-20, +20] trading days around Amendment 10 (A10). The data sample in this table corresponds to the one described in
the last row of Panel (a), which is produced by applying all filters. It is also the version used in the empirical analysis section. Note
that a stock can have multiple trading pauses across different days in the same hourly interval per day. Therefore, the summation of
uniquely involved stocks in the hourly intervals can surpass the total numbers in the last row of Panel (A).
Hourly Interval
LULD TP Events Count
Unique LULD TP Stocks Count
Pre A10
(-20 tr days)
Post A10
(+20 tr days)
Pre A10
(-20 tr days)
Post A10
(+20 tr days)
[9:35am, 10:00am)
362
46
166
24
[10:00am, 11:00am)
90
21
71
18
[11:00am, 12:00pm)
40
12
38
11
[12:00pm, 1pm)
28
6
23
4
[1:00pm, 2:00pm)
18
6
18
6
[2:00pm, 3:00pm)
22
8
21
8
[3:00pm, 3:40pm]
6
6
6
6
48
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 1
Distribution of Trading Pauses and Stocks around Amendment 10 — Continued
Panel C: Cross-Sectional Summary Statistics for 1-Minute Bins Span around Trading Pauses
This table summarizes how many 1-minute bins exist before and after the Limit-Up Limit-Down (LULD) trading pauses (TPs) crosssectionally before and after Amendment 10 (A10). The maximum span is 60 minutes before and 60 minutes after a LULD TP for the
complete [-60, +60] minutes event window around it. The data sample in this table corresponds to the one described in the last row of
Panel (A), which is produced by applying all filters. It is also the version used in the empirical analysis section. A10 is an indicator of
whether it is pre-A10 or post-A10. Similarly, TP indicates whether it is in the pre-LULD TP or post-LULD TP interval. Mean, SD, Skew,
Kurt, Min, and Max represent the mean, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis, minimum, and maximum. P5, P25, P50, P75, and P95
represent the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles, respectively. N means the number of LULD TPs. The timestamps on trading
pause and resumption are rarely at 9:35:00 am and 3:40:00 pm sharp. Therefore, the marginal time gap residuals are treated as extra
1-minutes bins when market opens and closes. Thus, the minimum pre-TP and post-TP bins span are 6 bins and 21 bins instead of 5
and 20.
A10
TP
Mean
SD
Skew
Kurt
Min
P5
P25
P50
P75
P95
Max
N
Pre
Pre
29.90
19.51
0.72
-1.27
6
12.00
16.00
16.00
59.00
60.00
60
566
Post
59.72
2.90
-11.25
131.71
21
60.00
60.00
60.00
60.00
60.00
60
566
Post
Pre
38.92
21.13
-0.18
-1.81
6
8.60
16.00
50.00
60.00
60.00
60
105
Post
58.72
5.99
-5.42
30.51
21
54.20
60.00
60.00
60.00
60.00
60
105
Panel D: Time-Series Summary Statistics for Trading Pauses Event Window Coverage per Minute-Bin
This table presents the time-series summary statistics of the Limit-Up Limit-Down (LULD) trading pauses (TP) event window coverage per 1-minute bin in the [-60, +60] minutes window. For instance, the bin of the [-1, 0) minutes before a LULD TP is covered in 566
LULD TP event windows in the pre-Amendment 10 (A10) era, while the bin of [-60, -59) minutes before a LULD TP is only covered
in 141 LULD TP event windows in the same era. Those two values also correspond to the Max and Min during the pre-TP interval
in that era. For another example, in the post-A10 era, there are on average 102.77 LULD TP event windows involved, across all the
1-minute bins after a LULD TP. The data sample in this table corresponds to the one described in the last row of Panel (A), which
is produced by applying all filters. It is also the version used in the empirical analysis section. A10 is an indicator of whether it is
pre-A10 or post-A10. Similarly, TP indicates whether it is in the pre-LULD TP or post-LULD TP window. Mean, SD, Skew, Kurt, Min,
and Max represent the mean, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis, minimum, and maximum. P5, P25, P50, P75, and P95 represent
the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles, respectively. N means the number of 1-minute bins.
A10
TP
Mean
SD
Skew
Kurt
Min
P5
P25
P50
P75
P95
Max
N
Pre
Pre
282.02
165.09
0.99
-0.90
141
145.90
164.50
205.50
524.75
566.00
566
60
Post
563.37
2.35
-0.17
-1.51
560
560.00
561.00
563.00
566.00
566.00
566
60
Post
Pre
68.12
20.84
0.81
-0.96
45
45.95
54.00
59.00
94.25
105.00
105
60
Post
102.77
2.12
-0.58
-0.79
98
99.00
101.00
103.00
105.00
105.00
105
60
49
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 2
Time-Series Average of Cross-Sectional Summary Statistics for Quoted Spread
This tables displays the time-series average of the cross-sectional summary statistics for the liquidity measure, Quoted Spread (%).
The rows are divided into pre- and post- trading pause (TP) intervals, and pre- and post- Amendment 10 (A10) eras. For example, a
“Pre” (“Post”) in the A10 column means the adjacent two rows are for the pre-A10 (post-A10) period; and a “Pre” (“Post”) in the TP
column indicates that the row shows the time-series average of the cross-sectional summary statistics across the 60 minutes bins before
(after) trading pauses. The definition of the liquidity measure, the quoted spread (%) follows that in Holden and Jacobsen (2014).
Measure
A10
TP
Mean
SD
Skew
Kurt
Min
P5
P25
P50
P75
P95
Max
N
Quoted
Spread
(%)
Pre
Pre
7.09
13.86
317.80
1780.09
0.07
0.18
0.50
1.51
8.74
29.16
71.31
79.18
Post
1.65
3.94
640.04
5664.29
0.06
0.16
0.38
0.65
1.20
6.67
41.71
268.63
Post
Pre
3.57
6.19
224.70
783.11
0.02
0.05
0.48
1.02
3.15
17.13
24.46
26.90
Post
1.70
3.11
418.67
2323.26
0.09
0.30
0.53
0.70
1.36
6.85
20.32
59.75
Table 3
Time-Series Average of Cross-Sectional Summary Statistics for HighLow
This tables displays the time-series average of the cross-sectional summary statistics for the short-term volatility measure HighLow.
The rows are divided into pre- and post- trading pause (TP) intervals, and pre- and post- Amendment 10 (A10) eras. For example,
a “Pre” (“Post”) in the A10 column means the adjacent two rows are for the pre-A10 (post-A10) period; and a “Pre” (“Post”) in the
TP column indicates that the row shows the time-series average of the cross-sectional summary statistics across the 60 minutes bins
before (after) trading pauses. The definition of the short-term volatility measure HighLow follows Hasbrouck and Saar (2013). The
values are in basis point.
Measure
A10
TP
Mean
SD
Skew
Kurt
Min
P5
P25
P50
P75
P95
Max
N
HighLow
(bps)
Pre
Pre
26.47
51.50
2.64
10.96
0.00
0.00
0.70
4.24
27.03
140.51
254.35
79.18
Post
18.24
33.19
3.66
25.83
0.00
0.00
0.52
2.56
26.28
76.91
273.38
268.63
Post
Pre
21.47
42.17
2.77
10.63
0.00
0.03
0.72
3.51
21.93
119.88
186.85
26.90
Post
30.89
42.02
2.13
9.13
0.00
0.00
1.59
14.12
47.52
113.89
207.46
59.75
Table 4
Time-Series Average of Cross-Sectional Summary Statistics for HFQU
This tables displays the time-series average of the cross-sectional summary statistics for high-frequency quotation measure HFQU.
The rows are divided into pre- and post- trading pause (TP) intervals, and pre- and post- Amendment 10 (A10) eras. For example,
a “Pre” (“Post”) in the A10 column means the adjacent two rows are for the pre-A10 (post-A10) period; and a “Pre” (“Post”) in the
TP column indicates that the row shows the time-series average of the cross-sectional summary statistics across the 60 minutes bins
before (after) trading pauses. The definition of high-frequency quotation measure HFQU follows Conrad, Wahal, and Xiang (2015).
Measure
A10
TP
Mean
SD
Skew
Kurt
Min
P5
P25
P50
P75
P95
Max
N
HFQU
Pre
Pre
27.70
119.73
8.98
105.48
0.02
0.03
0.20
1.85
13.32
116.18
1634.00 227.08
Post
39.71
122.27 10.65
168.79
0.00
0.05
0.23
6.73
37.23
171.47
2107.05 488.35
Post
Pre
60.02
155.50
3.47
16.03
0.03
0.08
0.22
2.81
28.16
376.27
873.27
61.88
Post
83.85
223.53
5.10
33.68
0.07
0.10
0.35
13.10
67.40
411.02
1686.42
92.77
50
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

(a) Panel A: Daily LULD Trading Pauses, [-6, +6] Months around Amendment 10 Implementation
2016-01-19
2016-02-04
2016-02-23
2016-03-10
2016-03-29
2016-04-14
2016-05-02
2016-05-18
2016-06-06
2016-06-22
2016-07-11
2016-07-27
2016-08-12
2016-08-30
2016-09-16
2016-10-04
2016-10-20
2016-11-07
2016-11-23
2016-12-12
2016-12-29
2017-01-18
Date
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Frequency
LULD Plan 
Amendment 10 in force 
(Jul 18, 2016)
[-20, +20] 
trading days window 
around 
Amendment 10 date
[-60, +60]
trading days window
around Amendment 10 date
Daily LULD Trading Pauses and Involved Stocks
Daily Trading Pauses (TP)
Trading Pauses 5-Day MA
Daily TP Stocks
TP Stocks 5-Day MA
(b) Panel B: Monthly LULD Trading Pauses, 2014-05-01 to 2021-09-30
2014-05
2014-06
2014-07
2014-08
2014-09
2014-10
2014-11
2014-12
2015-01
2015-02
2015-03
2015-04
2015-05
2015-06
2015-07
2015-08
2015-09
2015-10
2015-11
2015-12
2016-01
2016-02
2016-03
2016-04
2016-05
2016-06
2016-07
2016-08
2016-09
2016-10
2016-11
2016-12
2017-01
2017-02
2017-03
2017-04
2017-05
2017-06
2017-07
2017-08
2017-09
2017-10
2017-11
2017-12
2018-01
2018-02
2018-03
2018-04
2018-05
2018-06
2018-07
2018-08
2018-09
2018-10
2018-11
2018-12
2019-01
2019-02
2019-03
2019-04
2019-05
2019-06
2019-07
2019-08
2019-09
2019-10
2019-11
2019-12
2020-01
2020-02
2020-03
2020-04
2020-05
2020-06
2020-07
2020-08
2020-09
2020-10
2020-11
2020-12
2021-01
2021-02
2021-03
2021-04
2021-05
2021-06
2021-07
2021-08
2021-09
Year-Month
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
Frequency
LULD Plan 
fully in force 
(May 12, 2014)
LULD Plan 
Amendment 10 in force 
(Jul 18, 2016)
LULD Plan
Amendment 18 in force
(Feb 24, 2020)
Covid-19 Outbreak 
(March 2020)
Aug 24, 2015
"Flash Crash"
[-6, +6] months 
close-up range
Monthly LULD Trading Pauses, 2014-05-01 to 2021-09-30
Trading Pauses
Figure 1. Limit Up-Limit Down (LULD) Trading Pauses Frequency. Panel (a) plots the daily number of
trading pauses in the U.S. stock market together with the involved stocks which experience trading pauses
on that date. It covers the [-6, +6] calendar months window around Amendment 10 implementation on July
18, 2016. The 5-day moving averages (MA) are also plotted to smooth out extreme variations and better
reflect the trends. Panel (b) plots the monthly trading pauses count from May 1, 2015 to September 30, 2021.
The time span in Panel (a) corresponds to the shaded area of the [-6, +6] months close-up range in Panel (b).
51
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 2. Daily Average of Limit Up-Limit-Down Trading Pauses per Quarter-Hour. The top panel plots
the daily average occurrence of trading pauses in each quarter hour during market hours, in the [-20, +20]
trading days window, and in the [-6, +6] calendar months window, respectively, around Amendment 10
implementation. For example, the “9:30” tick on the horizontal axis represents 9:30-9:45 a.m. The middle
panel plots the same content as the top panel, but the time span is from May 12, 2014 (LULD Plan full
implementation) to September 30, 2021, and the same period but without March 2020 (Covid-19 outbreak).
The bottom panel plots the same content as in the middle panel, but singles out the March 2020 period.
52
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

Panel A: Quoted Spread (%)
LULD  TP
0
.03
.06
.09
.12
.15
.18
Quoted Spread(0.01=1%), Cross−Sectional Mean
−60
−55
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[−60, +60] 1−Minute Bins around LULD TP
Period 1: Pre−A10
5−min MA
Period 2: Post−A10
5−min MA
Quoted Spread(0.01=1%), Cross−Sectional Mean
LULD  TP
0
.03
.06
.09
.12
.15
.18
Quoted Spread(0.01=1%), Cross−Sectional Median
−60
−55
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[−60, +60] 1−Minute Bins around LULD TP
Period 1: Pre−A10
5−min MA
Period 2: Post−A10
5−min MA
Quoted Spread(0.01=1%), Cross−Sectional Median
Panel B: Quoted Spread ($)
LULD  TP
0
.3
.6
.9
1.2
1.5
Quoted Spread(USD), Cross−Sectional Mean
−60
−55
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[−60, +60] 1−Minute Bins around LULD TP
Period 1: Pre−A10
5−min MA
Period 2: Post−A10
5−min MA
Quoted Spread(USD), Cross−Sectional Mean
LULD  TP
0
.3
.6
.9
1.2
1.5
Quoted Spread(USD), Cross−Sectional Median
−60
−55
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[−60, +60] 1−Minute Bins around LULD TP
Period 1: Pre−A10
5−min MA
Period 2: Post−A10
5−min MA
Quoted Spread(USD), Cross−Sectional Median
Figure 3. Mean and Median of Liquidity Measure: Quoted Spread. This figure plots the minute-byminute evolution of the cross-sectional mean and median of the liquidity measure Quoted Spread in the
[-60, +60] minute bins before and after trading pauses. The 5-minute moving averages (MA) are also included to capture the trend and smooth out extreme variations. Grey color connected-scatters correspond
to Quoted Spread around trading pauses in the 20 trading days pre-Amendment 10 while the blue ones are
for Quoted Spread around trading pauses in 20 trading days post-Amendment 10. Panel (a) is for Quoted
Spread in percentage, while Panel (b) uses Quoted Spread in dollar value.
53
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

LULD  TP
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
HighLow(HS2013, bps), Cross−Sectional Mean
−60
−55
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[−60, +60] 1−Minute Bins around LULD TP
Period 1: Pre−A10
5−min MA
Period 2: Post−A10
5−min MA
HighLow(HS2013, bps), Cross−Sectional Mean
LULD  TP
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
HighLow(HS2013, bps), Cross−Sectional Median
−60
−55
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[−60, +60] 1−Minute Bins around LULD TP
Period 1: Pre−A10
5−min MA
Period 2: Post−A10
5−min MA
HighLow(HS2013, bps), Cross−Sectional Median
Figure 4. Mean and Median of Short-Term Volatility Measure: HighLow. This figure plots the minuteby-minute evolution of the cross-sectional mean and median of the short-term volatility measure HighLow
in the [-60, +60] minute bins before and after trading pauses. The values are in basis point. The 5-minute
moving averages (MA) are also included to capture the trend and smooth out extreme variations. Grey color
connected scatters correspond to HighLow around trading pauses in the 20 trading days pre-Amendment
10 while the blue ones are for HighLow around trading pauses in the 20 trading days post-Amendment 10.
54
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5
0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
High-Frequency Quote Updates
LULD TP
Mean of High-Frequency Quote Updates
Post- vs. Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: [-20, +20] Trading Days)
Pre-A10
Post-A10
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5
0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
High-Frequency Quote Updates
LULD TP
Median of High-Frequency Quote Updates
Post- vs. Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: [-20, +20] Trading Days)
Pre-A10
Post-A10
Figure 5.
Mean and Median of High-Frequency Activity Measure: HFQU. This figure plots the the
minute-by-minute evolution of the cross-sectional mean (as in the top panel) and median (as in the bottom panel) of the high-frequency quotation activity measure HFQU in the [-60, +60] minute bins before
and after trading pauses. The grey color connected scatters correspond to HFQU around trading pauses in
the 20 trading days pre-Amendment 10 while the blue ones are for HFQU around trading pauses in the 20
trading days post-Amendment 10.
55
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
Quoted Spread (%) Regression
Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days), Single Diﬀerence
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
Quoted Spread (%) Regression
Post-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days), Single Diﬀerence
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
Quoted Spread (%) Regression
Post- vs. Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: [-20, +20] Trading Days), Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
Figure 6. Quoted Spread (%) Bin-Level Differences Regressions. The top and middle panels of this figure
plot the estimated coefficients
 βτ + βTP
τ

as in the single difference Eq. (9) for each 1-minute bin in the
[-60, +60] minutes window around Limit Up-Limit Down trading pauses (LULD TP) in the pre- and postAmendment 10 periods respectively. The coefficients capture on average how different the Quoted Spread at
each 1-minute bin are from the base level 60 minutes before trading pauses. The bottom panel plots the estimated coefficients βTP
A10,τ as in the difference-in-differences Eq. (10). The coefficients capture the differences
between the post-Amendment 10 and pre-Amendment 10 bin-level differences of Quoted Spread relative to
their base levels 60 minutes before trading pauses. Darker colors correspond to stricter significance levels
(or smaller p-values) as shown in the graph legend. The vertical axis values are in percentage (%).
56
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
HighLow (bps) Regression
Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days), Single Diﬀerence
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
HighLow (bps) Regression
Post-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days), Single Diﬀerence
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
HighLow (bps) Regression
Post- vs. Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: [-20, +20] Trading Days), Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
Figure 7. HighLow Bin-Level Differences Regressions. The top and middle panels of this figure plot the
estimated coefficients
 βτ + βTP
τ

as in the single difference Eq. (9) for each 1-minute bin in the [-60, +60]
minutes window around Limit Up-Limit Down trading pauses (LULD TP) in the pre- and post-Amendment
10 periods respectively. The coefficients capture on average how different the short-term volatility measure
HighLow at each 1-minute bin are from the base level 60 minutes before trading pauses. The bottom panel
plots the estimated coefficients βTP
A10,τ as in the difference-in-differences Eq. (10). The coefficients capture
the differences between the post-Amendment 10 and pre-Amendment 10 bin-level differences of HighLow
relative to their base levels 60 minutes before trading pauses. The darker colors correspond to stricter
significance levels (or smaller p-values) as shown in the graph legend. The vertical axis values are in basis
points (bps).
57
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
High-Frequency Quote Updates Regression
Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days), Single Diﬀerence
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
High-Frequency Quote Updates Regression
Post-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days), Single Diﬀerence
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
Coeﬃcient
LULD TP
High-Frequency Quote Updates Regression
Post- vs. Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: [-20, +20] Trading Days), Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
Base Bin
Figure 8. High-Frequency Quote Updates Bin-Level Differences Regressions. The top and middle panels
of this figure plot the estimated coefficients
 βτ + βTP
τ

as in the single difference Eq. (9) for each 1-minute
bin in the [-60, +60] minutes window around Limit Up-Limit Down trading pauses (LULD TP) in the preand post-Amendment 10 periods respectively. The coefficients capture on average how different the HFQU
at each 1-minute bin are from the base level 60 minutes before trading pauses. The bottom panel plots
the estimated coefficients βTP
A10,τ as in the difference-in-differences Eq. (10). The coefficients capture the
differences between the post-Amendment 10 and pre-Amendment 10 bin-level differences of HFQU relative
to their base levels 60 minutes before trading pauses. The darker colors correspond to stricter significance
levels (or smaller p-values) as shown in the graph legend.
58
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
Coeﬃcient (×100)
LULD TP
Quotes Spread(%) – High-Frequency Quote Updates Regression
Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days)
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
p ≥10%
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
Coeﬃcient (×100)
LULD TP
Quotes Spread(%) – High-Frequency Quote Updates Regression
Post-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days)
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
p ≥10%
Figure 9. Liquidity and High-Frequency Quoting Regression. The top panel plots the estimated regression coefficients when regressing Quoted Spread on HFQU for each 1-minute bin in the [-60, +60] minutes
window around Limit Up-Limit Down trading pauses (LULD TP) in the 20 trading days pre-Amendment
10. The bottom panel plots those estimated coefficients in the 20 trading days post-Amendment 10. The estimated coefficients are scaled up by a multiplier of 100, along the vertical axis. The darker colors correspond
to stricter significance levels (or smaller p-values) as shown in the graph legend.
59
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Coeﬃcient (×100)
LULD TP
HighLow – High-Frequency Quote Updates Regression
Pre-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days)
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
p ≥10%
-60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
[-60, +60] Minute Bins around Trading Pause
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Coeﬃcient (×100)
LULD TP
HighLow – High-Frequency Quote Updates Regression
Post-Amendment 10 (Interval: 20 Trading Days)
p < 1%
p < 5%
p < 10%
p ≥10%
Figure 10.
Short-Term Volatility and High-Frequency Quoting Regression.
The top panel plots the
estimated regression coefficients when regressing HighLow on HFQU for each 1-minute bin in the [-60,
+60] minutes window around Limit Up-Limit Down trading pauses (LULD TP) in the 20 trading days
pre-Amendment 10.
The bottom panel plots those estimated coefficients in the 20 trading days postAmendment 10. The estimated coefficients are scaled up by a multiplier of 100, along the vertical axis.
The darker colors correspond to stricter significance levels (or smaller p-values) as shown in the graph
legend.
60
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

APPENDIX
0
10
20
30
40
Market Volatility/Uncertainty Index (%)
2016-01-19
2016-02-04
2016-02-23
2016-03-10
2016-03-29
2016-04-14
2016-05-02
2016-05-18
2016-06-06
2016-06-22
2016-07-11
2016-07-27
2016-08-12
2016-08-30
2016-09-16
2016-10-04
2016-10-20
2016-11-07
2016-11-23
2016-12-12
2016-12-29
2017-01-18
Date
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Trading Pauses Frequency
LULD Plan 
Amendment 10 in force 
(Jul 18, 2016)
[-20, +20] 
trading days window 
around 
Amendment 10 date
[-60, +60]
trading days window
around Amendment 10 date
Jun 23, 2016
Brexit Referendum
Nov 8, 2016
U.S. Presidential Election
Daily LULD Trading Pauses & Market Volatility/Uncertainty
VIX 5-Day MA
EMU 5-Day MA
Daily Trading Pauses
Trading Pauses 5-Day MA
Figure A.1. Daily Limit Up-Limit-Down Trading Pauses and Market Volatility / Uncertainty. This figure
plots the daily number of trading pauses in the U.S. stock market together with the involved stocks which
experience trading pauses on that date. It covers the [-6, +6] calendar months window around Amendment
10 implementation on July 18, 2016. The 5-day moving averages (MA) are also plotted to smooth out
extreme variations and better reflect the trends. The magnitude of trading pauses frequency is indicated on
the left hand side axis. This figure also plots the 5-day moving averages (MA) of the VIX and Equity Market
Uncertainty (EMU). Their magnitudes are shown along the right hand side axis. This figure supplements
Figure 1 Panel (a).
61
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed

2014-05
2014-06
2014-07
2014-08
2014-09
2014-10
2014-11
2014-12
2015-01
2015-02
2015-03
2015-04
2015-05
2015-06
2015-07
2015-08
2015-09
2015-10
2015-11
2015-12
2016-01
2016-02
2016-03
2016-04
2016-05
2016-06
2016-07
2016-08
2016-09
2016-10
2016-11
2016-12
2017-01
2017-02
2017-03
2017-04
2017-05
2017-06
2017-07
2017-08
2017-09
2017-10
2017-11
2017-12
2018-01
2018-02
2018-03
2018-04
2018-05
2018-06
2018-07
2018-08
2018-09
2018-10
2018-11
2018-12
2019-01
2019-02
2019-03
2019-04
2019-05
2019-06
2019-07
2019-08
2019-09
2019-10
2019-11
2019-12
2020-01
2020-02
2020-03
2020-04
2020-05
2020-06
2020-07
2020-08
2020-09
2020-10
2020-11
2020-12
2021-01
2021-02
2021-03
2021-04
2021-05
2021-06
2021-07
2021-08
2021-09
Year-Month
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Market Volatility/Uncertainty Index (%)
LULD Plan 
fully in force 
(May 12, 2014)
LULD Plan 
Amendment 10 in force 
(Jul 18, 2016)
LULD Plan
Amendment 18 in force
(Feb 24, 2020)
Covid-19 Outbreak 
(March 2020)
Aug 24, 2015
"Flash Crash"
[-6, +6] months 
close-up range
Monthly Market Volatility and Uncertainty, 2014-05-01 to 2021-09-30
VIX
EMV
Infectious Disease EMV
EMU
Figure A.2. Monthly Market Volatility and Uncertainty Indices. This figure plots the monthly evolution of
market volatility and uncertainty indices from May 2014 to September 2021. They are used for comparison
with monthly trading pauses as in Figure 1 Panel (b). The vertical axis values are in percentage. The shaded
area of the [-6, +6] months close-up range around Amendment 10 implementation corresponds to the entire
time span as in Figure 1 Panel (a) and also in Figure A.1.
62
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5084288
Preprint not peer reviewed
