Trading Places, Trading Platforms:
The Geography of Trade Policy
Realignment
Bryan Schonfeld1
Abstract
What motivates politicians and political parties to shift
their positioning on an issue? Focusing on the case of trade policy in
advanced plurality countries, I argue that the relative positioning of
parties on an existing issue can change even when the preferences
of the key actors (voters and politicians) are held constant, and even
when party leaders continue to represent the same constituencies. In
advanced plurality countries, college-educated voters support free
trade, and high-density constituencies are predominantly represented
by Left incumbents. As college-educated workers migrate to highdensity constituencies in pursuit of higher wages, Left incumbents
increasingly embrace free trade, while Right incumbents take more
protectionist positions.
I provide empirical support for several
observable implications of my theory.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

Introduction
What factors cause political parties to shift their positions on issues?
Moreover, under what conditions will parties “trade places” on an issue,
triggering a realignment?
Notable examples include the civil rights
realignment of the 1960s in the United States (Kuziemko and Washington
2018) and the more recent partisan shifts on European integration in the
United Kingdom (Schonfeld and Winter-Levy 2019). Some theories link
party position change to the replacement of previous party leaders with
new oﬃceholders who hold diﬀerent policy preferences or cater to diﬀerent
constituencies (Carmines and Stimson 1989; Adams 1997; Trubowitz
1998; Shoch 2001), while others focus on the adaptation of incumbents to
shifts in preferences among voters or interest groups (Stimson, MacKuen
and Erikson 1995; Karol 2009).
In this paper, I put forward a new framework of party position change in
which oﬃce-motivated incumbents adapt their positioning–even without
any voters changing their preferences. I argue that internal migration
can induce shifts in positioning, and even realignment. My argument
links a persistent political geography to an evolving economic geography.
In advanced plurality countries, Left incumbents represent mostly highdensity constituencies, while Right incumbents predominantly represent
low-density constituencies.2 In pursuit of higher wages, college-educated
2. For more on the relationship between population density and party politics in advanced
plurality countries, see Rodden (2019).
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

workers move to high-density constituencies. Because those workers tend
to support free trade, this migration induces more pro-trade positioning by
Left incumbents. At the same time, the “brain-drain” of highly educated
workers from low-density electorates yields more protectionist positioning
by Right incumbents. Due to changing party positioning, I predict collegeeducated voters will increasingly support the Left, while less educated
voters should increasingly turn out for Right candidates.
I focus on the issue of trade for two reasons. First, this is an issue where the core cleavage is education. Workers of diﬀerent skill
types diﬀer in their policy preferences on trade: survey data suggests
that college-educated citizens are substantially more supportive of trade
than those without college education. As a result, skill-biased internal
migration—the internal migration of workers of diﬀerent educational
backgrounds—should inﬂuence party positioning on trade. The second
reason I focus on trade is that trade policy is not core to either Left or Right
parties–it is hard to imagine the Right becoming the party of redistribution
or the Left becoming the party of low taxes, but Left and Right parties
have historically shifted on trade policy.3 In the United States, the parties
have stronger brands on domestic policy issues like taxes, gun control, or
abortion than they do on foreign policy issues like trade (Kertzer, Brooks
and Brooks 2017)–so incumbents have the ﬂexibility to stake out new
3. The Democrats were the relatively pro-trade party for most of American history, but
Democratic incumbents shifted to protectionism after a key constituency, the AFL-CIO labor
union, endorsed protectionism in 1970. For more, see Karol (2009).
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

positions on trade in response to shifting electoral incentives.
Despite the surge of academic interest in understanding the contentious
politics of trade in advanced democracies, existing research fails to address
the emerging realignment of parties in advanced plurality countries4
with regards to trade policy. Previously protectionist Left parties are
increasingly endorsing globalization, while formerly “free market” Right
parties are increasingly becoming the parties of protectionism (though
both Left and Right parties are beset by internal divisions on trade).
Take, for example, the shift in the U.K. Labour party’s position, from its
1983 platform arguing “We must therefore be ready to act on imports
directly...to safeguard key industries... using tariﬀs and quotas, if these
prove necessary” to its 2017 platform, which argued that “Labour is protrade...prosperity depends on minimising tariﬀand non-tariﬀbarriers.”
In the United States, this shift predates Trump; examining Republican
platforms from 2000 to 2012, Kuk, Seligsohn and Zhang (2018) ﬁnd
a persistent trend towards a more pessimistic tone about trade (with an
increasing emphasis on concerns about “fair trade,” for example) and away
from prior enthusiasm for “free and open trade.” Cerrato, Ferrara and
Ruggieri (2018) similarly ﬁnd a consistent trend towards protectionism in
Republican presidential campaign rhetoric from 2008 to 2016. The 1988
Canadian Liberal platform expressed strong opposition to the Canada4. Plurality systems here are countries with geographically-deﬁned single-member
constituencies in which voters cast ballots for individuals, rather than parties. Cox (1990)
provides a similar deﬁnition.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

United States Free Trade Agreement, the central issue of that year’s
election; by 2015 the Liberal platform stated “Canada’s economic success
relies on strong trade relationships with our closest neighbours.... we will
work to reduce the barriers that limit trade... Trade is vital for our economy.
It opens markets, grows Canadian businesses, and creates good-paying
middle class jobs.” Still, trade is a contentious issue on both the Left and
the Right, as trade advocates clash with those who have been “left behind”
by globalization.
At the same time, Left parties in advanced plurality countries have
become more popular with highly educated citizens, while Right parties
have gained less educated supporters at the expense of losing support
among educated voters.5 What is driving these puzzling realignments?
In this paper, I link these related realignments to internal migration:6 as
5. Take, for example, the United States: college-educated voters had supported Republican
presidential candidates for decades, but in 2016 college-educated voters preferred Clinton
to Trump by a 9 point margin, while voters without a college education (a traditionally
left-leaning group) supported Trump by 8 percentage points (Tyson and Maniam 2016).
Despite the British Labour party’s long history as a working-class party, educated voters
favored Labour in the 2017 election by a substantial margin, while those in the lowest
educational category preferred the Conservatives by more than 20 percentage points (Curtis
2017).
6. Gallego et al. (2016) estimates that 31 percent of English citizens relocated to a
diﬀerent parliamentary constituency at least once between 1991 and 2008. About 20
percent of Americans change counties over a 5 year period (Glaeser and Gottlieb 2009).
Mummolo and Nall (2017) ﬁnd that internal migration patterns in the U.S. are determined by
economic factors, not by partisan sorting. Though international migration is often analyzed
in International Political Economy, internal migration has been neglected as a salient factor
for understanding the politics of globalization. For more on the contentious politics of
internal migration, see Gaikwad and Nellis (2017); for an analysis of the relationship between
attitudes towards internal and internal migration, see Singer and Quek (2017).
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

skilled individuals sort into high-density constituencies controlled by the
Left, Left parties increasingly endorse free trade and Right parties turn
towards protectionism.7 As a consequence of changing party positioning,
educated voters defect from the Right to the Left, while less educated
citizens increasingly support the Right.
The paper begins by providing evidence for several assumptions underlying my theory. I then present the formal model, which embeds a spatial
equilibrium model from economic geography within a formal model of
incumbents choosing party platforms. I conclude by testing the predictions
of my model in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United
States, and ﬁnd strong and consistent evidence in favor of my theory. Until
recently, Republican constituencies were more educated than Democratic
constituencies; today, Democratic constituencies are disproportionately
college-educated. The relative skill of Left constituencies has risen across
other advanced plurality countries as well. Finally, I ﬁnd that Left parties
have become relatively more supportive of free trade over the last few
decades; at the same time, they have become relatively more popular with
college-educated voters in all four countries.
The rise of a more protectionist Right and a pro-market “New Left”
7. I am not the ﬁrst to link internal migration to political change in the United States. An
extensive literature in American Politics ﬁnds that migration into and out of the American
South was an important contributor to the civil rights realignment in the second half of the
20th century (Beck (1977) and Campbell 1977). Brown (1988) and Frendreis (1989) argue
that migration into an area changes the preferences of the local electorate. Examples include
the migration of aﬄuent, liberal Americans into Tennessee (Lyons and Durant 1980), as well
as the inﬂux of educated voters into the Rocky Mountain West (Robinson and Noriega 2010).
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

have largely been studied separately. One possible factor driving party
re-positioning on trade is changing voter preferences; exposure to import
competition seems to induce “authoritarian” preferences and support
for far-right parties (Cameron Ballard-Rosa and Scheve (2018), Cerrato,
Ferrara and Ruggieri (2018), Colantone and Stanig (2017) and Malgouyres
2017). While preference change in favor of authoritarianism can explain
more protectionist positioning by the Right, it cannot explain why Left
parties have become more supportive of free trade in advanced plurality
countries. A separate literature studies the emergence of a “New Left”
in advanced democracies that is increasingly capitalistic and supportive
of free trade. For example, Ford and Goodwin (2014) argue that the
UK’s Labour party abandoned its working class constituency to gain
the support of the expanding university-educated middle class (see also
Evans and Tilley 2012). However, arguments of this nature cannot explain
why Right parties in advanced plurality countries have become more
protectionist at the same time that a “New Left” has emerged. My theory
is unique in explaining both a liberalizing Left and a more protectionist
Right. Furthermore, my argument is consistent with other evidence of
policy-driven changes in voting in advanced plurality countries, such as
the defection of Southern whites from the Democratic party in response
to the party’s endorsement of civil rights,8 or the recent realignment of
8. See Kuziemko and Washington (2018) for more on policy voting in the United States.
Furthermore, Fowler (2018) ﬁnds that “intoxicated partisans, if they exist, are a small share
of the American electorate, and policy voting is more prevalent.” More generally, Carsey and
Layman (2006) write that “Issue-based change in party identiﬁcation should occur among
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

British voters following the Conservative party’s shift on Brexit in the
aftermath of the 2015 referendum.9
My ﬁndings also add nuance to a disagreement in the literature
exploring whether exposure to globalization increases or diminishes future
support for trade.10 For example, Milner (1988) argues that trade creates
pro-globalization constituencies among ﬁrms with international interests.
Examining support for trade among political parties, Milner and Judkins
(2004) ﬁnd that exposure to globalization leads to higher support for trade
among all parties: “Parties in countries that are more open (holding size and
level of development constant) are less protectionist. . . As globalization
grows, the diﬀerences among parties in a country over trade policy decline,
as all become more free trade oriented.”11 However, more recent work
ﬁnds a link between trade exposure and backlash to globalization at
the voter level (Autor (2016), Colantone and Stanig 2017) and at the
individuals who are aware of party diﬀerences on an issue and ﬁnd that issue to be salient.”
9. Schonfeld and Winter-Levy (2019)
10. There is a long-standing literature on the eﬀects of globalization on party systems
and societal cleavages more generally. Rogowski (1989) argues that trade exposure either
produces class conﬂict or urban-rural conﬂict depending on the relative abundance of labor,
capital and land. Alternatively, Kriesi et al. (2006) argue that globalization “transforms” the
structure of the Western European political space as conﬂict between winners and losers of
globalization crosscuts other cleavages like the religious-secular or urban-rural divides.
11. Milner and Judkins (2004) ﬁnd that right parties are more pro-trade than left parties
in advanced democracies, and argue that this is because right-wing parties depend more
on capital owners for support, whereas left parties depend more on labor. In opposition
to this ﬁnding, I demonstrate that Right parties in plurality countries have become more
protectionist as globalization has progressed. Like Milner and Judkins, Dutt and Mitra (2005)
also focus on capital and labor, predicting that left-wing governments will be protectionist
in capital-abundant countries. However, their model cannot account for an increasingly
pro-trade left in capital-abundant advanced democracies.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

party platform level (Burgoon 2009). I present a middle ground between
these competing ﬁndings: in advanced plurality countries, trade-induced
migration yields more support for trade among Left legislators, but also
more enthusiasm for protectionist policies among Right legislators.
Empirical Motivation for a New Theoretical Framework
My argument links the internal migration of college-educated workers to
emerging realignments on trade policy in advanced plurality countries.
I now present a set of empirical facts to motivate my theoretical focus
on the interaction of economic and political geography. In this section,
I demonstrate a set of empirical facts that are consistent with a broader
literature highlighting that college-educated individuals are less likely to
support protectionism, and that (American) legislators who represent more
educated constituencies are more likely to support pro-trade legislation. I
also provide evidence that Left incumbents in advanced plurality countries
disproportionately represent high-density constituencies–consistent with
the strong empirical relationship between population density and Left voting demonstrated by Rodden (2019). Finally, I demonstrate that economic
forces disproportionately boost the wages of college-educated (American)
workers in high-density constituencies, and that high-density constituencies are becoming disproportionately college-educated (“skilled”) in all
four advanced plurality countries–consistent with the work of (Autor
2019), which shows that urban wage premiums have disproportionately
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

increased for college-educated workers in the United States at the level of
“Commuting Zones” (areas in which there is much commuting within the
area, but not between areas, i.e. local labor markets).
Education and Individual Preferences on Trade
The existing literature links individual-level attainment of post-secondary
education with support for liberal trade policies in the United States
(Scheve and Slaughter 2001) and Europe (Mayda and Rodrik 2005). In
this section I follow O’Rourke et al. (2001) in analyzing survey data from
the International Social Survey Programme National Identity surveys,
which includes all four countries in my sample (1995 and 2003). I examine
answers to the question of whether the respondent’s country “should limit
foreign products in order to protect its national economy.” Answers range
on a 5 point scale from “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree”–for ease
of interpretability, I create a binary variable that equals 1 if a respondent
answered “strongly agree” or “agree,” and 0 otherwise. I regress this
dependent variable on a binary indicator of whether a respondent has
completed university education, and include controls for age, gender
and year ﬁxed eﬀects.
In the United Kingdom, university educated
respondents are 34 percent less likely to endorse protectionism–for the
other nations, college educated respondents are 18 to 20 percent less likely
to favor protectionist policy. These results are consistent with other work
demonstrating a link between university education and pro-trade sentiment
(Hainmueller and Hiscox 2006; Scheve and Slaughter 2001; O’Rourke
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

et al. 2001; Mayda and Rodrik 2005).12 I conclude from this analysis that
education is likely the key cleavage for individual preferences on trade, in
line with existing literature.
TABLE 1. University Education and Support for Protectionism
Dependent variable:
Limit Foreign Products to Protect National Economy
Australia
Canada
United Kingdom
United States
University Educated
−0.189∗∗∗
−0.185∗∗∗
−0.340∗∗∗
−0.203∗∗∗
(0.016)
(0.025)
(0.034)
(0.026)
Age
0.001∗∗∗
0.001∗
0.002∗∗∗
0.002∗∗∗
(0.0004)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Male
−0.083∗∗∗
−0.087∗∗∗
−0.061∗∗∗
−0.061∗∗∗
(0.013)
(0.021)
(0.022)
(0.019)
Constant
0.789∗∗∗
0.512∗∗∗
0.638∗∗∗
0.656∗∗∗
(0.023)
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.029)
Year Fixed eﬀects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
3,947
2,191
1,644
2,203
R2
0.056
0.061
0.088
0.046
Adjusted R2
0.055
0.059
0.086
0.045
Residual Std. Error
0.395 (df = 3942)
0.483 (df = 2186)
0.434 (df = 1639)
0.436 (df = 2198)
F Statistic
58.390∗∗∗(df = 4; 3942)
35.334∗∗∗(df = 4; 2186)
39.731∗∗∗(df = 4; 1639)
26.780∗∗∗(df = 4; 2198)
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
12. I also ﬁnd that older people are more protectionist, while men are less protectionist
—but the eﬀects of these variables are substantively small in comparison to the eﬀects of
education.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

Educated Constituencies and Legislator Voting on Trade
I have shown above that college-educated individuals are more supportive
of liberal trade policy–so the inﬂux of college-educated voters into a
constituency should indicate rising pro-trade sentiment.
Legislators
should adapt to these shifting preferences given that there is evidence of
“dynamic responsiveness”13 to changing constituency preferences in the
U.S.,14 the U.K.15 and Canada.16
In the U.S. context, Bailey (2001) ﬁnds that members of Congress (both
House and Senate) who represent skilled constituencies are more likely to
vote in favor of trade agreements; this ﬁnding has been widely replicated
(for recent examples, see Milner and Tingley (2011), Owen (2017) and
Conconi et al. 2018). Furthermore, there is evidence from the United States
that members of Congress vote in line with constituency opinion on trade
bills (Pomirchy and Schonfeld 2019). I now examine data on voting in the
House of Representatives on trade bills from Milner and Tingley (2011).
13. I borrow this term from Caughey and Warshaw (2018).
14. Stimson, MacKuen and Erikson (1995) ﬁnd that members of the U.S. House are
especially likely to maintain their seats by adapting their positions to changing public opinion;
they refer to this preemptive shift in positioning as “rational anticipation.” Other research
in American Politics also ﬁnds evidence of responsiveness to constituency preferences;
Canes-Wrone, Brady and Cogan (2002) contend that voters do not re-elect incumbents whose
positions are out of step with theirs, so politicians adopt the preferred policy positions of
their constituents. Similarly, Ansolabehere and Jones (2010) ﬁnd that American voters’
beliefs about their legislator’s positions are closely related to the legislator’s actual voting
record and the policy brand of the legislator’s party. Furthermore, citizens hold legislators
accountable if the legislator’s voting record diverges from the voter’s own policy preference.
15. Hakhverdian (2010)
16. Soroka and Wlezien (2004)
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

Their dataset includes votes on three types of bills–trade negotiating
authority for presidents, international trade agreements, and individual
legislators’ bills to regulate trade policy. They include only trade votes
that were both consequential for U.S. trade policy (not procedural votes
or “sense of Congress” votes) and did not deal with individual products
(unless those products involved major U.S. industries, for example, steel,
automobiles, textiles, sugar, and had been used by previous scholars in
roll-call vote). They coded the binary dependent variable such that 1
equals support for trade liberalization, while 0 indicates opposition. I
assess the cross-sectional relationship between percent college educated in
a district and the probability a legislator votes in favor of a trade agreement
for the 103rd (1993-1995)17 and 106th (1999-2001) sessions of Congress.
I match the Milner and Tingley (2011) data on legislative voting on
trade to district-level data on education (percent over 25 years old with a
bachelor’s degree) from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses (for the 103rd and
106th Congresses respectively). I include a set of controls from Milner
and Tingley (2011), which include the legislator’s party, district-level
percent foreign born, percent black in the district, and a variable indicating
whether a president from the same party supports the trade bill (controls
are suppressed for presentation). Finally, I include vote ﬁxed eﬀects to
control for any vote-speciﬁc factors. Consistent with the literature, I ﬁnd
that percent-college educated is a robust predictor of pro-trade voting in
17. There is no 1990 Census education data by district for the 101st or 102nd Congresses.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

both years (푝< .0001): a 10 percent increase in district-level percent
college educated is linked to a 7-8 percent increase in the probability of
the district’s representative voting in favor of trade liberalization.
TABLE 2. Congressional Voting on Trade
Dependent variable:
Roll-Call Vote
103rd
106th
Percent College-Educated
0.008∗∗∗
0.007∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.001)
Constant
0.713∗∗∗
0.023
(0.045)
(0.105)
Observations
1,267
1,245
R2
0.111
0.283
Adjusted R2
0.106
0.279
Residual Std. Error
0.455 (df = 1260)
0.417 (df = 1237)
F Statistic
26.128∗∗∗(df = 6; 1260)
69.606∗∗∗(df = 7; 1237)
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Political Geography
I have thus far provided evidence that college-educated individuals are
less likely to support protectionism, and legislators who represent highly
educated constituencies are more likely to vote in favor of trade liberalization. I now turn to providing evidence for the foundations of my
theoretical argument linking political and economic geography. Rodden
(2019) demonstrates a robust relationship between population density and
Left voting in advanced plurality countries. Though it initially emerged
out of the working class politics of the Industrial Revolution, “urban-rural
polarization” persists in Australia, Canada, the United States, and the
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

United Kingdom.
I ﬁrst validate the assertion that Democratic incumbents maintain
consistent control of high-density electoral constituencies. I divide districts
by population density into a top-half (“high-density”) and a bottom-half; I
then calculate what proportion of Democratic and Republican members
of the House of Representatives are in high-density districts.18 As shown
below in Figure 1, a majority of Democratic members of the House are
in high-density districts in all years of the sample, while a majority of
Republican representatives are in low-density districts in each year.19 I
perform the same analysis for the United States Senate, ﬁnding that a
majority of Democratic seats are in high-density states in each year.
18. I perform this analysis by matching congressional district-level data on population
density from the United States (1990 census, 2000 census, and 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012,
2014 and 2016 American Community Surveys) to VoteView data on membership of the
United States House of Representatives in those years (from the 103rd, 106th, 109th, 110th,
111th, 112th, 113th and 114th Congresses, respectively).
19. The vertical gray lines indicate years of redistricting.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

FIGURE 1. Proportion of Constituencies that are High-Density (by Party)
This plot shows that Democrats (Republicans) primarily control high-density
(low-density) constituencies.
I now extend my analysis of partisan constituencies by examining data
from Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom.20 For Australia, Canada
20. In this paper, I focus on Labour and the Conservatives in the U.K., but not the Liberal
Democrats–and I focus on the Canadian Liberal and Conservative parties, but not the New
Democratic Party (NDP). I exclude these parties from my analysis for a few reasons. While
the Liberal and Labour parties have safe seats in high-density constituencies, the British and
Canadian Conservative parties have safe seats in low-density constituencies. By contrast,
safe seats for the Liberal Democrats “do not ﬁt a very homogenous pattern,” as they are
scattered across rural, middle-class suburban, and inner city constituencies (Cook 2010,
pages 313-314). The same holds for the NDP, whose base includes both urban and rural
elements, such as urban workers in British Columbia and Ontario and farmers in Manitoba
and Saskatchewa (New Democratic Party). Furthermore, there is a dearth of incumbent
persistence for both of these parties–changes in party positioning are more likely to be driven
by selection (new candidates winning, incumbents losing) than by incumbent adaptation.
The Liberal Democrats have won as many as 62 seats (out of 650) in 2005, but in 2015, they
won only 8 seats. Similarly, the NDP’s seat share has ﬂuctuated widely, from only 9 seats (3
short of oﬃcial party status) in 1993 to as many as 103 in 2011. Finally, the positions taken
by these parties are unlikely to have signiﬁcant implications for trade policy. The Liberal
Democrats have never been one of the two largest parties in the British House of Commons,
while the NDP has never formed the Canadian government.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

and the United Kingdom, I divide constituencies by population density
into a top half (“high-density”) and a bottom half (“low-density”) in each
of the country years in my sample.21 In every year for which I have data, a
majority of each country’s major Left party constituencies are high-density,
and a majority of each country’s major Right party constituencies are
low-density (see Figure 2 below).22
Australia 2011
Australia 2013
Australia 2016
Canada 2001
Canada 2006
Canada 2011
Canada 2016
U.K. 2001
U.K. 2011
Left
63
71
64
59
67
73
65
63
75
Right
43
42
45
29
33
37
22
25
31
FIGURE 2. Percentage of Left and Right Constituencies that are
High-Density
21. For 2001 and 2011, I calculate the percentage of Labour seats in the House of Commons
that are in high-density parliamentary constituencies, and do the same for the Conservative
party. Because of data limitations, I am only able to do this analysis for England and
Wales (which include almost 90 percent of constituencies in the U.K.). I also perform this
analysis for the Canadian House of Commons elected in 2011 and 2016 (the Liberal Party
is the Left party, and the Conservative Party is the Right party), and the Australian House
of Representatives in 2011, 2013 and 2016 (Labor is Left and the Liberal party is coded
as Right–by 2011, the Liberal and National parties had merged in the Australia state of
Queensland and in the Northern Territories, so I count “LNP” (Liberal-National Party)
incumbents as Liberal).
22. I cannot analyze the Canadian Senate because Senators are appointed by the Prime
Minister; for the same reason, I cannot examine the British House of Lords. Australian
Senators are elected via state-wide proportional representation, and are therefore not within
the scope of my theory.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

Economic Geography
I consider the interaction of this relatively constant political geography
with an evolving economic geography.23 Research in economic geography
ﬁnds that “skilled” (college-educated) workers now earn signiﬁcantly
higher wages in high-density U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas.24 Until
a few decades ago, both skilled and unskilled workers earned higher
wages in urban areas, but “urban non-college workers currently perform
substantially less skilled work than in prior decades. This deskilling
reﬂects the joint eﬀects of automation and international trade, which have
eliminated the bulk of non-college production, administrative support,
and clerical jobs. . . attenuating, to a startling degree, the steep urban wage
premium for non-college workers that prevailed in earlier decades.”25 I
now verify that the same economic dynamics uncovered by Autor (2019)
hold at geographic levels that are relevant for American trade politics,
namely congressional districts (the House of Representatives) and states
(the Senate). I utilize American Community Survey data from 2016 on
the median earnings of workers whose highest level of education is a
23. In Spending to Win, Rickard ﬁnds that politicians in plurality systems favor geographically concentrated interest groups, while geographically diﬀuse interest groups perform better
under proportional representation. However, Rickard takes economic geography as given,
analyzing “the political implications of existing patterns of economic geography”(Rickard
(2018), page 31). By contrast, I allow economic geography to endogenously evolve by
employing spatial equilibrium modeling tools, enabling me to assess the implications of
changes in economic geography for partisan positioning and voter behavior.
24. See, for example, Lindley and Machin (2014).
25. Autor (2019), page 1.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

bachelor’s degree (“skilled”), as well as the median earnings of workers
whose highest level of education is a high school diploma (“unskilled”). I
then subtract the median gross rent (contract rent plus the cost of utilities)
from these wages to calculate the median skilled and unskilled “real”
wages. In Figure 3, I plot real wages against log population density; as
expected, I ﬁnd that skilled workers earn higher real wages in denser
congressional districts and states; the same does not hold true for unskilled
workers, who actually earn lower real wages in denser congressional
districts.
FIGURE 3. Real Wage by Log Population Density
In U.S. states and congressional districts, skilled real wages are increasing in
population density.
These geographic diﬀerences in real wages are a source of spatial
“skill-sorting” in advanced countries. For example, Lindley and Machin
(2014) ﬁnd evidence of “increased spatial concentration of more educated
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

workers” in U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas between 1980 and 2010.26
Relatedly, Diamond (2016) ﬁnds that American “cities which became
disproportionately productive for high skill workers attracted a larger
share of skilled workers. . . driving up local rents. . . low skill workers
were less willing to pay the “price” of a lower real wage. . . leading them
to prefer more aﬀordable. . . locations.”27 In Canada, because of “the
interprovincial migration process, human capital is redistributed from the
more rural to the predominantly urban provinces.”28
I now provide evidence that high-density constituencies have become
disproportionately skilled in advanced plurality countries, starting with the
United States. I calculate the “Skill Gap” between high and low-density
constituencies, which is the diﬀerence between high and low-density
constituencies in average percent skilled (the percent of adults over 25
years old with a bachelor’s degree or higher). In Figure 4, I plot this
measure over time for both congressional districts and states, ﬁnding
evidence of a strong positive time trend.29 In 1990, high-density states
26. Lindley and Machin (2014), page 131. While there is evidence that internal migration
in the United States has fallen, it is not the level of internal migration that matters for my
argument, but rather the skill and location-biased nature of internal migration.
27. Diamond (2016), page 479.
Similarly, Ganong and Shoag (2017) ﬁnd that the
“divergence in the skill-speciﬁc returns to moving to high-income places” and rising costs of
housing in high productivity areas have deterred low skill migration to high productivity
(high rent and high wage) areas.
28. Coulombe (2006), page 199. Skilled workers are also sorting into high-density areas
in advanced proportional representation democracies. In Spain, De la Roca (2017) ﬁnds that
“migrants to big cities are positively selected in terms of education, occupational skills, and
individual productivity;” other research ﬁnds evidence of skill-sorting in Italy (Mion and
Naticchioni 2009) and Sweden (Ahlin, Andersson, Thulin et al. 2016).
29. I start with 1990 because I cannot access census data on district education levels before
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

were about as skilled as low-density states; by 2016, there was a substantial
skill gap. The growing skill gaps between high and low-density states and
districts are not driven by outliers, as the skill gap between the median highdensity constituency and the median low-density constituency exhibits the
same positive time trend, as shown in the appendix. It is true, however, that
this skill gap has exhibited especially signiﬁcant growth when comparing
the densest and least dense constituencies. In 1990, the top ten percent
of congressional districts in terms of density were less than one and a
half percentage points more skilled than the bottom decile; by 2016, this
skill gap had grown to almost ten and a half percentage points. This
combination of “brain-drain” from rural areas and skilled migration into
dense areas has substantial implications for partisan constituencies, as
Democrats controlled 93 percent of the densest decile of congressional
districts in 2016, while Republicans controlled 87 percent of the least
dense decile.
1990.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

FIGURE 4. Skill Gap Between High and Low-Density Constituencies
This ﬁgure shows the growing skill gap between high and low-density constituencies
in the United States.
To isolate the mechanism of internal migration, I analyze data on
county-to-county migration in the previous year (by level of educational
attainment) from the 5 year American Community Survey spanning
2007 to 2011 (this is the only period for which migration by educational
attainment data is available). As before, I code college and above as
“skilled.”30 I match this migration data to population data from the same
5 year American Community Survey sample to construct a “high-density”
half and a “low-density” half. At both the congressional district and
state level, I calculate “net skilled migration” as the number of skilled
in-migrants plus the number of unskilled out-migrants minus the number
30. Some counties are in multiple congressional districts; I allocate counties to congressional districts by weighting districts by their share of a county’s population. The results are
robust to weighting districts by their share of a county’s territory instead.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

of skilled out-migrants minus the number of unskilled in-migrants. In
Figure 5, I present boxplots showing that high-density constituencies
disproportionately gained skilled workers from internal migration.
FIGURE 5. Net Skill Gain From Internal Migration (by Density)
High-density constituencies disproportionately gain skilled workers due to internal
migration.
Finally, I examine whether high-density constituencies have become
disproportionately skilled over time in the other advanced plurality countries. As before, I divide constituencies into a high-density top half and
low-density bottom half. I again calculate the average “Skill Gap” measure
between high-density constituencies and low-density constituencies, but
I now conduct this analysis for the Australian House of Representatives,
the Canadian House of Commons, and the U.K. House of Commons,
using the broadest data coverage available (2001, 2006, 2011 and 2016
for Canada, 2001 and 2011 for the UK, and 2011 and 2016 for Australia).
I do in fact ﬁnd evidence of a growing skill gap in Australia, Canada and
the United Kingdom.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

FIGURE 6. Skill Gap Between High and Low-Density Constituencies
There is a growing skill gap between high and low-density constituencies in
Australia, Canada and the U.K.
Modeling the Interaction of Political and Economic
Geography
Having demonstrated evidence of an evolving economic geography and
persistent political geography in advanced plurality countries, I now
consider the interaction of political and economic geography in a formal
theoretical framework. I combine two models, a game theoretic model from
political science and a spatial equilibrium model from economic geography.
To capture the notion of self-interested incumbents catering to their local
constituencies in a plurality system, I build on the basic framework
of Snyder (1994).
National party platforms are determined by self23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

interested party leaders who must cater to their particular (geographicallydeﬁned) constituencies to win re-election.31 This theoretical framework
conceptualizes political parties as groups of oﬃce-seeking politicians,
echoing Aldrich (1995), who argued “It is political leaders. . . those who
seek and those who hold elective oﬃce–who are the central actors in
the party.”32
To capture the dynamics of the internal migration of
workers of diﬀerent skill levels, I draw on the basic spatial equilibrium
framework of Moretti (2011).33 The model generates predictions about
the relative skill of Right-controlled constituencies over time, as well as
the relative positioning of Right parties on trade and the relative popularity
of Right parties with college-educated voters. The model also presents the
conditions for a partisan realignment on trade and for a voter realignment
by skill level. Combining these models allows me to unify economic
and political geography into one theoretical framework–and ultimately to
tease out the political implications of an endogenously evolving spatial
economy.34 I argue that migration-induced changes in the demographics
(and thus, the preferences) of partisan constituencies yield shifts in party
31. Incumbents cannot easily move between constituencies, as there may be legal requirements for running for election in a particular place. Furthermore, incumbents may have
organizational and reputational advantages within their own constituencies, but not in others.
32. Aldrich (1995), pages 19-20. Similar views of parties can be found in other foundational
analyses of party politics, such as Downs et al. (1957) and Schlesinger (1994). For an
alternative view of parties, see Cohen et al. (2009) (the UCLA school). For a critique of the
“UCLA school,” see McCarty and Schickler (2018).
33. The spatial equilibrium framework was initially explored in Rosen (1979) and Roback
(1982).
34. In a proportional representation system without districts—like the Netherlands or
Israel—an evolving economic geography would not yield clear changes in political incentives.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

positioning.35
The Political System
I ﬁrst consider the political system. There are two constituencies within the
political system which begin with the same total population but diﬀer in
their land area: we call the low-density constituency 푎and the high-density
constituency 푏. In each constituency, there are legislative candidates from
the Left (푙) and the Right (푟) parties. Candidate 푝푐of party 푝∈{푙, 푟}
competes in constituency 푐∈{푎, 푏} in election period 푡∈{1, 2}. At
the beginning of the game (푡= 1), the incumbent in constituency 푏is
푙푏, while the incumbent in constituency 푎is 푟푎; this initial condition
operationalizes the historical relationship between population density and
Left voting in advanced plurality countries. I assume the game begins in
autarky, but this assumption is made without loss of generality. Ahead
of each election, incumbents take positions on tariﬀpolicy (which are
binding policy commitments). Tariﬀpolicy is assumed to be a “pliable
policy,” i.e. a policy dimension in which parties are open to changing their
policies in response to electoral incentives.36 I refer to the tariﬀposition
adopted by the Left member of the legislature in period 1 as 휏푙1, while the
35. While the analysis in this paper focuses on trade policy realignment, there may be
other cases in which internal migration in a political system where politicians cater to local
constituencies can have important consequences for political positioning. Future research
can consider the political consequences of other instances of internal migration, such as the
“Great Migration” of African-Americans from rural areas in the South to northern cities.
36. These diﬀer from “ﬁxed policies,” which might include redistribution or other domestic
policy issues. For more on this distinction, see Grossman and Helpman (1996).
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

tariﬀposition adopted by the Right incumbent is 휏푟1. Challengers are not
strategic actors–they are associated with their “party brand,” i.e. with the
position taken by their co-partisan legislator in that election period.
In each constituency, the candidate who wins the majority of votes
wins the election; formally, a candidate in constituency 푐must win the vote
of the median voter in constituency 푐, 푚푐. Voters are not strategic, and
simply vote for the candidate in their constituency whose party’s platform
is closest to their ideal tariﬀpolicy. If 푚푐prefers tariﬀ휏푚푐, 푙푐wins the
constituency if |휏푙−휏푚푐| < |휏푟−휏푚푐|, and 푟푐wins if |휏푟−휏푚푐| < |휏푙−휏푚푐|.
Ties occur with probability 0, as I assume that incumbents win if their
platform positions are the same (incumbency advantage).37
The Spatial Economy
I now introduce the spatial economy. There are 푆skilled workers and 푈
unskilled workers (the overall numbers of skilled and unskilled workers
is unchanging across periods). 휃푐denotes the number of workers of
type 휃∈{푆,푈} in constituency 푐. Each worker’s utility is their real
wage, which is their skill and constituency-speciﬁc nominal wage 푊휃푐
for skill type 휃∈{푆,푈}) and constituency 푐∈{푎, 푏} minus their
constituency-speciﬁc cost of rent 휌푐.38 Workers of each skill type seek
37. For evidence of the incumbency advantage, see, for example, Gelman and King (1990)
for evidence from the U.S. and Kendall and Rekkas (2012) for evidence from Canada.
38. There is no commuting in the model, which may be a realistic assumption given the
size of electoral constituencies. There is also no home-ownership in the model; while this is
not a realistic assumption, including home-ownership is unnecessary to show the interesting
spatial dynamics of the model. Furthermore, one can think of the rent parameter 휌푐as
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

to maximize their real wage; migration occurs until workers of each skill
type are indiﬀerent between living in constituency 푎and constituency 푏
(spatial equilibrium).39 Formally, this means 푊휃푏−휌푏= 푊휃푎−휌푎in
equilibrium.40
Wages for skill type 휃in constituency 푐are increasing in labor
productivity 푋휃푐and decreasing in the number of workers of the same
skill type in their constituency, 휃푐(푊휃푐= 푋휃푐−휃푐).41 I assume the price
of rent in constituency 푐is directly proportional to the number of people
living in constituency 푐(휌푐= 푆푐+ 푈푐).42
Trade
Following each election, Nature chooses either constituency 푎or 푏as
the “median constituency.” Party 푝that wins the median constituency
in election period 푡sets nation-wide government tariﬀpolicy 휏퐺푡=
휏푝푡∈[0, 1], where 휏퐺= 1 indicates autarky and 휏퐺= 0 signiﬁes
a proxy for the general cost of living in constituency 푐; Moretti (2013) ﬁnds that rising
housing costs (in US Metropolitan Statistical Areas) are associated with increases in the cost
of local services.
39. I am assuming away moving costs in this analysis; though migration costs would
reduce the total level of internal migration, the direction of migration would not change.
None of the results of the model depend on a particular level of population movement, only
on the direction of skilled and unskilled migration.
40. See Kennan and Walker (2011) for evidence that individuals migrate in response to
economic incentives.
41. I assume 푋푆푐> 푋푈푐> 1 such that wages are never negative.
42. This simple equation captures the positive relationship between demand for housing
and the price of housing (assuming imperfectly elastic housing supply); I chose this linear
functional form for reasons of parsimony, but it is not necessary for the main results.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

free trade.43
Starting from autarky, trade boosts the productivity of
skilled labor in the high-density constituency (푋푆푏) inter-temporally:
푋푆푏2 = 푋푆푏1 + (1 −휏퐺1)Δ with Δ > 0. In line with empirical evidence
(and consistent with their utility functions), I assume unskilled voters
are more protectionist than skilled voters. However, I allow for some
heterogeneity among voters of each skill type, and assume skilled voters
have tariﬀpreferences 휏푆∼푈[0, 0.5] and unskilled voters have preferences
휏푈∼푈[.5, 1].44
Stage Game
The stage game in period 푡is as follows:
1.
Incumbents set party platforms 휏푙푡and 휏푟푡
2.
Elections are held
3.
Nature chooses either 푎or 푏as the median constituency
4.
Party 푝in control of the median constituency implements 휏퐺푡= 휏푝푡
43. For simplicity, I do not include the World Trade Organization in the model. Though
all of the advanced plurality democracies in my sample are in the World Trade Organization,
they often apply tariﬀrates below the WTO Most-Favored-Nation (MFN) rates, suggesting
that they can increase tariﬀs from those levels without violating WTO rules. For example,
according to the World Trade Organization’s “World TariﬀProﬁles 2017” report, Australia
applies a lower MFN tariﬀrate (2.5 percent) than the bound rate (9.9 percent) on all products;
the same can be said for Canada (4.1 percent average applied MFN tariﬀrate, 6.5 percent
bound rate). Furthermore, Rosendorﬀ(2005) notes that there are institutional mechanisms
allowing states to temporarily suspend compliance with international trade law in times of
intense domestic political support for protectionism. The ongoing trade war between the
United States and China following the implementation of tariﬀs by the Trump administration
casts further doubt on the ability of the WTO to insulate trade from protectionist pressures
in domestic politics.
44. This assumption allows for continuous platform change in the model, rather than
discontinuous shifts in party positioning.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

Between 푡= 1 and 푡= 2, workers relocate across constituencies to
maximize their expected utility (until spatial equilibrium is achieved).
Equilibrium Solution
Because there are many possible Nash Equilibria of this game, I focus on
the “Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium,”45 which allows for players
to make mistakes and to play any strategy (in this case, for incumbents
to choose any party platform) with positive probability. This reﬁnement
allows me to compute a unique equilibrium, rather than choosing among
many possible equilibria. For example, the right incumbent can choose any
휏푟that is better for the median voter in constituency 푎than the 휏푙chosen by
the Left incumbent–in this case, there would be many possible equilibrium
values of 휏푟. However, the trembling hand reﬁnement allows any tariﬀ
platform to be played by the Left incumbent with positive probability–in
this case, the only optimal strategy for the Right incumbent is to match
the low-density constituency’s median preference, 휏푚푎. In period 1, we
have the equilibrium tariﬀpositions 휏푙1∗= 휏푚푏1 and 휏푟1∗= 휏푚푎1. By the
same logic, we have 휏푙2∗= 휏푚푏2 and 휏푟2∗= 휏푚푎2. It is therefore a strictly
dominant strategy for incumbents to position at their own constituencies’
median tariﬀpositions–otherwise, there is positive probability of losing
their seats. Incumbents are the only strategic players in the game, so this
is a unique equilibrium. Because incumbents cater to their constituencies’
45. Selten (1988)
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

median voters, challengers from both parties lose their elections in each
period–political geography persists across periods.
The function 푀maps the skill ratio of a constituency to its median
tariﬀpreference; formally, 푀( 푆푐
푈푐) = 휏푚푐, where 푀is a monotonically
decreasing function (more skilled demographics indicate the median voter
prefers a lower tariﬀ). If all voters in a constituency are skilled, the
median tariﬀpreference would be 1
4, because skilled voter preferences
are uniformly distributed between 0 and .5, yielding .25 in expectation.
If there are equal numbers of skilled and unskilled, the median tariﬀ
preference would be .5 (because unskilled voter preferences are uniformly
distributed between .5 and 1), and if all voters in a constituency are
unskilled, the median tariﬀpreference would be .75. If there are more
skilled than unskilled (푆푐>= 푈푐), the median voter’s preference would
be 푆푐+푈푐
4푆푐
(this yields 1
4, or .25, when 푈푐= 0, and if 푆푐= 푈푐, then
the equation yields 1
2 or .5, as expected). If there are more unskilled
voters than skilled in a constituency (푈푐>= 푆푐), the median voter’s tariﬀ
preference is 1 −( 푆푐+푈푐
4푈푐) = 3푈푐−푆푐
4푈푐
(which equals 3
4 or .75 when 푆푐= 0
and 1
2 or .5 when 푆푐= 푈푐, as expected).
We therefore have that if 푈푐> 푆푐, then 푀( 푆푐
푈푐) = 휏푚푐= 3푈푐−푆푐
4푈푐
, and
if 푈푐< 푆푐, then 푀( 푆푐
푈푐) = 휏푚푐= 푈푐+푆푐
4푆푐. The particular equilibrium
values of 휏푙푡∗= 휏푚푏푡and 휏푟푡∗= 휏푚푎푡therefore depend on the initial spatial
distribution of skilled and unskilled workers, as well as government tariﬀ
policy (which inﬂuences the spatial distribution of workers in period 2).
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

Comparative Statics and Propositions
Relative Skill of Right Constituencies
Increasing skilled productivity in the high-density constituency by (1 −
휏퐺1)Δ yields skilled migration to 푏and unskilled migration to 푎. Because
푋푆푏2 = 푋푆푏1 + (1 −휏퐺1)Δ, 푆푎2 = 푆푎1 −4(1−휏퐺1)Δ
12
, 푆푏2 = 푆푏1 + 4(1−휏퐺1)Δ
12
,
푈푎2 = 푈푎1 + 2(1−휏퐺1)Δ
12
, and 푈푏2 = 푈푏1 −2(1−휏퐺1)Δ
12
. Because Δ > 0,
푆푏2
푈푏2 > 푆푏1
푈푏1 and 푆푎2
푈푎2 < 푆푎1
푈푎1 .46 The proof is in the appendix.
Proposition 1. As a result of internal migration and persistent political
geography, the “Relative Skill of Right Constituencies” declines between
periods.
Relative Protectionism of the Right
We now assess the inter-temporal change in relative party positions on
tariﬀs.
Because 푀is a decreasing function, and
푆푏2
푈푏2 >
푆푏1
푈푏1 , 휏푙2 =
휏푚푏2 = 푀( 푆푏2
푈푏2 ) < 푀( 푆푏1
푈푏1 ) = 휏푚푏1 = 휏푙1. The same argument shows that
휏푟2 > 휏푟1.
Deﬁne the Relative Protectionism of the Right in period 푡as 휏푟푡−휏푙푡.
Because 휏푟2 > 휏푟1 and 휏푙2 < 휏푙1, (휏푟2 −휏푙2) > (휏푟1 −휏푙1). The Relative
Protectionism of the Right therefore rises over time. In the special case
46. It is also worth noting that 푈푏2 + 푆푏2 > 푈푏1 + 푆푏1 and 푈푎2 + 푆푎2 < 푈푎1 + 푆푎1. We
therefore know that trade exposure causes the high-density constituency to gain population,
and the low-density constituency to lose population, so we do not need to worry about the
constituencies “changing types” (i.e. a low-density constituency becoming more dense or a
high-density constituency becoming less dense).
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

where the low-density constituency is relatively skilled at the beginning
of the game, but becomes relatively unskilled by the end of the game
( 푆푎1
푈푎1 > 푆푏1
푈푏1 and 푆푎2
푈푎2 < 푆푏2
푈푏2), there is a “partisan realignment on trade”:
휏푙1 > 휏푟1 and 휏푙2 < 휏푟2.47
Proposition 2. As the “Relative Skill of Right Constituencies” declines,
the “Relative Protectionism of the Right” rises.
Relative Skill of Right Voters
휃푝푡is the number of workers of type 휃that vote for party 푝in period 푡.
Deﬁne the “Relative Skill of Right Voters” as 푆푟−푆푙
푆
−( 푈푟−푈푙
푈
). Because
the Relative Protectionism of the Right declines (휏푟2 −휏푙2) > (휏푟1 −휏푙1),
the Relative Skill of Right voters declines as well: 푆푟2−푆푙2
푆
−( 푈푟2−푈푙2
푈
) <
푆푟1−푆푙1
푆
−( 푈푟1−푈푙1
푈
). In the special case where there is a partisan realignment
on trade (휏푙1 > 휏푟1 and 휏푙2 < 휏푟2), there is a voter realignment by skill
level: 푆푟1
푈푟1 > 푆푙1
푈푙1 and 푆푟2
푈푟2 < 푆푙2
푈푙2.
Proposition 3. As a result of the rising “Relative Protectionism of the
Right,” the “Relative Skill of Right Voters” declines.
In summary, I embed a spatial equilibrium framework within a gametheoretic model of party platform-setting by re-election driven incumbents.
Trade exposure causes the high-density constituency to become more
skilled, while the low-density constituency becomes less skilled. In
47. Formally, 푀( 푆푎1
푈푎1 ) < 푀( 푆푏1
푈푏1 ) and 푀( 푆푎2
푈푎2) > 푀( 푆푏2
푈푏2 ).
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

response to changing constituency demographics, the Left incumbent
adopts a more pro-trade platform than before, while the Right platform
becomes increasingly protectionist. Finally, inter-temporal changes in
party platforms drive skilled voters towards the Left and make unskilled
voters more likely to vote for the Right. If a partisan realignment on trade
occurs, then a voter realignment takes place as well.48
Empirical Analysis
Relative Skill of Right Constituencies
I now turn to examining the empirical evidence for the predictions of
the model, starting with Proposition 1. I ﬁrst undertake a quantitative
case study of the United States, which has the broadest data coverage for
population density, internal migration and percent college-educated of all
the countries in the sample. After ﬁnding strong support for the model in
the U.S., I extend my analysis to other advanced plurality countries.
Given that the relationship between population density and Democratic
political control has persisted, an increasing relationship between population density and percent college-educated should result in Democratic
constituencies that are increasingly skilled (and Republican districts that
are comparatively less skilled). As before, I match data from the U.S.
48. Proofs of Propositions 1 and 2 are in the appendix (Proposition 3 follows trivially from
Proposition 2).
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

Census (1990 and 2000) and the American Community Survey (2006,
2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, 2016) with data on members of Congress from
VoteView to examine the skill levels of Republican and Democratic districts over time in Figure 7. I ﬁnd that the median Republican-controlled
district was more skilled than the median Democratic district in 1990–
Republican districts are now less skilled, and this gap has grown since
2006.49 The same result holds when analyzing the mean district, rather
than the median (shown in the appendix). I perform the same analysis for
the U.S. Senate, and ﬁnd that the median Republican Senate constituency
was more educated than the median Democratic Senate constituency in
1990; for the last two decades, Democratic Senate constituencies have
been relatively more skilled than those controlled by Republicans.50
49. Gray lines indicate years in which there was redistricting.
50. In both chambers of the American legislature, Right constituencies were initially more
skilled, and are now less skilled; in the model, this shift is the key theoretical condition for a
partisan realignment on trade.
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

FIGURE 7. Median Percent Skilled of Constituencies Controlled by Party
This ﬁgure reveals that Democratic constituencies are now more skilled than
Republican constituencies.
To negate the concern that changes in relative skill levels are due to
changes in the types of constituencies each party controls (rather than
through demographic change in continuously-held constituencies), I subset
to constituencies held by each party throughout the whole time period in
the appendix (for the House of Representatives, I must account not only
for selection but also for redistricting). In support of my argument, I ﬁnd
that continuously-held Republican constituencies became relatively less
skilled than continuously-held Democratic constituencies over time.
To isolate the mechanism of internal migration, I again analyze data on
county-to-county migration in the previous year (by level of educational
attainment) from the 5 year American Community Survey spanning 2007
to 2011. As before, I code college and above as “skilled”, and calculate “net
skilled migration” as the number of skilled in-migrants plus the number
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

of unskilled out-migrants minus the number of skilled out-migrants minus
the number of unskilled in-migrants at both the congressional district and
state level.
I then assess whether Democratic (Republican) constituencies have
gained (lost) skilled workers due to internal migration. I subset to House
and Senate constituencies that were held by the same party throughout
the whole time period in question. The boxplots in Figure 8 conﬁrm that
Democratic constituencies disproportionately gained college-educated
voters via internal migration.
FIGURE 8. Net Skill Gain From Internal Migration (by Party)
Democratic constituencies have disproportionately gained skilled voters due to
internal migration.
Finally, I examine cross-nationally whether Left-controlled constituencies have become relatively more skilled over time in the Australian House
of Representatives, the Canadian House of Commons, and the U.K. House
of Commons. I measure the “Relative Skill of Right Constituencies,”
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

which is the diﬀerence between the skill level of the median constituency
controlled by the Right and the skill level of the median constituency
controlled by the Left. I expect this variable to trend in a negative direction
over time as high-density Left constituencies become disproportionately
skilled due to internal migration. The plot below indicates the Relative
Skill of Right constituencies in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom;
values over the black line indicate that Right constituencies are relatively
more skilled. The data coverage is the same as the plots above showing an
increasing skill gap between high and low-density constituencies. The Relative Skill of Right constituencies has sharply declined in Canada–Right
constituencies were relatively skilled in 2001, but were relatively unskilled
by 2006. In the United Kingdom, the relative skill of Right constituencies
declined between 2001 and 2011, though values were positive in both
years. As before, the data coverage for Australia only includes 2011
and 2016–we see little evidence of change in the relative skill of Right
constituencies in Australia (though the data coverage is only very recent).
These cross-national diﬀerences may result from diﬀerences in political
and economic geography: in Canada, only a ﬁfth to a third of Right party
constituencies were high-density (as shown in Figure 2), but in Australia
about 45 percent of Right constituencies are high-density. Furthermore,
Figure 6 reveals a rapidly growing skill gap between high and low-density
Canadian constituencies–this gap does not appear to be growing as fast in
Australia.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

FIGURE 9. Relative Skill of Right Constituencies
Right-controlled constituencies have disproportionately lost university-educated
constituents in Canada and the U.K., though there is little recent change in
Australia.
Relative Protectionism of the Right
I now examine the empirical evidence for Proposition 2 in Australia,
Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States between 1985 and
2015.51 I measure parties’ support for tariﬀs in a given election year by
taking a Manifesto Project measure of favorable mentions of protectionism
in a party’s platform and subtracting from it a measure of unfavorable
mentions of protectionism.52 To assess whether there is evidence of
51. The Right parties in my sample include the Republican party in the U.S., the Conservative party in the U.K., the Progressive Conservative party in Canada from 1988 to 2000
and the Conservative party in Canada from 2004 to 2011, and the Liberal party in Australia.
The Left parties in the sample are the Democratic party in the U.S., Labour in the U.K., the
Liberal party in Canada, and Labor in Australia.
52. This is “per406”-“per407.”
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

an emerging partisan realignment on trade, I measure the “Relative
Protectionism of the Right” in each country-election year by subtracting
the major Left party’s “Support for Tariﬀs” value from the major Right
party’s value (i.e. for the United States in 1988, the “Relative Protectionism
of the Right” measure captures the Republicans’ 1988 “Support for Tariﬀs”
score minus the Democrats’ 1988 “Support for Tariﬀs” value).
I focus on the relative positioning of the parties, rather than their
absolute positioning, because my Downsian model of electoral competition
assumes that relative positioning drives electoral outcomes. As Karol
(2009) writes, “Politicians do not adopt stances in a vacuum. They care
greatly about where a stand situates them vis-à-vis the other party...Parties’
relative proximity to voters is key, not their absolute distance from
them”[10].53
Figure 10 shows most Relative Protectionism measures were negative
in the 1980s, indicating relatively pro-trade Right parties; in the 2000s,
most values are positive, indicating partisan realignments on trade. This
trend is positive and statistically signiﬁcant, as shown in the appendix. I
also demonstrate in the appendix that the positive trend in the Relative
Protectionism of the Right is robust to excluding the Canada 1988 outlier.
53. Karol notes “There is no necessary connection between movement of the debate on an
issue and change in the parties’ relative positions.. when the Cold War ended both parties
favored reduced defense budgets, but Republicans remained relatively more supportive of
military spending than Democrats”(Karol (2009), 10). Furthermore, “Parties can also move
in the same direction at diﬀerent rates, altering their relative positions...when the GOP
became the more conservative party on race in the 1960s it was still more supportive of
racial equality in an absolute sense than either party had been for most of U.S. history”(Karol
(2009), 10).
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

I therefore demonstrate that Right parties in advanced plurality countries
have become relatively more protectionist over the last three decades, as
predicted by the model.
FIGURE 10. Relative Protectionism of the Right
This plot reveals that the Relative Protectionism of Right parties has increased
over time, especially in Canada.
Relative Skill of Right Voters
Finally, I assess whether there is empirical support for Proposition 3. To
analyze trends in voting by skill level, I rely on post-electoral survey
data. I divide each country’s sample into voters with university education
and above (“skilled”) and those without (“unskilled”), and calculate
the percentage of each voter type that supported the major Left (Right)
candidate in their constituency’s legislative election (I exclude survey
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

respondents who did not vote).54 I ﬁrst calculate the “Skill Gap in Voting,”
which is the percentage of college-educated voters supporting a party
minus the percentage of less educated voters turning out for the party.
Positive (negative) values indicate a party is more popular with collegeeducated (less educated) voters. I then subtract the major Left party’s
value of this measure from the Right’s “Skill Gap in Voting” to generate
the “Relative Skill of Right Voters.” This measure is positive if the Right’s
electorate is more college-educated than that of the Left, and negative if
the Left’s base of support is relatively more educated. Figure 11 presents
visual evidence that the Relative Skill of Right Voters has declined in all
four countries. I examine the time trend for this measure in the appendix,
ﬁnding a negative and signiﬁcant time trend in the “Relative Skill of Right
Voters.”
54. To measure voter behavior, I utilize the American National Election Study, as well
as the Australian, Canadian and British Election Studies. In the U.S., I assess voting for
members of the House.
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

FIGURE 11. Relative Skill of Right Voters
This ﬁgure shows that the Relative Skill of Right Voters has decreased over time in
all four countries.
I therefore ﬁnd empirical support for all predictions of my model; as
the relative skill of Right constituencies declines, the relative protectionism
of Right parties rises. The emergence of an increasingly protectionist
Right coincides with a decline in the relative skill of Right voters.
Conclusion
Over the last three decades, two puzzling realignments have taken place
in advanced plurality countries. Initially protectionist Left parties have
increasingly become proponents of free trade, while formerly pro-trade
Right parties have moved towards protectionism.
At the same time,
the Right has lost its appeal among college-educated citizens; the Left
has gained these voters at the expense of losing support among less
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785

educated voters. In this paper, I oﬀer a formal theoretical framework for
understanding these developments. Drawing on research in economic and
political geography, I argue that exposure to trade causes skilled workers
to move from low-density constituencies controlled by Right incumbents
to high-density constituencies controlled by the Left. As the relative skill
of Right constituencies decreases, the relative protectionism of the Right
rises, yielding a corresponding decline in the relative skill of Right voters.
My research provides new causes for concern for already-embattled
proponents of globalization in advanced countries. Rodden (2019) shows
that advanced plurality systems are biased against urban citizens; as skilled
workers sort into cities, the political power of globalization supporters will
continue to wane, dimming the prospects for continued global economic
integration. Ultimately, my ﬁndings show the importance of economic
geography not only for domestic electoral politics, but also for the international political economy. Future studies should further probe the political
consequences of an ever-evolving spatial economy.
Date received: MMMM DD, YYYY; Date accepted: MMMM DD, YYYY.
Dummy dates;
please ignore.
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3357785
