Trading Strategies and Market Microstructure:
Evidence from a Prediction Market∗
David M. Rothschild†
Rajiv Sethi‡
November 22, 2015
Abstract
We examine transaction-level data from Intrade’s 2012 presidential winner market for the entire two-year period for which trading occurred. The data allow us to compute key statistics,
including volume, transactions, aggression, directional exposure, holding duration, margin, and
proﬁt for each of 6,300 unique trader accounts. We identify a diverse set of trading strategies
that constitute a rich market ecology. These range from arbitrage-based strategies with low and
ﬂeeting directional exposure to strategies involving large accumulated positions in one of the
two major party candidates. Most traders who make directional bets do so consistently in a
single direction, unlike the information traders in some canonical models of market microstructure. We present evidence suggestive of manipulation by a single large trader, and consider
the possible motives for such behavior. Broader implications for the interpretation of prices in
ﬁnancial markets and the theory of market microstructure are drawn.
∗This project was initiated while Sethi was a visiting researcher at Microsoft Research, New York City. We thank
Ron Bernstein for providing us with transaction level data and Suxin Shen for exceptional research assistance. No
user identities were disclosed to us by Intrade.
†Microsoft Research, New York City
‡Corresponding Author: Department of Economics, Barnard College, Columbia University and the Santa Fe
Institute. Phone 212-854-5140. Email: rs328@columbia.edu.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

1
Introduction
A central concern in the economics of ﬁnance is the process by means of which asset prices adjust
in response to new information about the size and certainty of promised income streams. In order
for prices to respond to news, there must exist a set of market participants who ﬁnd it proﬁtable
to acquire information and trade on this basis. But this raises the question of how such informed
traders are able to ﬁnd willing counterparties.
Two broad approaches this question have been taken in the theoretical literature. In the classic
models of Copeland and Galai (1983), Kyle (1985), and Glosten and Milgrom (1985), market-makers
operating under competitive conditions are willing to trade with all counterparties, including those
with superior information, provided that there also exist some traders with pressing liquidity needs.
The losses incurred by this latter set of individuals allow for positive returns to information traders,
while intermediaries break even.
In these models market participants may have heterogeneous
information, but form beliefs based on a common prior. An alternative approach to trading is
based on the hypothesis that market participants have heterogeneous priors or mental models, and
hence diﬀer in their interpretations of public information (Miller, 1977; Harrison and Kreps, 1978).
In this framework trading occurs on the arrival of new information because individuals, even if
symmetrically informed, agree to disagree about its payoﬀimplications.1
These models (as well as many others descended from them) are based on a partition of the
trading population into multiple groups, each using a distinctive strategy. In principle, one could
distinguish among theories by examining the empirical distribution of trading strategies in an asset
market. Deducing the nature of a strategy from a sequence of trades is not an easy task, however,
especially when large numbers of individuals are interacting simultaneously with each other and
responding rapidly to changes in market states and the arrival of information. At a minimum, one
needs transaction level data in which each trade can be associated with a buyer and seller account.
Recent work by Kirilenko et al. (2011) has used transaction-level data from the S&P 500 E-Mini
futures market to partition accounts into a small set of groups, thus mapping out an “ecosystem”
in which diﬀerent categories of traders “occupy quite distinct, albeit overlapping, positions.” Their
concern was primarily with the behavior of high frequency traders both before and during the ﬂash
crash of May 6, 2010, especially in relation to liquidity provision. Subsequent work by Baron et al.
(2012) has used similar data over a longer time frame to compute the risk-adjusted proﬁts of high
frequency traders.
In this paper we examine transaction-level data from a very diﬀerent source, Intrade’s prediction
1See also Harris and Raviv (1993), Kandel and Pearson (1995), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), and Hong et al.
(2006). Equilibrium models with common priors and private information, such as Hellwig (1980) and Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980), explore the question of whether prices fully aggregate all dispersed information, but do not consider
the process of trading.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

market for the 2012 US presidential election. With wagers topping $230 million on the 2012 US
election, this was the largest exchange in both volume and transactions for this event.2 The ﬁrst
trade in this market occurred on November 16, 2010, and the last was executed on November 7,
2012, a few hours after all polls had closed. When the market opened it was not clear who the
eventual nominees would be, and a total of 22 diﬀerent contracts were listed.3 Trading was initially
active in all contracts, but as it became clear that the election would be contested by Obama and
Romney, volume in the remaining contracts diminished substantially.
Contracts on prediction markets such as Intrade are structured as binary options that pay a
ﬁxed amount if the referenced candidate is elected, and nothing otherwise. We obtained data on
each transaction in this market for the entire two years of its existence, including price, quantity,
time of trade, and aggressor side, as well as a unique identiﬁer for each account that allowed us
to trace the evolution of trader positions and proﬁts. There were 6,300 unique accounts, almost
300,000 total transactions, and close to 13 million contracts traded in total. No identities could be
deduced from this data, but it is possible to make inferences about strategies from the pattern of
trades.
The data allows us to compute volume, transactions, aggression, directional exposure, holding
duration, margin, and proﬁt for each of the trader accounts. We ﬁnd that a relatively small number
of highly active traders dominate total volume and transactions. Most traders either take liquidity
consistently or provide it consistently, although the most active traders have intermediate levels of
aggression. The vast majority of traders hold their positions to expiration but a small number of
high volume traders have extremely short holding periods, closing out positions almost as soon as
they have entered them.
Based on a range of computed characteristics, we partition the full set of accounts into six
categories that we associate with distinct trading strategies.
One of these is arbitrage, which
seeks to exploit temporary inconsistencies between the prices of the two contracts, and tends to be
algorithmically implemented. The others are unidirectional or exhibit varying levels (extreme, high,
moderate and low) levels of bias. A unidirectional trader’s portfolio is always long for one of the
two major candidates, while a low bias trader’s portfolio ﬂuctuates between long in one candidate
and long in another. Low or moderate bias traders that are not arbitrageurs most closely resemble
the information traders in standard models.
Having developed a taxonomy based on the behavior of traders we turn to their beliefs and
2Intrade closed the accounts of all US residents in December 2012 in the wake of a suit brought by the CFTC
alleging that the company “solicited and permitted” US persons to trade commodity options without being a registered
exchange. It ceased all trading activity in March 2013 and remains closed.
3All but one of the contracts referenced a particular potential candidate (Obama, Clinton, Biden, Romney, Palin,
Thune, Gingrich, Pawlenty, Daniels, Huckabee, Paul, Trump, Bachmann, Huntsman, Barbour, Cain, Santorum,
Perry, Christie, Bloomberg, and Johnson). The last contract referenced Other, and would have paid out if none of
the listed candidates had won.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

motivations.
Traders could be engaging in cross-market arbitrage, hedging exposures in more
conventional asset markets, attempting to manipulate prices, or directly speculating on the electoral
outcome (the canonical reason for trading). Contracts very similar to those on Intrade were also
oﬀered on Betfair, the world’s largest prediction market, and a persistent price disparity between
the two created incentives for arbitrage across exchanges. This can only account for unidirectional
strategies in one direction, however, since the Romney contract was consistently overpriced on
Intrade relative to Betfair. Hedging may have been a motive, given that prior research has linked
electoral outcomes to movements in both broad market indexes as well as particular baskets of
securities (Knight, 2006; Snowberg et al., 2007). We show, however, that at least as far as market
indexes are concerned, prior correlations appear not to have been relevant to the 2012 election.
This also suggests that price manipulation for ﬁnancial gain, by temporarily aﬀecting the S&P
futures market for instance, would not have been eﬀective.
It does appear, however, that price manipulation by a single trader who accumulated a large
directional position on Romney may have been a factor. This trader accounted for more than
one-third of all bets placed on Romney to win, and about one-ﬁfth of all bets placed on Obama
to lose.4 These positions were accumulated by placing large bids for Romney and large oﬀers for
Obama that eﬀectively created a ﬁrewall, preventing prices from moving in response to incoming
information. This resulted in remarkable stability in Intrade prices for several hours on Election
Day, and at other critical moments of the campaign, even as prices on Betfair were moving sharply.
On Election Day, these orders were removed just as voting ended in Colorado, the last swing state
to close its polls. The eﬀect was a sharp price movement and immediate convergence to the Betfair
prices. Financial gain though correlated changes in stock prices seems an unlikely motivation for
this activity, since these appear to have broken down in 2012. More plausibly, this trader could have
been attempting to manipulate beliefs about the odds of victory in an attempt to boost fundraising,
campaign morale, and turnout.
Manipulation aside, one of our most striking ﬁndings is that 87% of traders, accounting for 32%
of volume, never change the direction of their exposure even once. A further 37% of volume comes
from 7% of traders who are strongly biased in one direction or the other. A handful of arbitrageurs
account for another 16% of volume, leaving just 6% of accounts and 15% of volume associated with
individuals who are unbiased in the sense that they are willing to take directional positions on
either side of the market. This suggests that information ﬁnds its way into prices largely through
the activities of traders who are biased in one direction or another, and diﬀer not only with respect
to their private information but also with respect to their interpretations of public information. In
this sense our ﬁndings are supportive of models of trading based on heterogeneous prior beliefs,
such as Miller (1977) and Harrison and Kreps (1978). Fundamental belief heterogeneity of this kind
is an increasingly common assumption in models of speculation, given the diﬃculty of accounting
for trade under the common prior assumption.5 We argue here that heterogeneous prior beliefs
4The trader held the vast majority of these contracts to expiration, but closed out a small number on earlier dates.
5See Milgrom and Stokey (1982) for a classic no-trade theorem, and Harris and Raviv (1993), Kandel and Pearson
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

imply a certain distribution of directional exposure across traders in binary options markets, and
that this prediction is consistent with the patterns observed in our data.
2
Data
The data come from Intrade’s presidential election market, and include a record for each transaction
completed during the two year period over which the market was open.
The contracts were structured as cash-or-nothing binary options; for instance, the Obama
contract paid $10 contingent on his winning the presidential election (and nothing otherwise),
while the Romney contract paid $10 contingent on a Romney victory. These contracts could be
bought and sold just like stocks or futures contracts in ﬁnancial markets. As in other electronic
exchanges, the mechanics of trading involved the use of a continuous double auction. That is,
traders could place a bid to buy or an oﬀer to sell a speciﬁed number of contracts at a speciﬁed
price. If an incoming order was compatible with an earlier order that had yet to trade, a transaction
would occur. If no such compatible order existed, then the new order would be recorded and made
available to trade against future orders. This list of orders that have been received but await a
compatible counterparty is referred to as an order book. Whenever a trade occurs, it involves a
new, incoming order and an older one that is resting in the order book. The former is said to
be aggressive or liquidity-taking, and the latter passive or liquidity-providing. A new order that
results in a trade is said to be marketable.
Each observation in our data identiﬁes the contract traded, time of trade, price, quantity, buyer
and seller accounts, and the aggressor side. Accounts are identiﬁed only by a unique number so that
trader anonymity is fully protected. The timestamp on each trade allows us to compute average
holding periods for each trader in a manner described below. By tracking trader portfolios over
the period, we can also determine changes in amount of money risked, as well as the aggregate
proﬁt or loss. The exchange required traders to have cash deposits that were enough to cover their
worst-case loss. This amount is referred to as the trader’s margin.
2.1
Volume
There were about 287,000 distinct transactions over this two year period, involving 12.9 million
contracts and 6,300 unique accounts.6 The average transaction was for about 45 contracts, while
the largest single trade involved ten thousand.
(1995), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), Hong et al. (2006), Geanakoplos (2010) and Simsek (2013) for models of
speculation based on heterogeneous priors. When prior beliefs are unobservable, then private information need not
be fully revealed even if posteriors are common knowledge (Sethi and Yildiz, 2012).
6In all, 7.6 million traded contracts referenced either Obama or Romney, since volume in the remaining contracts
dried up once the decisive primaries were over.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

0
12
0
16
Log Number of Transactions
Log Volume
Figure 1: Distribution of Transactions and Volume
The distribution of transactions and volume (both in logs) is shown in Figure 1, where each
point corresponds to a distinct trader. Volume refers to the total number of contracts traded, which
must be at least as great as the number of transactions. Hence all points lie on or above the line
deﬁned by the equality of the two. The positive association between volume and trading frequency
is clear from the ﬁgure, but there is also considerable variation across traders in the size of the
average trade.7 Many traders engaged in just a handful of transactions over this period: 55% had
less than ten trades, and 12% had just one. But some of these had fairly high volume. Of the
traders with just a single transaction, for instance, 78 had volume exceeding a hundred contracts
and three had volume exceeding a thousand.
More generally, both volume and total transactions are dominated by a relatively small number
of traders. The single largest trader was responsible for more than 15% of total volume, with close
to four million contracts bought or sold in about 70,000 distinct transactions.8 This was also the
most frequent trader, accounting for more than 12% of total observations. The largest 63 traders
7The number of transactions is an upper bound for the number of marketable orders, since a single marketable
order that trades against more than one resting order will appear as multiple transactions in our data.
8Since two parties are jointly responsible for trade in a single contract, aggregating volume across all traders
results in double the number of contracts traded. The most a single trader can contribute to this total is one-half.
The same applies to total transactions.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

(just 1% of the trading population) were responsible for 67% of volume, while the 63 most frequent
traders accounted for 60% of transactions.
Table 1 contains information about ten selected traders. The ﬁrst two columns contain volume
(the total number of contracts traded) and trades (the total number of distinct transactions). Each
transaction here has a unique price and counterparty, so a single large marketable order can give
rise to multiple transactions. The third column, scope, contains the number of distinct candidate
contracts traded, and ranges between 1 and 22.
Aggression is the share of total volume that
resulted from a marketable order placed by the trader in question; these are orders that trade
against resting orders and remove liquidity. Direction is deﬁned more precisely below, and refers to
the extent to which exposure increasing trades were bets on Obama (coded as positive direction)
or Romney (coded as negative direction). This measure ranges between +1 for traders who were
always betting on Obama (or against Romney), to −1 for those who were doing the opposite.
Holding is the median amount of time, in seconds, that elapses before an exposure increasing trade
is closed out or reversed, and duration is a normalized measure of holding; the computation of both
is described in detail below. Margin is the largest amount of money that the trader has at risk at
a single point in time over the entire cycle; this is the most that the trader could conceivably have
lost. The last column is just the realized proﬁt or loss.
Volume
Trades
Scope
Aggression
Direction
Holding
Duration
Margin
Proﬁt
A
3,961,242
69,977
22
0.77
0.19
0
0.00
$9,877
$61,871
B
2,062,908
22,738
2
0.27
−1.00
520,428
1.00
$6,882,186
-$6,882,186
C
1,380,406
29,134
22
0.31
−0.49
2,491
0.00
$737
$11,921
D
321,818
1,207
2
0.83
0.92
51,470
1.00
$2,099,441
$867,059
E
174,712
4,340
22
0.79
−0.13
7
0.00
$415
$1,058
F
156,413
65,652
22
0.72
0.38
0
0.00
$1,375
$2,147
G
138,264
1,707
9
0.39
1.00
1,802,885
1.00
$535,018
$318,975
H
72,563
392
2
0.73
1.00
149,180
1.00
$479,896
$233,414
I
68,416
858
2
0.37
−1.00
664,333
1.00
$121,609
-$121,609
J
44,195
350
1
0.64
−1.00
152,360
1.00
$149,998
-$149,998
Table 1: Characteristics of Selected Traders
The traders in Table 1 are those who traded at least 10,000 contracts referencing the two
main candidates (Obama and Romney) and were among the top three overall with respect to one
or more of the following criteria: volume, trades, frequency, margin, proﬁt, or loss (here high
frequency corresponds to low duration). They are ordered by total volume.9 Traders A and F both
had zero median holding period. That is, more than half of all exposure increasing trades were
closed out within the same second. In fact, for trader A, more than half were reversed within the
same millisecond—these were mutually oﬀsetting trades with exactly the same timestamp. Such
arbitrage strategies can only be implemented algorithmically. Trader A was also the largest by
9Many accounts had greater volume and transactions than some on this list. For instance, trader J was 56th on
volume, 33rd on volume in the two main contracts, 188th on trades, 19th on margin risked, and 2nd on total loss.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

volume and transactions overall, and trader F had the second highest number of trades. Trader D
was the most proﬁtable, while B incurred the greatest loss.
The two largest traders adopted completely diﬀerent strategies, with one of them building up
large directional exposure and holding almost all contracts to expiration, while the other engaged
in arbitrage, selling all 22 contracts almost simultaneously, with virtually no sustained directional
exposure.
First consider trader B, who traded only contracts referencing the two major party
candidates. The evolution of this trader’s positions over the 120 day period leading up to the
election are shown in Figure 2. He consistently bought the Romney contract and sold the Obama
contract, building a large directional position over time. This required increasing amounts of margin
and a substantial exposure (close to 7 million dollars) to a Romney loss on Election Day.
−120
0
0
15 x 10
5
Position
Romney
−120
0
−10
0 x 10
5
Days before Contract Expiration
Position
Obama
Figure 2: Evolution of Positions for Trader B
Next consider trader A, who traded each of the 22 listed contracts.
The evolution of this
trader’s positions in the two major party nominees over the 120 day period leading up to the
election are shown in Figure 3. He accumulated large and virtually identical short positions in
these two contracts (and in all other contracts) over time. That is, he bet on both Obama and
Romney to lose, at prices that ensured a certain proﬁt (since one of the two was guaranteed to
lose). This requires a minimal amount of cash margin. The trader quickly covered directional
positions in one contract with exactly oﬀsetting positions in the complementary contracts. This
behavior is strongly suggestive of an arbitrage based strategy, a point to which we return below.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

−120
0
−10
0 x 10
5
Position
Romney
−120
0
−10
0 x 10
5
Days before Contract Expiration
Position
Obama
Figure 3: Evolution of Positions for Trader A
3
Characterizing Strategies
While the strategies of the two largest traders are quite easy to characterize based on visual inspection, this is not the case for the majority of market participants. In order to describe the
ecology of strategies in the market as a whole, we compute several measures for each trader using
the transaction level data: aggression, direction, exposure, duration, margin and proﬁts. Some of
these measures require that we restrict attention only to traders who bought or sold at least one
contract in one of the two major party nominees. There are 5,906 such traders, constituting 94%
of the total trading population, together accounting for 97% of total volume across all contracts.
3.1
Aggression
Each order has two transacting parties, one of which is passive and provides liquidity, while the
other is aggressive and takes liquidity. The aggressive party is the one who initiates the trade by
placing an order that is immediately marketable against a resting limit order previously placed
by the passive party. For each trader we can compute an index of aggression, deﬁned simply as
the proportion of this trader’s total volume (in the two major contracts) that was initiated by an
aggressive order by the trader. There are substantial variations across traders in the degree of
aggression: 5% are always passive, 37% are always aggressive, and the remainder lie somewhere in
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

between, sometimes taking and sometimes providing liquidity.
Common arbitrage based strategies gives rise to intermediate values of the aggression measure
by design. For instance, consider the strategy of placing an oﬀer to sell each contract at a price that,
in conjunction with the current bids in the complementary contracts, yields an arbitrage proﬁt. If
an oﬀer is met the trader immediately covers by selling all other contracts at the prevailing bid
prices. The ﬁrst trade is passive, while the remainder are aggressive. When only two contracts are
involved the resulting aggression measure is exactly one-half. If, in addition to this, the strategy
sells all contracts aggressively when the sum of the bid prices exceeds the amount to be paid to
the winning contract, the overall aggression measure will lie between one-half and 1. The three
traders in Table 1 who had the shortest median holding period—between 0 and 7 seconds—all
had aggression measures consistent with such strategies. In contrast, trader C has a short median
holding period but is mostly passive, suggesting a more traditional market making strategy of
placing bids and asks simultaneously for multiple contracts and waiting for these to trade.
3.2
Direction
Restricting attention only to trades in contracts that reference one of the two major party nominees,
we assign the number +1 to a contract that increases exposure to an Obama loss, and −1 to a
contract that increases exposure to a Romney loss.
These numbers are then averaged over all
exposure-increasing contracts to obtain an index of directional exposure.
A trader with direction +1 is never betting against Obama. Such a trader may be buying
and selling Obama contracts repeatedly, but all sales are exposure reducing while all purchases
are exposure increasing. Similarly, an index of −1 indicates a trader who is never betting against
Romney. Values of direction close to zero correspond to traders who switch exposure from Obama
to Romney or vice versa at some point, perhaps repeatedly, and whose exposure increasing trades
do not systematically favor one candidate or the other.
In constructing a taxonomy of trading strategies, we will be more interested in the size rather
than the sign of direction. Accordingly, we deﬁne the bias of a trading strategy as the absolute
value of its direction. We see from Table 1 that the three traders with the largest loss all had bias
equal to 1, as did two of the there traders with the largest gain. Trader D, who had the largest
proﬁt in the data, had bias of 0.92. These traders also had duration equal to 1. In contrast, the
four traders with bias below 0.5 also had duration close to zero. These ten traders either have high
frequency and low bias, or low frequency and high bias.
Very high levels of bias are common among traders and account for a sizable portion of volume.
More than 89% of traders, responsible for over 58% of volume in the two main contracts, have bias
exceeding 0.9. In fact, 87% of traders, accounting for 32% total volume, have bias precisely equal to
1. This latter group, which includes traders G, H, I and J in Table 1, do not change the direction
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

of their exposure even once.
3.3
Holding Duration
For any given trader we have a list of all trades and the times at which they occur. Let (qi, ti)
denote the quantity traded and timestamp for the ith transaction involving the trader. Restricting
attention only to trades in one of the two major party nominees, we classify a trade as long Obama
if it involves either a purchase of the Obama contract or a sale of the Romney contract. Otherwise
the trade is long Romney. At any given time, a trader’s net position is either long Obama, or long
Romney, or zero. Each trade either increases the trader’s directional exposure or reduces it.
Starting with the ﬁrst trade, which clearly increases exposure, we identify the earliest time tj
at which exposure is reduced. If the number of contracts in the ﬁrst trade is q1 while the number in
the direction-reversing trade is qj, we compute q = min{q1, qj} and assign the time diﬀerence tj −t1
to precisely q contracts from the ﬁrst trade. We then subtract q from both q1 and qj, resulting in
a new series of trades and times to which the same procedure can be applied. This is iterated until
all trades have been reversed, with any residual position reversed at the time of contract expiry.
This procedure yields a holding period for each contract purchased or sold that increases directional
exposure. Trades that reduce directional exposure simply close out or cover a position previously
entered. One measure of duration is the median holding period for all exposure increasing trades.
One problem with this measure is that for trades with the same timestamp, the order in which
they appear in the data aﬀects the computation of the measure. This is easy to deal with, however,
by treating mutually oﬀsetting trades with the same timestamp separately, and assigning them zero
holding period. The holding period for other exposure increasing trades may then be computed after
removing these from the data. We adopt this procedure, but after ﬁrst rounding the timestamps to
the nearest second (the original data had timestamps in milliseconds). That is, we treat transactions
that occur within the same second as if they occur simultaneously.
As in the case of aggression, there is wide variation in holding periods. Three traders had
median holding precisely equal to zero: more than half of exposure increasing trades were reversed
within the same second. Two of these (A and F) are shown in Table 1; the third traded just
fourteen main market contracts and is omitted from the table. Trader G in Table 1 had median
holding about three weeks; across all traders the longest holding period was almost two years.
For traders who never reduce their exposure to a particular candidate, the median holding
period just reﬂects the median time before contract expiration at which they enter their positions.
This can vary from a few hours (if they were especially active on election day) to two years. In order
to obtain a normalized measure of duration, we divide the median holding period by the median
time to contract expiration of their trades. This is constrained to lie between 0 and 1, and equals
1 for those who never reduce their exposure to a candidate. This normalized measure of duration
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

is reported in Table 1 for the ten selected traders. Four of these have very short duration, exiting
positions almost as soon as they enter them; the remaining six hold their median trade essentially
to expiry.
Of those 5906 traders who have at least one major market trade, a clear majority—64% in all,
accounting for almost 20% of volume in the two main contracts—have duration precisely equal to
1. These individuals bet only in one direction and hold the median contract to expiration. But
signiﬁcant volume comes from a small number of high frequency traders. Just two traders (A and F
in Table 1) with zero median holding account for almost 14% of volume in the two main contracts.
3.4
Margin
Intrade required traders to post cash margin equal to their worst-case loss, and this amount was
frozen in trader accounts as soon as a transaction was made. Hence, for example, the sale of the
Obama contact for $6.00 would result in the freezing of $4.00 in a trader’s account, while $6.00
would be frozen in the account of his counterparty. These amounts are released when positions are
exited, net of any proﬁts or losses made on the trade.
Importantly, the contracts are margin-linked for sales: a trader who sold Obama at $6.00 and
(at some later date) sold Romney at $3.50 would have $4.00 frozen on the initial trade and $3.50
released on the second, since the worst case loss (under the assumption that only one of the two
candidates could win) was now $0.50. And if the latter contract were sold for $4.50 instead, the
entire margin from the ﬁrst trade would be released, since no loss on the combined position is
possible.
The eighth column of Table 1 shows the maximum amount of margin frozen in each of the trader
accounts over the course of the entire cycle. This is the largest amount of cash that each trader had
at risk. Particularly striking is the amount for trader C, who managed to participate in over 29,000
trades using just $737 in cash. Just prior to contract expiration, this trader had short positions
exceeding 73,000 contracts in both Obama and Romney, along with signiﬁcant short positions in
all other contracts, and would have netted a proﬁt of at least $11,921 regardless of the electoral
outcome. The four high frequency traders in the table all had very low levels of margin relative to
the volume of contracts traded, and all netted a proﬁt well in excess of the margin posted.
3.5
Proﬁts
The computation of proﬁts for each account is a straightforward matter, since we know the prices at
which all positions are entered and exited, and the terminal value of all contacts held to expiration.
The last column of Table 1 reports realized proﬁts for the ten selected traders, which include the
three most proﬁtable and the three with the biggest loss. Trader B lost close to $7 million on
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

an accumulated position that was heavily short Obama and long Romney, and this was by far
the largest loss recorded in the data. Trader D bet heavily on an Obama victory and had the
highest proﬁt recorded in the data. These were both risky bets that could have gone either way.
In contrast, Traders A, C, E, and F used arbitrage-based strategies with minimal risk exposure to
book small proﬁts on each of a large number of transactions.
4
Trading Strategies
Trading strategies can diﬀer along multiple dimensions. The degree to which traders take or provide
liquidity varies widely, as does the extent to which they build up large directional positions rather
than entering and exiting positions repeatedly.
Holding periods also vary widely, as does the
willingness to switch positions from one direction to another. Some traders are clearly engaged in
arbitrage across the two contracts, building up large negative positions in both, with a very small
amount of margin frozen relative to position size.
These two strategies discussed above (for traders A and B respectively) occupy distinct niches
in a rich trading ecology that we now attempt to characterize in detail. The goal is to construct a
taxonomy of strategies, based on bias and holding period. Each account can be placed in one of
six diﬀerent categories, based on the following deﬁnitions:10
1. Arbitrage: median holding period less than 10 minutes (traders A, E, and F)
2. Unidirectional: bias equal to 1, non-arb (traders G, H, I, and J)
3. Extreme Bias: bias above 0.9 but below 1, non-arb (traders B and D)
4. High Bias: bias between 0.5 and 0.9, non-arb
5. Moderate Bias: bias between 0.25 and 0.5, non-arb (trader C)
6. Low Bias: bias less than 0.25, non-arb
The incidence of each strategy in the trading population, the volume attributed to each, and
various characteristics (aggression, duration and bias) are shown in Table 2.
The unidirectional strategy accounts for 87% of traders and almost a third of total volume.
These traders never switch the direction of their exposure. The second category is composed of
traders with extreme levels of bias (exceeding 0.9). These traders are almost always either long
10The qualiﬁer “non-arb” in the deﬁnition of all non-monotone strategies is necessary to prevent double counting.
Although the 40 arbitrage strategies all have very low duration (none exceeding 0.02), they have widely varying biases
ranging from precisely zero to precisely 1.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

Strategy
Traders
%
Volume
%
Aggression
Duration
Bias
Unidirectional
5,118
87%
4,901,262
32%
0.65
0.75
1.00
Extreme Bias
136
2%
3,987,006
26%
0.38
0.65
0.97
High Bias
272
5%
1,699,355
11%
0.42
0.22
0.71
Moderate Bias
173
3%
1,293,289
9%
0.41
0.06
0.43
Low Bias
167
3%
926,702
6%
0.40
0.10
0.13
Arbitrage
40
1%
2,368,380
16%
0.73
0.00
0.20
Total
5,906
100%
15,175,994
100%
Table 2: A Taxonomy of Trading Strategies
Obama or long Romney, and the mean level of bias in this group is 0.97.11 There are few traders
in this group but they include some very large ones (including B and D in Table 1) and together
account for 26% of volume. The high and moderate bias categories account for a further 11% and
9% of volume respectively, and those with low bias account for 6%.
Arbitrageurs also have low bias on average, but are distinguished by their very short duration.
Less than 1% of traders fall into this category but they account for 16% of total volume. As noted
above, a substantial portion of this volume comes from traders A and F in Table 1. These two
traders (and a handful of others in the data) are similar to the high-frequency traders in Kirilenko
et al. (2011) in that their strategies are algorithmically implemented and characterized by short
duration and limited directional exposure. Such traders account for about one-third of total volume
in the S&P futures market.
Recall that a bias exceeding 0.5 implies that three-quarters of all exposure increasing trades are
in one direction. These traders do switch direction, but strongly favor one direction over the other.
Taken together, therefore, strategies that restrict their exposure largely to one side of the contract
are responsible for 69% of total volume. A further 16% is associated with arbitrage, leaving just
15% assigned to strategies with moderate or low bias, whose exposure increasing trades do not
favor either side of the contract more than three-fourths of the time.
Some features of the ecological composition of the market may be seen in Figure 5, which plots
duration and bias for all 5,906 strategies that were active in one or both of the main candidate
markets. The area of each circle is proportional to the trader’s (main market) volume, and the
arbitrage based strategies are shown in the darker green. All unidirectional strategies (with bias
equal to one) are clustered along the top of the ﬁgure. The two largest circles correspond to traders
B (duration and bias both close to 1, main market volume 2.06m) and A (zero duration, low bias,
main market volume 1.94m) respectively.
It is clear from the ﬁgure that, for the most part, strategies are either extremely biased or have
very low duration (or both). Strategies with long holding periods tend to be extremely biased, but
even short duration strategies are often highly biased. There are many strategies with duration
11The levels of aggression, duration and bias within groups are computed by taking the (main market) volumeweighted average of these magnitudes.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

Figure 4: Duration and Bias for Traders Active in Major Markets
approximately zero that had holding periods in excess of ten minutes, and were therefore not
classiﬁed as arbitrageurs. Some of these are likely to have been using market making strategies,
such as posting bids and oﬀers across multiple contracts, or arbitrage strategies that were manually
rather than algorithmically executed. Trader C, for example, has near-zero duration and a very
low ratio of margin to proﬁts, indicative of an arbitrage or market making strategy. But the 42
minute median holding period makes it possible that the trader was executing an information based
strategy with very quick turnover.
The most striking feature of the data is the relatively small number of unbiased traders with
moderate or long holding periods and sizable volume. Most large traders were either heavily biased
(like B and D) or engaged in arbitrage or market making strategies (like A and F). This has
implications for our understanding of how prices come to reveal information. Polling data was
appearing with rapid frequency over this period, and campaign related news dominated headlines.
If all this information was ﬁnding its way quickly into prices, it must have been at least in part
through the actions of biased traders.
A plausible channel through which these biases could arise is wishful thinking, or the tendency
of people to “bend their expectations to coincide with their preferences” (Granberg and Brent,
1983). Uhlaner and Grofman (1986) found strong evidence of this in the 1980 Presidential race
between Carter and Reagan, with more then 80 percent of each candidate’s supporters expecting
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

their favored candidate to win. Even in elections that are viewed by many as foregone conclusions,
wishful thinking is prevalent: a quarter of those intending to vote for McGovern in 1972 and more
than 30 percent of Goldwater voters in 1964 thought that their favored candidate would win; in
contrast, the proportion of Nixon supporters in 1972 and Johnson supporters in 1964 who believed
that their favored candidate would win was close to 100 percent (Granberg and Brent, 1983).
5
Beliefs and Objectives
Our taxonomy of trading strategies was based on what traders were doing, and we now turn to
the question of why. For the arbitrage based strategies the answer is straightforward: the link
between the two contracts presents an opportunity for risk-free proﬁt that can be grasped with a
modest capital outlay and some programming skill. Neither beliefs about the electoral outcome
nor complicated objectives need come into play.
The beliefs and motivations underlying the other strategies are harder to deduce.
Traders
could be engaging in arbitrage across exchanges, speculating based on subjective beliefs about
the electoral outcome, hedging exposures in other markets, or attempting to manipulate prices to
further political or ﬁnancial goals. We consider each of these possibilities in turn.
5.1
Cross-Market Arbitrage
The arbitrage strategies identiﬁed in Table 2 are based on exploiting inconsistencies in the prices of
the two contracts on the same exchange. But similar contracts were available on other exchanges,
allowing for cross-market arbitrage. For such transactions we would only observe one leg of the
activity, making it appear that the trader was building a directional position when in fact his
aggregate portfolio was characterized by negligible bias.
One exchange that oﬀered virtually identical contracts to those on Intrade was Betfair, and there
was a striking and persistent disparity in prices across the two trading venues over this period. For
the last few months of the election cycle, the headline Obama contract was trading at a higher
price on Betfair relative to Intrade, with the disparity ﬂuctuating between 5 and 10 percentage
points (Rothschild and Pennock, 2014). Even accounting for the fact that Betfair takes 2-5 percent
of winnings, depending on account size, this represented an arbitrage opportunity.12
Exploiting this disparity was considerably more complicated and costly than the withinexchange arbitrage described earlier. Since positions across the two exchanges were not margin
12A trader who bought the Obama contract on Intrade and sold it on Betfair would have avoided this transactions
cost, since all winnings would have been on Intrade. But this could not have been known in advance of the election
result.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

linked, building a directional position on one exchange with oﬀsetting positions in the other required substantial margin to be posted in both. In addition, Betfair contracts were denominated
in British pounds, subjecting traders to exchange rate risk or requiring them to hedge this using
currency futures, in addition to the cost of currency conversion. Most importantly, since the disparity was always in the same direction, such cross-market arbitrage would result in a long Obama
position on Intrade, and cannot therefore account for monotone and unidirectional positions that
were long Romney. That is, it cannot account for the behavior of trader B in Table 1, nor for a
substantial portion of other unidirectional traders. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility
that some traders with unidirectional positions that were long Obama had oﬀsetting positions on
Betfair.
5.2
Speculation
The standard account of ﬁnancial market behavior in economics is based on preferences over lotteries, represented by the maximization of expected utility. This model allows us to make some
inferences about the distribution of trader beliefs.
At a given point in time, consider a trader with portfolio (y, z), where y is cash and z is the
(possibly negative) number of Obama contracts owned, measured in units of face value. That is,
z is the amount of cash that the trader is contracted to receive in the event of an Obama victory.
Let π denote the current market price of such contracts, and p the trader’s belief in the likelihood
of an Obama victory.13 If this trader were to adjust his portfolio by buying d units at price π, his
expected payoﬀwould be
pu(y −πd + z + d) + (1 −p)u(y −πd).
In order for the trader to hold the portfolio (y, z), the demand d = 0 must be optimal.
The
necessary ﬁrst-order condition for this is given by
p(1 −π)u′(y + z) = (1 −p)πu′(y).
For traders with u′′ < 0, z > 0 can be optimal if and only if p > π. That is, a risk-averse trader
will be long Obama if and only if his subjective belief in an Obama victory exceeds the market
price. Less obviously, the same is also true of risk-seeking traders, since these markets allow for
positions in either direction. A risk-seeking trader who was long Obama but believed that the
price was higher than the subjective probability of victory could switch direction, securing an
increase in expected return without a reduction in risk-exposure. This is clearly not possible in
markets for lottery tickets since these assets cannot be sold short. But unlike conventional lotteries,
prediction markets do not force individuals to accept negative expected returns in order to increase
risk exposure.
13Here we are neglecting the bid-ask spread, assuming that small amounts can be purchased or sold at price π.
The spread over this period was negligible, amounting to just a penny or two per $10 of face value.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

The implication of this reasoning is that under the standard expected utility hypothesis, unidirectional traders must believe that the market price is wrong in precisely the same direction throughout the observational window. Those with direction +1 must consider the Obama price to be consistently too low relative to their subjective belief, while those with direction −1 must think the
opposite.
Biased traders also believe that the market is systematically mispricing the Obama contract
in the same way for much of the time.
Traders with extreme bias are almost unidirectional;
the volume weighted average bias in this group is 0.97 (see Table 2). Those with high bias do
occasionally change direction, but the average bias within this group is 0.71.
Recall that taken together, the unidirectional, extreme, and high bias categories account for
94% of traders and almost 70% of total volume. It is entirely possible that many of these individuals
trade in response to new information, but since they are strongly biased in two opposing directions,
it is very diﬃcult to reconcile their behavior as a group with the common prior hypothesis. That is,
to the extent that they are trading on news, they must be doing so with very diﬀerent interpretations
of information.14
The moderate and low bias traders most closely resemble the information traders in standard
model of ﬁnancial market microstructure (Glosten and Milgrom, 1985; Kyle, 1985). However, they
are responsible for just 6% of accounts and 15% of volume, and their counterparties on most
trades are very likely to be biased. It is the interaction between the various groups of traders, and
especially interactions among traders with strong but opposing directional biases, that govern the
behavior of asset prices in this market.
5.3
Hedging
Electoral outcomes are known to aﬀect a variety of asset prices, including broad indexes as well
as speciﬁc sectors. In principle, individuals with such exposures can hedge their risk by taking
oﬀsetting position in prediction markets. This can give rise to positions that appear to conﬂict
with subjective beliefs about the outcome.
As an example, consider the ﬁndings of Snowberg et al. (2007) regarding the race between Bush
and Kerry in 2004. Using the fact that a set of ﬂawed exit polls were leaked at about 3pm on
Election Day, the authors were able to identify market beliefs about the asset price implications of
the electoral outcome. The exit polls pointed to a Bush defeat, and appear to have been widely
14We can also imagine that some some traders gain positive utility from owning either Obama to win or Romney
to win. This is observationally equivalent to the case of extreme beliefs in one direction of the other: such traders act
as if they are highly optimistic about the prospects of victory for their preferred candidate. Whether or not partisan
leanings correlate with the beliefs inferred from positions is an interesting question, but one that cannot be addressed
with our data (since we observe only market behavior).
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

believed. The price of the Bush contract on TradeSports (a precursor to Intrade) fell sharply from
about 55 cents to 30 cents per dollar of face value upon release of the polls, remained close to
this depressed level for several hours, and then rose sharply to 95 cents shortly before the election
was called. This movement was mirrored in the price of the S&P futures contract with the closest
settlement date, which dropped by 1% on release of the ﬂawed polls, remained down until the error
became apparent, and rose by 1.5% in concert with the rise in the price of the Bush contract.15
The ﬁnding that electoral outcomes have predictable asset price eﬀects raises the possibility
that individuals were hedging positions in conventional ﬁnancial markets with partially oﬀsetting
positions on Intrade.
This could account for monotone strategies with long duration in either
direction. However, we provide some evidence below that this would not have been an eﬀective
hedge during this particular electoral cycle, at least with respect to a broad based index such as
the S&P 500.
The link between electoral outcomes and asset prices also creates an incentive for the deliberate
manipulation of prediction market prices. For instance, if a large trader could temporarily elevate
or depress a price on an election contract, resulting in corresponding temporary changes in the
prices of other assets, opportunities for substantial windfall gains could arise. We next explore this
possibility, as well as other incentives for manipulation.
6
Manipulation
Although the main electoral markets on Intrade had high volume, broad participation, and tight
spreads over this period, the amounts wagered were small relative to those in stock and bond
markets, and also relative to the costs of contemporary electoral campaigns. This raises the question
of whether price manipulation was attempted on this market, and if so, for what purpose.
At about 3:30pm on Election Day, the order books for the Obama and Romney contracts were
discovered to have a very unusual structure.16 There were bids to buy more than 40,000 contracts
in the Romney book at prices between 28 and 30, an order of magnitude greater than the number
of oﬀers to sell. The Obama order book was similarly skewed, with oﬀers to sell more than 35,000
contracts at prices between 70 and 71, vastly great than the number of bids for the contract. Note
that prices are quoted as a percentage of face value, which on Intrade was $10 per contract. Hence
the margin frozen for this set of orders alone was about $200,000. The left side of Figure 5 shows a
snapshot of the quantity of open orders, at the top three prices, to buy and sell Obama contracts,
taken every three minutes, from noon ET onward on Election Day.
15Along similar lines Knight (2006) found that increases in the likelihood of a Bush victory over Gore in 2000, as
measured by prices in the Iowa Electronic Markets, were associated with a substantial return diﬀerential between
Bush-favored sectors (such as tobacco) and Gore-favored sectors (such as alternative energy).
16See pic.twitter.com/EHvm1DGl and http://t.co/kJJeFkqJ for screenshots of order books posted on the afternoon
of election day.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

This order book structure is highly unusual at a time when information is coming in thick and
fast, because the party with resting orders stands to lose a great deal in transactions with more
informed traders.17 Although the evidence is not conclusive, it appears as if someone was trying
to put a ﬂoor of about 30 on the Romney price and a corresponding ceiling of 70 on the Obama
price. If so, the strategy was successful: the ﬂoor and ceiling both held ﬁrm for several hours until
the ﬁrewall ﬁnally collapsed at around 9pm ET. While prices on Betfair were ﬂuctuating freely in
response to incoming information, and broadly moving in the Obama direction, those on Intrade
were remarkably stable despite heavy volume.
Figure 5: Betfair and Intrade on Election Day
Starting at noon ET on Election Day, the right side of Figure 5 shows prices on Betfair and
Intrade for Obama to win. The Betfair premium on the Obama contract was relatively modest at
the start of the day but the gap began to widen in the afternoon. At 7:30pm, when the Betfair price
began another upward movement, there were over 15,000 contracts for sale at a price of about 70
in just the top three positions of the Obama order book on Intrade. Breaking though this barrier
would have required over a hundred thousand dollars, and since there was no way to transfer funds
to the exchange at short notice, this was enough to maintain the price ceiling.
Since most of the limit orders that held the ﬂoor and ceiling in place were eventually met, we are
able to conﬁrm from the data that they were placed by Trader B. This trader spent over $375,000
to hold prices in place during the 90 minute interval starting at 7:30pm. At 9pm he pulled out of
the market for a while, and the price of the Obama contract shot up quickly to reach the Betfair
level. His return about an hour later, this time in support of a much lower Romney price, caused
a wedge between the two markets to open up again. Whatever his motives may have been, there
can be little doubt that his activity had a price impact.
Trader B was responsible for one-third of the total money on Romney over the two week
period leading up to the election, and about a quarter over the entire cycle. The result was a
17The extreme order book asymmetry that was apparent on Election Day was also in evidence in earlier periods of
high information ﬂow, for instance during Hurricane Sandy. This was veriﬁed using data collected in real time, every
three minutes, on the prices and quantities in the ﬁrst three positions of the order books for the two contracts.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

loss of close to seven million dollars. What could possibly have motivated this activity? Given
that the trader bet on Romney and not Obama, we can rule out cross-market arbitrage with
Betfair as a motivation. This leaves three possibilities: (i) the trader was convinced that Romney
was underpriced throughout the period and was expressing a price view, (ii) he was hedging an
exposure held elsewhere, or (iii) he was attempting to distort prices in the market for some purpose.
A trader believing that the Romney contract on Intrade was underpriced should have bought the
contract on Betfair instead, where it was consistently cheaper. Nevertheless, given the additional
diﬃculties and costs of using Betfair, especially for US based traders, we cannot rule out the
possibility that this trader was simply expressing a price view.
What about hedging? If the ﬁndings of Snowberg et al. (2007) applied to the 2012 election,
then a long Romney position would hedge a short position in S&P futures. In order to explore the
relevance of this possibility, we examined movements in the index during the ﬁrst debate, in which
Obama’s performance was widely acknowledged to have been disastrous. The price of the Obama
contract stood at about 71 cents per dollar of face value at the start of the debate, tumbled to 66
during the event, and ended the day at around 65 despite a short-lived recovery in the interim.
These price movements are shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Responses of Intrade and S&P futures to the First Debate
The ﬁgure also shows movements in the price of the S&P 500 futures contract over this period. If
anything, the index fell modestly on the basis of Obama’s performance, which is the opposite of what
one would expect based on the analysis by Snowberg et al. (2007) of the 2004 election. A similar
eﬀect occurred on Election Day itself, with a modest rise in the index occurring as the election
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

was called.18 Based on these admittedly crude observations, it appears that the use of Intrade to
hedge a market position based on correlations in prior elections would have been ineﬀective at best,
and possibly counterproductive. For similar reasons, forcing up the Romney price on Intrade in
the hope that this would provide a temporarily boost to stock prices in the aggregate would have
resulted in losses rather than windfall gains. For these reasons, we consider the hedging of market
risk and the manipulation of Intrade for ﬁnancial gain to be unlikely explanations for the behavior
of this trader.19
This still leaves open the possibility of market manipulation for political purposes (Thompson,
2012). The trading losses, while hardly trivial, pale in comparison with the cost of contemporary
political campaigns.20 It is conceivable that the trader could have been attempting to manipulate
beliefs about the odds of victory in an attempt to inﬂuence fundraising, campaign morale, voter
preferences, and turnout.
The viability of a campaign is clearly an important consideration for potential donors.21 Mutz
(1995) distinguishes between “loyalty-based” and “hesitancy-based” giving, where the former motive may be triggered when one’s preferred candidate is slipping in the polls and is in need of a
boost, while the latter is contingent on a demonstrated likelihood of prevailing in the election.
Hesitancy-based giving may be especially relevant in the wake of the Supreme Court’s 2010 Citizens United ruling, allowing unlimited contributions to political action committees that are formally
separate from but informally closely tied to individual campaigns. The manipulation of prediction
market prices costs money, since bets must be placed at unfavorable odds, but could pay for itself
several times over if it maintains ﬂows to campaigns or super PACs.
There is also the possibility that beliefs about the likelihood of victory can have a direct eﬀect
on voter preferences. While the existence of such bandwagon eﬀects remains a matter of dispute,
there is some recent evidence that perceived momentum for a party can result in increased support.
In a survey experiment involving a very large sample (over 23,000) of the Dutch electorate, van der
Meer et al. (2015) ﬁnd that while polling levels do not signiﬁcantly aﬀect vote intentions, polling
momentum does. Here subjects were exposed to identical (and genuine) polling data but it was
framed diﬀerently for diﬀerent treatment groups. Positive framing, using a more recent reference
point to suggest momentum, was found to have a positive and statistically signiﬁcant impact on
vote intentions. In the US context, Bartels (1985) provides evidence of a bandwagon eﬀect for
Bush in the 1980 nomination contest, and Skalaban (1988) claims an eﬀect favoring Reagan in the
18One possible reason for the modestly positive market impact of the Obama victory was the belief that monetary
policy would be tighter under a Romney administration (Popper, 2012).
19We cannot, of course, rule out the possibility that hedging more speciﬁc exposures or manipulating a narrow set
of securities would have been eﬀective.
20Aggregate expenses for the 2012 presidential cycle were over $2.6 billion (http://www.opensecrets.org/bigpicture).
21The evidence on the sensitivity of contributions to polling data comes mostly from primaries; see Mutz (1995) for
the 1988 Democratic presidential primary, Fuchs et al. (2000) for the 1989 New York Democratic mayoral primary,
and Adkins and Dowdle (2002) on pre-primary fundraising over the 1980-2000 period.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

general election of that year, but neither study is experimental.22
Anecdotal evidence certainly suggests that campaigns consider positive momentum to be valuable. For instance, a poll showing a substantial tightening of the Bush-Clinton race close to the
1992 election was cited as evidence for momentum by the trailing Bush campaign, but dismissed
as an outlier by the Clinton campaign (Ansolabehere and Iyengar, 1994). To the extent that such
bandwagon eﬀects exist, or are believed to exist, there are incentives for partisans to invest in the
manipulation of prediction market prices. Based on the pattern of transactions in our data, it is
likely that at least one well-funded individual responded to these incentives in the run up to the
2012 election.
Attempts to manipulate prediction market prices have historically been futile (Rhode and
Strumpf, 2008), but this may have been an instance when a modest distortion was successfully
sustained over several days, with more substantial eﬀects over the last few hours. Our ﬁndings
suggest that with a moderate amount of capital and a strategy of placing large limit orders at
plausible prices, prediction markets with relatively high liquidity and broad participation can be
manipulated for a time. However, in order for manipulation to be successful in meeting broader
ﬁnancial or political goals, it is important that it remain undetected in real time. It is doubtful that
any such broader goal was met. The possibility of price manipulation on Intrade was salient as the
election approached, and the availability of multiple trading venues made it easy to spot outliers.
Social media can serve as an ampliﬁer of misinformation at times, but it can also serve as an antidote. The rapid spread of information through dense online networks can prevent manipulation
from remaining undetected for long, and thereby undermine any broader goals that manipulation
is intended to achieve.
Historically, prediction markets have generated forecasts that compete very eﬀectively with
those of the best pollsters.23 This was also the case in the 2012 cycle, attempts at manipulation
notwithstanding. Forecasts based on price averages across multiple trading venues, with corrections
for the favorite-longshot bias that is known to arise in sports betting and related markets, were
especially accurate (Rothschild, 2014).
Nevertheless, it is worth knowing that a highly visible
market that drove many a media narrative could be manipulated at a cost less than that of a
primetime television commercial.
22For issue based polling, bandwagon eﬀects have been clearly and convincingly demonstrated using experiments;
see Marsh (1985) and Nadeau et al. (1993) on abortion, and Rothschild and Malhotra (2014) on free trade agreements.
Beliefs can also aﬀect vote intentions for tactical reasons in multi-candidate contexts; see for instance Blais et al.
(2006) on the 1988 Canadian election.
23See Berg et al. (2008) on the performance of 49 markets in 13 countries, Wolfers and Leigh (2002) and Leigh
and Wolfers (2006) on two successive Australian elections, and Rothschild (2009) and Rothschild (2014) on the US
presidential elections of 2008 and 2012.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

7
Discussion
In this paper we have taken a close look at transaction level data in an asset market that has recently
had broad cultural and political importance. Doing so allowed us to characterize a rich ecology of
trading strategies that is dominated by traders who seldom, if ever, change directions. This has
implications for theoretical models of market microstructure. It appears that the trading process
is driven, in large measure, by individuals with diﬀerent interpretations of public information. The
results of opinion polls or the words spoken in debate are not facts in dispute, but there can be
considerable disagreement about their meaning and importance.
A strength of prediction markets is that prices reﬂect not just public information from polls and
models but also scattered private information held by traders. Empirical studies of the performance
of such markets have consistently found them to be at least as accurate as opinion polls, and much
quicker to incorporate new information. Nevertheless, prediction markets also have a number of
characteristics that could make them vulnerable to failure. Traders are predominantly young and
male, and include many who are not eligible to vote in the elections on which they are betting.
Sophisticated traders probably make allowances for this fact, but even so, it is unlikely that their
beliefs are a representative sample of the population at large. Second, the bets placed by individuals
depend on their respective budgets, and these can—and indeed, do—vary dramatically across
traders. Prices skew towards the beliefs of those who are best funded, who need not be the best
informed, though this eﬀect is somewhat mitigated by the fact that budgets evolve over time based
on prior trading performance. Third, traders are not immune from the wishful thinking that has
been amply documented among voters in elections.
To some degree the biases of traders with
opposing preferences will tend to cancel each other out, but it is not clear why this should result
in unbiased forecasts in the aggregate.
In addition, there is a paradox at the heart of the prediction market model. The more accurate
market forecasts are perceived by the general public to be, the greater is the incentive for deeppocketed partisans to try to manipulate prices to alter perceptions of the state of the race. They
may do so to sustain campaign contributions, maintain morale among supporters, boost turnout,
and inﬂuence voter preferences over candidates. The relatively small size of these markets makes
manipulation relatively inexpensive, especially in comparison with the aggregate expenditures involved in a national campaign.
Given the mismatch between the characteristics of traders and the electorate, the unbalanced
budget constraints, the propensity for wishful thinking, and the incentives for manipulation, the
high level of prediction market forecasting accuracy is something of a mystery. It has been argued
by Berg et al. (2008) that the traders who really matter, the ones who post prices against which
others are likely to trade, are not vulnerable to wishful thinking. But in the case examined here,
most orders to sell Romney contracts or buy Obama contracts traded against orders posted by a
single large trader who appears to having been attempting to manipulate beliefs.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

Kets et al. (2014) suggest a possible explanation for the eﬀectiveness of the wisdom of crowds
even in the presence of wishful thinking. In their model beliefs are arbitrarily given, but the wealth
of individuals evolves over time as a result of trading proﬁts and losses as events are repeatedly
realized. In the long run the distribution of wealth is such that the market clearing price matches
the objective likelihood of the events in question. This model is not directly applicable to the case
of elections, each of which is a unique event. Nevertheless, it suggests that endogenous transfers
of wealth may be a key element in accounting for the impressive forecasting accuracy of prediction
markets.
A promising direction for theoretical research that is suggested by our ﬁndings is the development of models that allow for public information to be rapidly and reliably reﬂected in prices in the
presence of heterogeneous interpretations of this information. Ideally, the model should allow for
responsive prices even with unidirectional traders. One possibility is to consider trading among partisans who diﬀer systematically in their interpretations of public signals, such that news favorable
to their side is considered to be highly signiﬁcant, while news unfavorable to their side is viewed as
relatively unimportant. To illustrate, consider a contract that pays if and only event A occurs. Let
A–partisans denote those who are predisposed to believe that A will occur, while B–partisans are
predisposed to believe the opposite. The appearance of news that makes A appear more likely will
then cause A–partisans to buy vigorously, driving up the price to levels at which B–partisans will
wish to sell. The news does lead to a higher price for the asset, but with B–partisans increasing
their short positions. Similarly, news that makes A appear less likely will cause a price decline,
but with A–partisans increasing their long positions at prices that they consider too low. Prices
do absorb information in both cases, but without any trader changing direction.
Such dynamics are most likely to arise in electoral prediction markets and in sports betting,
but similar eﬀects may well exist also for common stock.
Especially in the case of consumer
durables, attachment to products and the companies that make them is widespread. It would not
be surprising if one were to ﬁnd Apple or Samsung partisans among investors, just as one ﬁnds
them among consumers. A more thorough development of this idea is beyond the scope of the
present empirical exercise, but seems worth pursuing in future research.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

References
Randall E. Adkins and Andrews J. Dowdle. The money primary: What inﬂuences the outcome of
preprimary presidential nomination fundraising? Presidential Studies Quarterly, 32(2):256–275,
2002.
Stephen Ansolabehere and Shanto Iyengar. Of horseshoes and horse races: Experimental studies
of the impact of poll results on electoral behavior. Political Communication, 4(413-430), 1994.
Matthew Baron, Jonathan Brogaard, and Andrei Kirilenko. The trading proﬁts of high frequency
traders. Unpublished Manuscript, 2012.
Larry M. Bartels. Expectations and preferences in presidential nominating campaigns. American
Political Science Review, 79(3):804–815, 1985.
Joyce Berg, Robert Forsythe, Forrest Nelson, and Thomas Rietz. Results from a dozen years of
election futures markets research. In Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, Volume 1,
2008.
Andr´e Blais. To Vote Or Not to Vote? The Merits and Limits of Rational Choice Theory. University
of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA, 2000.
Andr´e Blais, Elisabeth Gidengil, and Neil Nevitte. Do polls inﬂuence the vote? In Richard G. C.
Johnston and Henry E. Brady, editors, Capturing Campaign Eﬀects, pages 263–279. University
of Michigan Press, 2006.
Thomas E. Copeland and Dan Galai. Information eﬀects on the bid-ask spread. Journal of Finance,
38(5):1457–1469, 1983.
Morton Deutsch and Harold B Gerard. A study of normative and informational social inﬂuences
upon individual judgment. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51(3):629–636, 1955.
Ray C. Fair. Predicting presidential elections and other things. Stanford University Press, second
edition, 2011.
Ester R. Fuchs, E. Scott Adler, and Lincoln A. Mitchell. Win, place, show: Public opinion polls
and campaign contributions in a New York City election. Urban Aﬀairs Review, 35(4):479–501,
2000.
John Geanakoplos. The leverage cycle. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009. University of
Chicago Press, 2010.
Lawrence R. Glosten and Paul R. Milgrom. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market
with heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics, 14:71–100, 1985.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

Donald Granberg and Edward Brent. When prophecy bends: The preference–expectation link in
us presidential elections, 1952–1980. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(3):477,
1983.
Sanford J. Grossman and Joseph E. Stiglitz.
On the impossibility of informationally eﬃcient
markets. American Economic Review, 70(3):393–408, 1980.
Milton Harris and Artur Raviv. Diﬀerences of opinion make a horse race. Review of Financial
Studies, 6(3):473–506, 1993.
J. Michael Harrison and David M. Kreps. Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with
heterogeneous expectations. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 92(2):323–336, 1978.
Martin F. Hellwig. On the aggregation of information in competitive markets. Journal of Economic
Theory, 22:477–498, 1980.
Harrison Hong, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. Asset ﬂoat and speculative bubbles. Journal of
Finance, 61(3):1073–1117, 2006.
Eugene Kandel and Neil D Pearson.
Diﬀerential interpretation of public signals and trade in
speculative markets. Journal of Political Economy, 103(4):831–872, 1995.
Willemien Kets, David M. Pennock, Rajiv Sethi, and Nisarg Shah. Betting strategies, market selection, and the wisdom of crowds. In Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
2014.
Andrei A. Kirilenko,
Albert S. Kyle,
Mehrdad Samadi,
and Tugkan Tuzun.
The ﬂash
crash: The impact of high frequency trading on an electronic market.
Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1686004, 2011.
Brian Knight. Are policy platforms capitalized into equity prices? evidence from the bush/gore
2000 presidential election. Journal of Public Economics, 90(4–5):751–773, 2006.
Albert S Kyle. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica, 53(6):1315–1335, 1985.
Andrew Leigh and Justin Wolfers. Competing approaches to forecasting elections: Economic models, opinion polling and prediction markets. Economic Record, 82(258):325–340, 2006.
Catherine Marsh. Back on the bandwagon: The eﬀect of opinion polls on public opinion. British
Journal of Political Science, 15(1):51–74, 1985.
Paul Milgrom and Nancy Stokey. Information, trade and common knowledge. Journal of Economic
Theory, 26(1):17–27, 1982.
Edward M Miller. Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion. Journal of Finance, 32(4):1151–
1168, 1977.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

Diana C Mutz. Eﬀects of horse-race coverage on campaign coﬀers: Strategic contributing in presidential primaries. Journal of Politics, 57(4):1015–1042, 1995.
Richard Nadeau, Edouard Cloutier, and J-H. Guay. New evidence about the existence of a bandwagon eﬀect in the opinion formation process. International Political Science Review, 14(2):
203–213, 1993.
Thomas R Palfrey and Howard Rosenthal. Voter participation and strategic uncertainty. American
Political Science Review, 79(1):62–78, 1985.
Nathaniel Popper. Which changed ﬁrst, the polls or the markets? New York Times, October 16
2012.
Paul W. Rhode and Koleman S. Strumpf. Manipulating political stock markets: A ﬁeld experiment
and a century of observational data. Working Paper, University of Arizona, 2008.
William H Riker and Peter C Ordeshook. A theory of the calculus of voting. American Political
Science Review, 62(1):25–42, 1968.
David Rothschild.
Forecasting elections comparing prediction markets, polls, and their biases.
Public Opinion Quarterly, 73(5):895–916, 2009.
David Rothschild. Combining forecasts for elections: Accurate, relevant, and timely. International
Journal of Forecasting, 2014.
David Rothschild and Neil Malhotra. Are public opinion polls self-fulﬁlling prophecies? Research
& Politics, 1(2):1–10, 2014.
David Rothschild and David M Pennock. The extent of price misalignment in prediction markets.
Algorithmic Finance, 3(1):3–20, 2014.
Jose Scheinkman and Wei Xiong. Overconﬁdence and speculative bubbles. Journal of Political
Economy, 111(6):1183–1219, 2003.
Kay Lehman Schlozman and John T Tierney.
Organized Interests and American Democracy.
Harper & Row, New York, 1986.
Rajiv Sethi and Muhamet Yildiz.
Public disagreement.
American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics, 4(3):57–95, 2012.
Alp Simsek. Belief disagreements and collateral constraints. Econometrica, 81(1):1–53, 2013.
Andrew Skalaban. Do the polls aﬀect elections? some 1980 evidence. Political Behavior, 10(2):
136–150, 1988.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420

Erik Snowberg, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz. Partisan impacts on the economy: evidence
from prediction markets and close elections. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2):807–829,
2007.
Derek Thompson. Should presidential campaigns spend more money manipulating intrade? The
Atlantic, October 23 2012.
Carole Jean Uhlaner and Bernard Grofman. The race may be close but my horse is going to win:
Wish fulﬁllment in the 1980 presidential election. Political Behavior, 8(2):101–129, 1986.
Tom W. G. van der Meer, Armen Hakhverdian, and Loes Aaldering.
Oﬀthe fence, onto the
bandwagon? a large-scale survey experiment on eﬀect of real-life poll outcomes on subsequent
vote intentions. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 2015.
Justin Wolfers and Andrew Leigh. Three tools for forecasting federal elections: Lessons from 2001.
Australian Journal of Political Science, 37(2):223–240, 2002.
Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz. Interpreting prediction market prices as probabilities. Working
paper No. 12200, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2322420
