Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753
Ultra High Frequency Statistical Arbitrage
Across International Index Futures
Hamad Alsayed and Frank McGroarty
School of Management, University of Southampton, UK.
February 20, 2013
Abstract
We show that exploitable lead-lag relations of the order of a few hundred milliseconds
exist in the three pairings between the S&P 500, FTSE 100, and DAX futures
contracts.
These relations exhibit clear intra-daily patterns, particularly around
the US open, the European close, and the announcement of macroeconomic data.
Using this information, we forecast mid-quote changes in lagging contracts with
a directional accuracy in excess of 85%.
A simple statistical arbitrage strategy
exploiting these relations yields economically signiﬁcant proﬁts which are robust
to market impact costs and the bid-ask spread. However, returns are sensitive to
the risk of slippage, and the most proﬁtable trading opportunities rarely exist for
longer than 300 milliseconds. Hence, we highlight price slippage and infrastructure
costs as the most signiﬁcant limits to arbitrage in this market setting. Overall, our
results accord with the view that informational ineﬃciencies incentivize arbitrageurs
to appropriate pricing anomalies.
Keywords: Lead-Lag Relationships, Futures Markets, Hayashi-Yoshida Cross Correlation Estimator, Statistical Arbitrage.
JEL classiﬁcation: F36, G14, G15.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753
2
1. Introduction
Employing a recent advance in the statistical measurement of lead/lag relationships
(Hayashi and Yoshida (2005), Hoﬀman et al (2010)), this paper’s principal contribution is to uncover the existence of sub-second exploitable disequilibria which occur
across international index futures.
Our work is motivated by evidence of increasing international ﬁnancial integration
in recent years (Ayuso and Blanco (2001), Kearney and Lucey (2004), Evans and
Hnatkovska (2005)). If on the one hand, markets were perfectly integrated, eﬃcient,
and frictionless, then returns on closely related securities would exhibit perfect simultaneity and contemporaneous correlation, so as to preclude the possibility of
cross-market arbitrage (De Jong and Donders (1998)). On the other hand, there is
wide evidence that frictions impede the ﬂow of information across markets (Lo and
Mackinlay (1990)), and give rise to lead/lag patterns.1 Now, if the price adjustment
process is not instantaneous, then we ask: Do lead/lag patterns across segmented
markets induce cross-market predictability? Does information about future price
adjustments admit the possibility of arbitrage?
This is the ﬁrst paper to provide answers to these questions within the important
but overlooked context of international stock index futures. Speciﬁcally, we focus
on lead/lag relations in the three pairings between the S&P 500, FTSE 100, and
DAX futures contracts. While previous works focus on the relation between futures
contracts and their underlying stock indices, the vast majority highlight factors
such as trading costs, price staleness, and illiquidity in the index constituents which
render spot-futures arbitrage infeasible (see e.g.
Brennan and Schwartz (1990)).
In contrast, futures contracts are highly liquid instruments with low upfront capital
1Examples include the S&P 500 futures vs spot in Kawaller et al. (1987), the Major Market Index
futures vs spot in Stoll and Whaley (1990), and the FTSE 100 futures vs spot in Brooks et al.
(2001).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

3
requirements and trading costs. Therefore, we suggest that pairs of futures contracts
constitute an ideal setting under which to examine lead/lag relationships.
We complement the extant literature in four ways. Firstly, we employ the HayashiYoshida (Hayashi and Yoshida (2005), hereafter HY) cross-correlation estimator to
measure the speed of price adjustment. The HY estimator readily allows for irregular
and non-synchronous quote arrival times without the need for coarse resampling.
This feature allows us to examine microscopic lead/lag patterns, which is particularly
useful as we ﬁnd that the majority of price adjustments take place at sub-second
intervals. Secondly, we employ Best Bid and Oﬀer (BBO) quote data, time-stamped
to the millisecond. BBO quotes form the top level of the Central Limit Order Book,
thus constituting a continuous price series free of stale quotes. The use of ultra-high
frequency data is crucially important, because the speed of price adjustment is likely
to be high in electronically traded markets. Thirdly, we place emphasis on both the
forecasting accuracy, and arbitrage returns, in assessing the evidence against crossmarket eﬃciency. Finally, we document the risks and costs which constitute the
greatest limits to arbitrage in this market setting.
Our results show evidence of highly signiﬁcant lead/lag relationships between the
three pairs. On average, the S&P 500 leads the FTSE 100 and DAX contracts by
98 and 349 milliseconds respectively, consistent with the notion that international
price discovery originates in the US. The FTSE 100 leads the DAX contract by
33 milliseconds on average. We ﬁnd some evidence of bi-directional causality in
the FTSE-DAX pair, but very little between either transatlantic pair. Further, the
FTSE-DAX pair is more strongly correlated than either transatlantic pair, in line
with the notion of imperfect international integration (Jorion and Schwartz (1986)).
The lead/lag relations across all pairs exhibit strong intraday seasonality: Correlations among all pairs peak around daily economic announcements at 13:30 GMT,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

4
and fall sharply when the FTSE 100 and DAX cash markets close at 16:30 GMT,
rebounding in evening trade. The S&P 500 contract increases its lead over both
FTSE 100 and DAX contracts at the announcement of data, at 14:30 GMT when
the S&P 500 cash market opens, and at the European close. It is important to
note that none of these results are the product of statistical artifacts arising from
diﬀerences in liquidity or quote arrival frequency.
Based on simple threshold triggers, mid-quote moves of leading contracts forecast
subsequent moves of lagging contracts with a directional accuracy of over 85%. This
accuracy relates directly to the sensitivity of the threshold: The more conservative
the threshold, the ”cleaner” the trigger signal, and the more accurate the forecast.
Finally, a simple trading exercise provides evidence against auto-eﬃciency across international markets. Leading mid-quote moves are used to generate buy/sell signals
in lagging contracts, and the returns aggregated net of all costs. Arbitrage proﬁts
are economically and statistically signiﬁcant - a strategy that trades only 5 contracts
per trading signal generates aggregate proﬁts of around GBP 100,000 per month.
However, returns are sensitive to the risk of price slippage: Around half the proﬁts
disappear if 20% of trades execute at the next best price. Further, the windows of
arbitrage opportunity are narrow, with the most proﬁtable trades rarely existing for
more than 300 milliseconds. This suggests that technology costs are a signiﬁcant
consideration for arbitrageurs in this setting.
Overall, we conclude that information ﬂows across international markets are not
instantaneous, but rather exhibit brief delays. Importantly, these delays last long
enough, and induce pricing anomalies large enough, to compensate arbitrageurs
for appropriating pricing disequilibria. Our results accord with the Grossman and
Stiglitz (1976, 1980) suggestion that temporary disequilibria incentivize arbitrageurs
to correct pricing anomalies.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

5
2. Related Literature
Introduced in February 1982 by the Kansas City Board of Trade, the Value Line
contract was the world’s ﬁrst index futures contract, followed shortly by the S&P
500 contract (Gulen and Mayhew (2000)). As futures and other derivative contracts
become more pervasive, research exploring the link between these and their underlying markets, as well as across markets, becomes increasingly focal. Our work is
related to two broad streams of literature which constitute a substantial body of
work documenting inter-market pricing relationships.
The ﬁrst stream explores price discovery and the temporal pricing relationship between futures contracts and the underlying cash index. The seminal research of
Zeckhauser and Niederhoﬀer (1983) documents the possibility that futures prices
can predict spot prices.2 The early work involving intraday data of Kawaller et al.
(1987) provides evidence that US futures prices lead spot prices with a time lag of
around 45 minutes. The authors attribute this lag to the inertia of stock trading
relative to futures trading, which implies that the futures market contributes most
to price discovery. Similarly, Herbst et al. (1987) and Stoll and Whaley (1990)
document that futures prices lead spot prices by around 8 minutes, whereas Wang
and Wang (2001) show that price discovery is bi-directional when volatility is high.
The spot-futures relationship has also been explored for a number of diﬀerent countries. Wahab and Lashgari (1993), Abhyankar (1998), Brooks et al. (2001), and
Brooks and Garrett (2002) analyze UK spot-futures data, Tse (1995) explores the
Japanese spot-futures relationship, while the case of Greece is examined in Kenourgios (2004) and Andreou and Pierides (2008). These works largely conﬁrm the notion
that futures prices lead spot prices, suggesting that price discovery takes place in
the futures market. But what is the signiﬁcance of these pricing relationships?
2The term spot refers to the underlying index cash market - e.g. the constituent stocks of an index.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

6
This question is explored in the second stream of literature to which our work
belongs. On the one hand, an important implication of a lead/lag relationship is
the potential for cross-market return predictability and arbitrage.
On the other
hand, the authors in Brooks et al.
(2001) point out that while futures markets
are capable of responding to new information quickly, the cash index can only fully
respond once every constituent stock price updates. An important question then
arises: Is a persistent lead/lag relationship evidence of market ineﬃciency?
While works such as Figlewski (1984, 1985), Brennan and Schwartz (1990), Thomas
(2002), Richie et al. (2008), and Cummings and Frino (2011) document evidence
of signiﬁcant disequilibria in the spot-futures relation, there are two commonalities
in these works: First, the nature of the pricing relation examined therein is not a
temporal one based on lead/lag eﬀects, but rather a mispricing approach based on
a cost of carry model. Second, disequilibria in these works are frequently attributed
to transaction costs, market (im)maturity, and liquidity eﬀects that give rise to
disequilibria while precluding arbitrage.
The literature exploring arbitrage based on lead/lag relationships is relatively sparse.
Stoll and Whaley (1990) suggest that although futures generally lead spot prices,
the eﬀect is not uni-directional, making spot-futures arbitrage diﬃcult. Brooks et
al. (2001) compare several forecasting models and demonstrate that the FTSE 100
futures contract can achieve over 65% accuracy when forecasting the FTSE 100
index. However, when a trading strategy based on this is tested, proﬁts are not
robust to trading costs.
Our paper relates to these works by placing emphasis on the predictability of returns, and the proﬁtability of arbitrage. However, unlike these works, we pursue
this theme in an international setting. Indeed, one major commonality linking these
works is a focus on inter-market relationships within the same country. Now, recent
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

7
advances in communications technology have contributed to the integration of similar but otherwise fragmented markets. One direct consequence of this integration is
a trend towards the equalization of expected returns across global markets - a single
”relevant” event is able to move global stock market indices jointly (Eiteman et al
(1994), Medeiros et al. (2009)).
There are several works which explore temporal relationships across international
markets (Eun and Shim (1989), Hamao et al. (1990), Abhyankar et al. (1997),
Antoniou et al (2003), Innocenti et al. (2011)). However, few focus explicitly on
the link between lead/lag eﬀects and arbitrage, none employ high-frequency data,
and none focus on futures contracts. So why is doing so important? Employing
high-frequency data is particularly important to uncover temporal relations which
are invisible to the discrete-price observer. Goetzmann et al. (2005) document a
dramatic increase in global market correlations over the last two decades, which
increases international market integration and naturally pushes evidence of lead/lag
relationships deeper into the sub-minute and sub-second space. Examining the link
between lead/lag eﬀects and arbitrage has important implications towards the theory
of Eﬃcient Markets. Finally, using futures data mitigates many of the limitations of
spot-futures arbitrage, such as transaction costs and illiquidity. Therefore, exploring lead/lag relationships across diﬀerent futures contracts provides an important
platform on which to test for inter-market predictability and arbitrage.
In what follows, we employ BBO quotes time-stamped to the millisecond for the S&P
500, FTSE 100, and DAX futures. These contracts are arguably the most globally
liquid ﬁnancial securities, and by using them, we mitigate to the greatest extent
possible the transaction cost barrier, and the spurious lead/lag relation generated
by liquidity diﬀerences across the contracts. Anticipating that lead/lag patterns
occur at very ﬁne timescales, we employ the HY estimator which is statistically
robust to non-synchronous trading and irregular quote-arrival times.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

8
3. Data and Methodology
Here we provide details of our data and data reﬁnement procedures, together with
details of our implementation of the HY estimator. Also, we contrast the performance of HY against a common discretization procedure. Finally, we provide details
of the forecasting and trading strategy we employ.
3.1 - Futures Contracts Data
Our data consist of the three most liquid futures contracts globally, namely the
DAX, FTSE 100, and S&P 500 E-mini futures contracts.3 For each contract, we
obtain BBO quotes containing price and volume information, time-stamped to the
millisecond. Our data spans the period January 9, 2012 - February 28, 2012. Each
contract is monitored for 12 hours per day, between 08:30 and 20:30 GMT. Because
futures contracts operate on a quarterly expiration cycle, we focus this study on the
the current ”active” contracts, namely those expiring in March 2012. In all, our
data set consists of a number of BBO quotes in excess of 100 million.
Our data is sourced from the CME, Eurex, and NYSE-Liﬀe exchanges. Table 1
provides an overview of the institutional features of the data set.
Table 1: Futures Data. This table describes some institutional features of the contracts
within our data set. The fourth column shows the futures multiplier relative to the index.
The ﬁfth column shows the minimum price increment. The last two columns show, as of
January 2012, the average number of contracts traded, and the average daily turnover. Data
are obtained from Eurex, NYSE-Liﬀe, and CME Group.
3The E-mini is the electronically traded version of the S&P 500 contract. The traditional contract
is traded primarily by open outcry. The E-mini is by far the most liquid futures contract globally.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

9
We see from Table 1 that these contracts are highly liquid. Given that our aim is to
ultimately establish the existence of arbitrage opportunities based on lead/lag relationships, our choice of data set is deliberately conservative - it is well documented
that liquidity and the availability of arbitrage are inversely related.
Inspired by Schultz and Shive (2010), we apply a number of crucial data ﬁltering
processes. Speciﬁcally, we exclude data which qualiﬁes any of the following:4
• Bid Price ≥Ask Price,
• Bid Volume = 0 and/or Ask Volume = 0,
• Ask Price > Bid Price by more than 25%,
• Mid quote return ≥25% or ≤−25%.
Since we use BBO quotes, we are in eﬀect continuously observing the current best
quote within the central order book. New BBO quotes arrive when there is either
a change in the current best price, or a change in the available liquidity at the
current best price. In the ﬁrst scenario, If a new quote arrives that is better than
the current best price, or an incoming trade consumes all the liquidity available at
the best price, the BBO price and volume update. In the second scenario, if a new
quote arrives at the current best price, or an incoming trade does not consume all
the currently available liquidity, the BBO volume updates, but the price does not.
In view of establishing lead/lag relationships, the diﬀerence between the above two
scenarios is non-trivial. If we monitor changes in the mid-quote, the ﬁrst scenario
will always yield a non-zero return, while the second scenario will always yield a zero
return. Our aim is to establish whether mid-quote changes in one futures contract
portend corresponding changes in another. This aim is best served by focussing
purely on non-zero returns, and so we remove all zero-returns from our data. This
process carries the beneﬁt of allowing us to deem all non-zero returns as informative
4In all, this process removes around 0.2% of our data.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

10
to the lead/lag relationship.5 A similar procedure is performed in Huth and Abergel
(2012).
3.2 - Trading Costs and the Representative Investor
Costs pertaining to futures trading consist of the bid/ask spread, which is accounted
for directly in the BBO quote data. Further, each exchange charges a fee for order
submission and clearing. These are outlined below.
Table 2: Exchange Costs. This table shows the costs for order submission and clearing
levied by the Eurex, NYSE-Liﬀe, and CME Group. These relate to trading the DAX, FTSE
100, and S&P 500 contracts, respectively.
The costs in Table 2 apply on a per-order basis, regardless of the size of the order.
Given that the notional amount of a single futures contract is 10, 25, or 50 times its
underlying value (see Table 1), the costs in Table 2 are economically small. However,
our approach warrants the submission of a vast number of market orders aimed at
exploiting minute pricing disequilibria across these markets. The costs in Table 2
are negligible for a long-term investor, but are a signiﬁcant consideration for our
purposes.
With that in mind, our representative investor is akin to a quantitative hedge fund
utilizing a fully algorithmic strategy, with access to co-location services within the
exchange buildings. We choose this type of investor for two reasons: Firstly, all
three contracts are 100% electronically traded. Hendershott et al. (2011) provide
evidence that some 70% of NYSE trades are executed by investors of this type.
Secondly, our approach aims to exploit temporal pricing disequilibria which exist
5Griﬃn and Oomen (2011) provide a thorough discussion of similar sub-sampling routines.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

11
predominantly in the sub-second horizon. Clearly, such speeds lie beyond the scope
of human traders.
3.3 - The Hayashi-Yoshida Estimator
In Hayashi and Yoshida (2005),6 the authors introduce a novel estimator of the
covariance between two non-synchronous processes. Speciﬁcally, let (Ω, F, P) be a
probability space, and let Xt and Yt be two correlated processes such that:
(1)
dXt = µXXtdt + σXXtdW X
t
dYt = µY Ytdt + σY YtdW Y
t ,
where W X
t
and W Y
t
are Brownian motions with respect to P. Assume that the
correlation ⟨W X
t , W Y
t ⟩= ρ. Assume further that Xt and Yt are sampled at discrete
observation times 0 = tX
0 ≤tX
1 ≤· · · ≤tX
n = T X and 0 = tY
0 ≤tY
1 ≤· · · ≤tY
m = T Y
respectively. Importantly, these observation times are assumed independent of each
other and of Xt and Yt - which in practical terms suggests two things. Firstly, the
quote arrival frequency of one asset does not inﬂuence that of the other. Secondly,
the quote arrival frequency of each asset does not depend on the value of that asset.
Let us deﬁne the following terms:
(2)
IX
i =
 tX
i , tX
i+1

IY
j =
 tY
j , tY
j+1

.
Here, IX
i and IY
j denote time intervals between the arrival of quotes in assets X and
Y respectively, and this concept is illustrated in Figure 1.
6For brevity, mathematical proofs in this section are omitted. However, we direct the interested
reader to works in which these proofs are available.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

12
Figure 1.
Time Intervals. A time-line illustration of quote arrivals in X (top) and Y
(bottom). Quotes are marked ”X”. Intervals between quotes are marked IX and IY .
Figure 1 depicts a typical scenario encountered with high-frequency data. Quotes
arrive irregularly for each asset, and asynchronously across assets. Robustly estimating the covariation between data which exhibit these phenomena is the subject
of HY. Given (1) and (2), the HY estimator for the covariance CX,Y is:
(3)
CX,Y =
X
i,j
∆X
 IX
i

∆Y
 IY
j

I{IX
i ∩IY
j̸ =∅},
where ∆is the diﬀerence operator, and I is an indicator function such that:
I =







1,
if IX
i ∩IY
j̸ = ∅
0,
otherwise.
The covariance CX,Y in (3) yields the HY correlation coeﬃcient ρHY as follows:
(4)
ρHY = CX,Y
σXσY
=
P
i,j ∆X
 IX
i

∆Y
 IY
j

I{IX
i ∩IY
j̸ =∅}
qP
i [∆X (IX
i )]
2 P
j

∆Y
 IY
j
2 .
In practice, equations (3) and (4) amount to summing the product of all returns
between assets X and Y once they fully or partially share a time overlap. Because
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

13
of this property, the HY estimator allows for the inclusion of all data points, without
the need for regularizing (re-sampling) the data.
As it is currently stated, equation (4) measures the contemporaneous correlations
between X and Y . Hoﬀman et al. (2010) extend the estimator to allow for leads
and lags. Following from (2), we deﬁne:
(5)
(IY
j )ℓ=
 tY
j + ℓ, tY
j+1 + ℓ

,
where ℓ∈R is the lag length (measured in units of time). Following the same procedure in (2)-(4), we arrive at a formula for the lagged version of the HY estimator.
(6)
ρHY (ℓ) =
P
i,j ∆X
 IX
i

∆Y
 IY
j

I{IX
i ∩(IY
j )ℓ̸=∅}
qP
i [∆X (IX
i )]
2 P
j

∆Y
 IY
j
2 .
As it is now deﬁned, equation (6) yields the entire cross-correlation curve (hereafter
HY curve) between X and Y . In practice, evaluating (6) amounts to shifting the
time-stamps of Y by amount ℓand re-evaluating the HY correlation ρHY . Doing
this for all ℓyields the HY curve.
In practical applications, it is important to establish the lag length ˆℓthat maximizes
the correlation ρHY (ˆℓ). Doing so allows conclusions to be drawn about the temporal
relationship between X and Y . For example, ”X leads Y by ˆℓseconds”. The lag ˆℓ
is deﬁned as a solution to the following equation:
(7)
|ρHY (ˆℓ)| = max
ℓ∈G |ρHY (ℓ)|,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

14
over a time-grid G. In practice, this amounts to ﬁnding the peak of the HY curve.
Equivalently, evaluating (6) for diﬀerent values of ℓuntil a maximum is obtained.
Importantly, if it is found that ˆℓ̸ = 0, this would imply that the relationship between
X and Y is not contemporaneous. Speciﬁcally, knowledge of one can be used to
explicitly forecast future movements in the other. It is precisely this condition that
we rely on to examine lead/lag relations across international futures contracts.
Finally, Huth and Abergel (2012) deﬁne the notion of a lead/lag ratio (henceforth
LLR) which we employ in our analysis. It s deﬁned as follows:
(8)
LLR =
P
u ρ2
HY (−ℓu)
P
u ρ2
HY (ℓu) ,
where u is chosen such that ℓu ≥0.
The quantity ρHY (ℓ) in (6) provides the correlation coeﬃcient when Y leads X by ℓ
units of time, and similarly, the quantity ρHY (−ℓ) provides the same measure when
Y lags X (i.e. X leads Y ) by ℓunits of time. With this in mind, the purpose of the
LLR is simply to compare the evidence of these two phenomena. It is established in
the literature that lead/lag relationships are often bi-directional (Wang and Wang
(2001) among others). The LLR is informative in decoupling bi-directional relationships into relative strengths at diﬀerent lags. Put simply, it is a metric which is
useful in assessing the strength and direction of the lead/lag relationship.
3.4 - Robustness to Spurious Lead/Lag Relations
This section evaluates the robustness of HY to diﬀerences in liquidity. Further, we
contrast the performance of HY against a commonly employed method of measuring
covariation.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

15
It is well known that liquid7 assets tend to lead less liquid ones, due to their ability
to impound information faster (Lo and Mackinlay (1990) and Brooks et al. (2001)).
However, liquidity diﬀerences could also give rise to spurious conclusions toward
lead/lag relationships. For example, data that are known to be contemporaneously
correlated but contain diﬀerences in trading activity must not exhibit any lead/lag
eﬀects (Voev and Lunde (2007)). Discovery of a non-zero lag in this case would by
deﬁnition be spurious. It is therefore important that any employed estimator be
robust to artiﬁcial liquidity eﬀects, particularly when dealing with high-frequency
data.
In this section, we examine the robustness of HY to spurious lead/lag relations by
way of an exercise involving synthetic data. The beneﬁt of using synthetic data is
simple - we know what parameters we input, hence we know what output to expect.
Our exercise involves sampling from the stochastic processes X and Y in (1) along
two independent Poisson time-grids with intensities λX and λY respectively.8 The
data span 24 hours, and samples are observed to the nearest millisecond. Further,
we impose that X leads Y by 400 milliseconds (0.4 seconds). At this lag length, we
impose a correlation between X and Y of 90%.
We measure lead/lags between -10 and 10 seconds, with 10-millisecond increments.
Speciﬁcally, we choose a grid G from (7) such that:
ℓ∈{−10, −9.99, −9.98, . . . , −0.01, 0, 0.01, . . . , 9.98, 9.99, 10}.
Further, we repeat the exercise for diﬀerent liquidity combinations between assets
X and Y . We achieve this by varying the ratio
λY
λX ∈{0.5, 1, 2, 5}. This step is
aimed at examining how the estimated lead/lag relation is aﬀected by diﬀerences in
7In this case, liquidity refers to trading/quoting activity.
8Here, λX and λY can be thought of as proxies for illiquidity: The lower their value, the shorter
the average interval between price updates.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

16
Figure 2. HY Curve on Synthetic Data. This ﬁgure shows the HY-estimated correlation
between X and Y at various lags ℓ∈[−10, 10]. A dotted vertical line denotes the ”true”
lead/lag relationship with X leading Y by 0.4 seconds (ˆℓ= −0.4). The four curves represent
repetitions of the HY exercise with various liquidity ratios:
λY
λX = 0.5 shown in red, λY
λX = 1
in green, λY
λX = 2 in blue, and λY
λX = 5 in purple.
liquidity. For example, the ratio λY
λX = 5 suggests that the average interval between
price updates for asset Y is 5 times that for asset X. Figure 2 shows the results of
the HY exercise.
It is clear from Figure 2 that the HY estimator is robust to spurious temporal
relations induced by liquidity diﬀerences between assets - it correctly recovers the
true lead/lag relationship between X and Y under all combinations of
λY
λX . This
property of HY is useful to the examination of temporal relationships using highfrequency data.
It is informative to contrast the performance of HY against that of a commonly employed methodology, namely previous-tick interpolation, henceforth PT.9 For completeness, we present the results of the same exercise using the PT method.
9for a thorough discussion, see Voev and Lunde (2007), Hoﬀman et al. (2010), and Griﬃn and
Oomen (2011).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

17
The intuitive idea behind the PT method is to regularize irregularly-spaced and nonsynchronous prices onto a synchronous time-grid with ﬁxed and constant intervals.
Where there is no price update between two or more consecutive points on the
regularized grid, the previous price is interpolated forward. Formally, and using the
deﬁnitions in (2), let:
(9)
Xt = X(IX
i ) and, Y t
= Y (IY
j ),
denote the PT-interpolated versions of X and Y in (1), then for a ﬁxed-interval grid
of size M and interval length h, the PT correlation estimator is given by:
(10)
ρPT =
PM
i=1
 Xih −X(i−1)h
  Y ih −Y (i−1)h

σXσY
.
The extension of ρPT to incorporate leads and lags ρPT(ℓ) is similar to that of HY
in (6).
We now repeat the estimation exercise using the PT method. We do this for various
mesh sizes h ∈{0.1, 0.5, 1} seconds. The results are given in Figure 3.
There are two interesting phenomena evident in Figure 3. First, the PT estimation procedure is adversely aﬀected by diﬀerences in liquidity. For example, in the
bottom-left panel where price updates in X occur on average 5 times as frequently
as those in Y , the PT approach suggests that X leads Y by between 3 and 3.4 seconds, which is clearly not true. Second, although a smaller mesh size h yields a more
accurate estimate of the true lag ˆℓ, it also results in a more biased estimate of the
true correlation. This is not surprising, and is a well-known artefact of interpolation
based on regularized grids (Epps (1979)).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

18
Figure 3. PT Curve on Synthetic Data. This ﬁgure shows the PT-estimated correlation
between X and Y at various lags ℓ∈[−10, 10]. A dotted vertical line denotes the ”true”
lead/lag relationship with X leading Y by 0.4 seconds (ˆℓ= −0.4). The three curves in each
panel represent repetitions of the PT exercise with various mesh sizes: h = 0.1 shown in red,
h = 0.5 in green, and h = 1 in blue. The four panels represent diﬀerent liquidity combinations
λY
λX across X and Y . Lags which maximize the correlation are given by ”Lag”.
Overall, the results of this section motivate the use of HY in dealing with highfrequency data.
3.5 - The Trading Strategy
Knowledge of the temporal relationship between a pair of contracts can be used to
build statistical arbitrage strategies based on exploiting the temporal disequilibria.
In this section, we show how we can apply our knowledge of the lead/lag relationship
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

19
to forecast and exploit mid-quote changes in the lagging contract, based on midquote changes in the leading contract.
Our forecasting and trading devices are motivated by Huth and Abergel (2012) and
Kozhan and Tham (2012). Given contracts X and Y , observing both time-series
simultaneously amounts to observing sets of contiguous quotes in X interspersed
with sets of contiguous quotes in Y . Hence we deﬁne a cluster of mid-quote returns
{CX
i,n : i, n ∈N+} in contract X as a sequence of contiguous mid-quote returns in
X uninterrupted by returns in Y . A similar deﬁnition of CY
i,n holds for contract
Y . Here, the subscript i refers to the cluster index (the number of clusters already
observed), whereas the subscript n refers to the mid-quote return index within each
cluster. This concept is illustrated graphically in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Quote Clusters. A time-line illustration of contiguous sequences of mid-quote
returns.
Returns in asset X are marked X and returns in asset Y are marked O, while
X-clusters and Y -clusters are marked with CX
i,n and CY
i,n respectively.
Once we distinguish the leading contract from the lagging contract within the HY
framework, we use this information to build a statistical arbitrage trading strategy.
Without loss of generality, let us assume contract X leads contract Y , then:
(11)
N Y
i =













+1,
if max
n
 CX
i,n

≥K
−1,
if min
n
 CX
i,n

≤−K
0,
otherwise,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

20
where N Y
i is the position taken in contract Y , and where +1 and −1 denote long and
short positions, respectively. The quantity K > 0 is a pre-set threshold. Intuitively,
equation (11) describes a simple trading strategy: Given that X leads Y , a signal to
trade Y is generated whenever the price of X moves by an amount greater than K in
the current X-cluster (i.e. before the price of Y moves).10 If Y moves in the interim,
no trading signal is generated and the process restarts in the following X-cluster.
The motivation for including a threshold in the trading strategy stems from the
fact that exploiting microscopic price ”jumps” is fruitless, unless the magnitudes of
these jumps exceed the costs associated with trading (Brooks et al. (2001)). It is
important to note that the trading strategy (11) depends only on present and past
price observations of the leading contract.
When a signal to trade Y is generated in the current X-cluster, a position in Y is
immediately opened and held for the entire duration of the following Y -cluster. The
position is then closed at the start of the subsequent X-cluster. Formally, we have:
(12)
N Y
i+1 =







0,
if {CX
i+ϵ,n : n ≥1, ϵ ≥1}
N Y
i ,
otherwise.
Taken together, equations (11) and (12) fully describe the algorithm by which we
exploit temporal disequilibria between leading contract X and lagging contract Y .
The calculation of proﬁt P for each Y -cluster is as follows: We multiply the position
taken in cluster i by the sum of the individual mid-quote returns in cluster i, and
subtract trading costs:
(13)
Pi = N Y
i
X
n
CY
i,n −ci,
10Since all C denote mid-quote returns, it is easier to measure K in terms of ticks. Conversion
between ticks and monetary value is done easily via Table 1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

21
where ci is the all-inclusive cost of trading. Calculating total proﬁts amounts to
summing the individual Pi over all clusters in the data set:
(14)
Total Proﬁt =
X
i
Pi.
Alongside the trading strategy, we measure the directional accuracy by which midquote changes in contract X portend mid-quote changes in contract Y . Speciﬁcally,
we deﬁne:
(15)
Fi =







1,
if sgn
P
n
 CY
i,n

= sgn
P
n
 CX
i,n

0,
otherwise,
where sgn(·) is the signum function. Equation (15) essentially measures whether the
aggregate returns in the current X-cluster portend the sign of the aggregate returns
in the subsequent Y -cluster. Arriving at a ﬁnal measure of directional forecasting
accuracy is intuitive: we sum all Fi and divide by the number of clusters in the data
set:
(16)
Directional Forecasting Accuracy =
P
i Fi
sup(i) × 100%,
where sup(·) denotes the supremum.
An important question related to the forecasting accuracy is whether the accuracy
is aﬀected by the choice of signal threshold K in (11). One might expect that a
stronger trading signal (i.e. higher K) would intuitively yield a higher directional
forecasting accuracy of X over Y . To help investigate this, equations (15) and (16)
are evaluated over all clusters in which a trade has been generated.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

22
4. Empirical Results
Here, we apply the analysis of section 3 to the three contract pairs within our data
set, namely the FTSE - DAX, S&P - FTSE, and S&P - DAX March 2012 pairs. For
the remainder of this paper, we deﬁne the following conventions: First, the leading
asset, as in the above list, is named ﬁrst. Second, graphs pertaining to each pair will
be coloured blue, green, and red, respectively. Third, the numerator of the lead/lag
ratio (8) refers to the ﬁrst-named contract; thus a highly asymmetrical left-heavy
HY curve with LLR ≫1 shows strong evidence that the ﬁrst-named leads.
We start by exploring the three lead/lag relationships, and proﬁle the intraday
patterns of these relationships. Then, we forecast and trade lagging contracts based
on signals generated by mid-quote changes in leading contracts. Finally, we discuss
the limits to arbitrage across international futures contracts.
4.1 - The Lead/Lag Relationship Between Futures Contracts
There are 35 full trading days (hereafter ”days”) in our sample.
For each day,
we estimate the entire HY cross-correlation curve based on equation (6), then we
average the curves for each pair over all days. We therefore ultimately obtain a single
HY curve for each contract pair. This step helps quantify the relative strength and
direction of the lead/lag relationships for each of our contract pairs.
For each contract pair, we measure leads and lags of mid-quote returns on a horizon
of −30 to 30 seconds, with 5-millisecond increments. We justify this horizon by
the fact that cross-correlations across all pairs diminish substantially within a few
seconds. We choose a grid G from (7) such that:
ℓ∈{−30, −29.995, −29.990, . . . , −0.005, 0, 0.005, . . . , 29.990, 29.995, 30}.
The results of this exercise are presented in Figure 5.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

23
Figure 5. Lead/Lag Relationships. The HY curves plotted for each contract pair. Left
panels show lag lengths ℓ∈[−30, 30] seconds.
Right panels zoom in on lag lengths ℓ∈
[−0.5, 0.5] seconds. In regions to the left of the vertical zero-line in each panel, the contract
whose name appears ﬁrst in the title leads, and vice versa.
Figure 5 displays evidence of strongly asymmetric lead/lag relationships, in which
the S&P 500 contract leads both the FTSE 100 and DAX contracts. The relationship
between the FTSE 100 and DAX contracts is less pronounced, though it is clear that
the FTSE leads the DAX contract. These results are qualitatively consistent with
other works documenting international price linkages (Innocenti et al. (2011) among
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

24
others), and the notion that international price discovery occurs in the US. Further,
by looking at the left-hand panels in Figure 5, what we ﬁnd particularly striking is
the speed at which the HY cross-correlation curves diminish towards zero across all
three pairs. In other words, the panels in Figure 5 display evidence of high ﬁnancial
integration across the three contract pairs.
This is conﬁrmed by examining the
right-hand panels, which reveal that point estimates of the lead/lag relationships,
or equivalently the peaks of the HY curves, are of the order of milliseconds. This
observation is striking because it has important implications for works examining
international pricing relationships: by using non-granular data, it is easy to achieve
the illusory eﬀect of perfect contemporaneous correlation, as documented in Section
3.4 of this paper.
We quantify the strength and direction of the lead/lag relationships in terms of
three parameters, namely the lag length ˆℓwhich maximizes the correlation between
a given contract pair, the maximum correlation itself ˆρHY , and the lead/lag ratio
LLR. These results are given in Table 3.
Table 3. Lead/Lag Relationships. Three contract pairs along with summary statistics.
The third and fourth columns show, respectively, the mean and median of the lag length ˆℓ, by
which the leader (second column) leads. The ﬁfth and sixth column show, respectively, the
maximum correlation ˆρHY and lead/lag ratios for each pair.
Table 3 reveals intuitive insights into the nature of the lead/lag relationships under
investigation. Lag lengths, maximum correlations, and lead/lag ratios all appear to
be directly related to the pairwise geographical distances between the markets.
Given that market information pertinent to any lead/lag relationship must traverse
geographical distances, it is natural to wonder whether the lag lengths reported
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

25
in Table 3 are not indicative of price discovery, but merely the result of delays in
the physical transmission of data. The latter is unlikely. Built in 1999 by Global
Crossing, the current transatlantic communication network (AC-1) spans 14,000
km, and links the US and major European markets via ﬁbre-optic cables. One-way
transmission between New York and London takes 32.4 milliseconds (see Johnson
et al. (2012) and references therein). By extrapolating this number to the distances
between the CME, NYSE-Liﬀe, and Eurex, it is unlikely that the lag lengths in Table
3 are the result of physical delays. Further, Hasbrouck and Saar (2012) suggest that
the entire event-analysis-action cycle for co-located algorithmic trading systems is
less than 2 milliseconds.
By examining the HY curves generated for each day in the sample, we reject at the
90%-level the statistical hypothesis that the maximum correlation occurs at zero lag
for the FTSE-DAX pair; and at the 99%-level for both transatlantic pairs. This
result is not surprising, given the proximity of the NYSE-Liﬀe to the Eurex, relative
to either transatlantic distance.
4.2 - The Intraday Proﬁle of Lead/Lag Relationships
It is a well-known stylized fact that ﬁnancial markets produce intraday patterns
(e.g. U-shaped volatility). Having established an overall lead/lag structure across
the three contract pairs, we turn our attention to the intraday proﬁle of these relationships.
We split each day into 24 half-hourly intervals, spanning 08:30 - 20:30 GMT. For
each interval, over each day, and for each contract pair, we measure the same three
quantities as in Table 3, namely the Lead/Lag ratio, the maximum correlation ˆρHY ,
and the lag length ˆℓwhich maximizes the correlation. We average these results
over the number of days. Ultimately, we obtain three 24-point curves: one for each
contract pair. The results of this exercise are shown in Figure 6.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

26
Figure 6. Lead/Lag Intraday Proﬁle. Intraday patterns in the Lead/Lag Ratio (top),
Maximum Correlation ˆρHY (middle), and Lag Length ˆℓ(bottom). Times on the horizontal
axes refer to the previous half-hour interval (e.g. 10:00 refers to the 09:30-10:00 interval).
Figure 6 reveals clear evidence of intraday seasonality exhibited for all three pairs.
The daily events most interesting to us are the announcement of macroeconomic
news at 13:30 GMT, the US cash market open at 14:30 GMT, and the close of both
UK and German cash markets at 16:30 GMT. All three panels conﬁrm that for each
pair, mid-quote returns in the ﬁrst-named contracts portend mid-quote returns in
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

27
the second-named contracts. Although this notion was established in the previous
section, Figure 6 shows that this eﬀect is consistent throughout the day.
The Lead/Lag ratio generally decreases (towards unity) throughout the day, indicating a diminishing asymmetry in the HY curves. This implies that the pairwise
causal link between the leading and lagging contracts deteriorates throughout the
day (Huth and Abergel (2012)). The maximum correlation remains largely rangebound, and the lag length largely constant. Notable exceptions to the above are as
follows: Around the announcement of macroeconomic data, the LLR and maximum
correlation both increase, while in terms of lag length, the US increases its leads
over both UK and German contracts. This indicates that both UK and German
traders react more attentively to cues from the US market, which impounds information ﬁrst. The same eﬀect occurs at the US cash market open. Following the
close of the UK and German cash markets, the US sharply increases its lead over
each, but both the LLR and maximum correlation across all three pairs fall sharply.
Taken together, these observations suggest that at the close of the UK and German
markets, the FTSE and DAX contracts are less sensitive to global factors, and more
so to local factors (Jorion and Schwartz (1986)).
4.3 - Trading Results: Exploiting Temporal Disequilibria
Here, we perform the statistical arbitrage exercise based on the methodology presented in section 3.5. We re-iterate that the trading strategy relies only on present
and past mid-quote observations. Importantly, the trading strategy is simple in nature, and uses no ex-ante knowledge of the dynamic lead/lag relationship presented
in section 4.2. This way, our entire data set is taken as out-of-sample for forecasting
and trading purposes. Although we discuss later how one may enhance the trading
strategy by incorporating the information conveyed via the HY output, our results
rely chieﬂy on the simple strategy (11) - (12), in the interests of robustness.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

28
Figure 7. Cumulative Proﬁts. Proﬁts gained by applying strategy (11)-(12) to the three
contract pairs over the 35 days in our sample. The vertical axis is measured in Euros for the
FTSE - DAX and S&P - DAX pairs, and Pounds Sterling for the S&P - FTSE pair.
We begin by presenting the accumulated proﬁts gained by trading the FTSE - DAX,
S&P - FTSE, and S&P - DAX pairs over the number of days in our sample. Throughout, we maintain the convention that the ﬁrst-named contract leads. Initially, we
impose a signal threshold K = 5 ticks in equation (11). That is to say, a trading
signal is generated in the lagging contract whenever we encounter a cluster of leading
quotes, wherein the mid-quote moves by 5 or more ticks in any aggregate direction.
The position is then held open until the end of the lagging cluster. Later, we vary
the signal threshold to examine its eﬀect on the arbitrage proﬁts. Furthermore, we
initially impose that the arbitrageur trades a single contract per signal; a step that
ensures no market-impact costs, since we employ BBO quotes. Figure 7 shows the
accumulated wealth gained by trading the three contract pairs, following the strategy (11) - (12). The curves denote proﬁts over the 35-day sample period, net of the
bid-ask spread and all order submission and clearing costs.
Although each proﬁt time-series trends consistently upwards, they exhibit vast differences in magnitude. The most proﬁtable pair is the FTSE - DAX, while the least
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

29
Figure 8. Intraday Arbitrage Proﬁle. Intraday patterns of Directional Forecasting Accuracy (top), the total number of individual trades on a log10 scale (middle), and the 10th
percentile duration length of proﬁtable disequilibria (bottom).
proﬁtable is the S&P - FTSE. One reason for this may relate to the geographical
proximity of London to Frankfurt: It is likely that the FTSE and DAX contracts
respond to a larger set of overlapping idiosyncratic factors than either transatlantic
pair, yielding a more consistent relationship.
This suggestion is conﬁrmed by a
greater magnitude of correlation, shown in Figure 5. Further, the low proﬁtability
which characterizes the S&P - FTSE pair may be explained by Werner and Kleidon’s
(1996) suggestion that the US-UK market is among the most heavily arbitraged.
We now study the intraday proﬁle of arbitrage. Speciﬁcally, we aggregate over our
entire sample, the directional forecasting accuracy, number of generated signals, and
durations of proﬁtable disequilibria. The results are shown in Figure 8.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

30
The top panel of Figure 8 shows a consistently high directional forecasting accuracy
across all three contract pairs. Accuracy rates rise slightly following the US open,
which accords with the idea that the UK and German markets follow the US more
closely during this period. Further, accuracy rates fall following the UK and German
close, which is also an intuitive result exhibiting the opposite eﬀect. Following Huth
and Abergel (2012), we test the robustness of the directional forecasts against both
a random forecast, and a forecast generated via an auto-correlation in the lagging
contract. The auto-correlation forecast slightly outperforms the random forecast,
but is not statistically signiﬁcantly better. The directional forecasts we present are
signiﬁcant at the 99% level for all contract pairs over all intervals in our sample,
with the exception of the S&P - DAX pair between 20:00 and 20:30.
The middle panel of Figure 8 shows that the number of trades (or equivalently,
trade signals) generated per interval increases sharply following the announcement
of market data and again following the US open. This increase is then maintained
for as long as all three cash markets remain open. The bottom panel plots the 10thpercentile reaction times, denoting interval durations between the point at which
a trade signal is generated, and the point at which the lagging contract begins to
move following the signal. This panel shows that reaction times decrease following
the announcement of market data, and remain low for as long as all three cash
markets are open, before gradually rising following the close of the UK and German
markets. Taken together, these results suggest that market participants who act to
appropriate temporal disequilibria concentrate their activity during speciﬁc periods.
4.4 - Varying the Number of Contracts per Trade
So far, we have assumed that the arbitrageur trades one single futures contract each
time a trading signal is generated. In reality, statistical arbitrage systems of this
kind are only proﬁtable if they can be scaled to yield economically signiﬁcant proﬁts.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

31
Here, we repeat the trading exercise 20 times. Each time we repeat the exercise,
the arbitrageur is assumed to trade a number R of contracts per trade signal, where
R ∈{1, 2, . . . , 20}. Table 4 shows the results of this exercise.
Table 4.
Number of Contracts per Trade. This table shows the eﬀect on proﬁts of
varying the number of contracts per trade from a single contract to 20. Proﬁts are converted
to Euros for ease of comparison, and totalled in the ﬁnal column.
Interestingly, as the arbitrageur trades a larger number of contracts, the strategy
beneﬁts from economies of scale with regard to trading costs. To see this, note that
the proﬁts from trading 10 contracts per signal exceed ten times the proﬁts gained by
trading 1. This is because exchange-related costs are charged per market order, not
per contract. Clearly, one cannot trade a large number of contracts simultaneously
without incurring market impact costs. This is discussed in section 4.6.
4.5 - Varying the Signal Threshold
Up to now, we have assumed a pre-set signal threshold K. It is informative to study
the eﬀects of varying this threshold on the proﬁtability of arbitrage.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

32
Intuitively, a higher signal threshold yields better directional forecasts proﬁtability,
at the expense of a lower trading frequency. Studying the eﬀects of varying the
signal threshold is informative to both academics and practitioners. To academics,
it establishes a link between the frequency of temporal price disequilibria and risk.
To practitioners, it permits an investigation into optimal trading rules.
We proceed by varying the signal threshold from K ∈{1, 2, . . . , 10} ticks. For each
instance and for each contract pair, we measure the aggregate directional forecasting accuracy, total number of trades, average proﬁt per trade, and 10th percentile
reaction times. The results are shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Varying the Signal Threshold This table shows, for each contract pair, the eﬀect
of varying the signal threshold K from 1 to 10 ticks. For each instance, the table shows the
directional forecasting accuracy, total number of trades, proﬁt per trade, and 10th percentile
reaction time.
Table 5 reveals several insights into the eﬀects of varying the signal threshold on
arbitrage returns. The eﬀects are consistent across all contract pairs. Firstly, increasing the signal threshold directly increases the directional forecasting accuracy.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

33
This result is consistent with the notion that increasing the signal threshold results in a cleaner signal with which to trade. Similarly, while the total number of
trades falls sharply, the proﬁt per trade increases. In particular, despite low signal thresholds yielding directionally accurate forecasts, trading based on low signal
thresholds does not overcome costs. To practitioners, these results can be used to
devise optimal trading strategies.
The ﬁnal three rows of Table 5 are interesting. The 10th percentile reaction times
decline sharply as the signal threshold increases. In other words, arbitrageurs who
wait for stronger trade signals do so at the cost of facing drastically shorter durations of disequilibria. This is consistent with the view that competition among
arbitrageurs acts to enforce pricing eﬃciency (Grossman and Stiglitz (1976, 1980)),
thereby perpetuating the need to invest in technological infrastructure.
It is informative to compare the reaction times stated in Table 5 to the time it
takes data to physically traverse the relevant geographical distances. Recall from
section 4.1 that one-way transmission between New York and London takes 32.4
milliseconds via Global Crossing’s AC-1 ﬁbre-optic cable.
By extrapolating this
time to the distances between the CME, NYSE-Liﬀe, and Eurex, it is highly unlikely
that any of the FTSE - DAX or S&P - DAX trades lie inside the transmission speed
boundary, even for high signal thresholds. This is particularly striking for the FTSE
- DAX pair, which beneﬁts from close geographical proximity, and which we have
shown to be more proﬁtable than either transatlantic pair. It is therefore puzzling
why the 10th percentile reaction time for this pair should be signiﬁcantly higher
than either transatlantic pair. However, looking closely at the proﬁts per trade is
informative: The FTSE - DAX pair generates a large number of trades, each of
which is relatively less proﬁtable than either transatlantic pair. This suggests that
the FTSE - DAX pair contains a relatively high idiosyncratic risk component which
acts as a deterrent to arbitrage.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

34
Looking at the S&P - FTSE pair, a signal threshold K ≥9 suggests that for a
number of arbitrage opportunities, namely those at 37 milliseconds, the duration of
disequilibria lies at or just within the data transmission speed barrier. However, it
is noteworthy that in our entire sample, this phenomenon occurs for only one single
trade. Overall, the S&P - FTSE result is consistent with Werner and Kleidon’s
(1996) suggestion that the US-UK market is among the most heavily arbitraged.
Finally, it is important to note that the computing processes behind generating a
trading signal and managing a position require only the evaluation of one logical
operation and one ﬂoating-point operation per observed mid-quote, as per (11) and
(12). Modest desktop computing resources can perform these kinds of calculations
within a small number of microseconds, akin to suggestions by Hasbrouck and Saar
(2012). As for the millisecond environment in which we operate, it is unlikely that
the time required for calculation will signiﬁcantly signiﬁcantly aﬀect the visible
duration of temporal disequilibria.
4.6 - On the Limits of Arbitrage
Our data set consists of the three most liquid and widely traded futures contracts
globally, with virtually no restrictions on trading or cross-border arbitrage.
In markets such as this, professional arbitrageurs often compete over a limited supply of available arbitrage opportunities.
This competition creates an imbalance
stemming from the excess demand by arbitrageurs for proﬁtable trades. As a result,
competition among arbitrageurs eﬀectively reduces the magnitude and duration of
proﬁtable disequilibria. This in turn creates a natural selection mechanism by which
arbitrageurs who possess the most powerful computing resources survive. Overall,
this system poses two major limits to arbitrage, namely costs and risk.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

35
Liquidity, price slippage, market impact, and competition for scarce opportunities
from other traders are all sources of risk for which arbitrageurs demand compensation. This fact may explain why even seemingly riskless arbitrage opportunities
sometimes go unexploited. It is informative to explore the eﬀects each of these risks
have on arbitrageurs’ capacity to appropriate pricing disequilibria, by examining
their eﬀects on proﬁtability.
We parsimoniously capture the eﬀects of liquidity risk, price slippage, market impact,
and competition from other arbitrageurs, following an approach by Kozhan and
Tham (2012). Speciﬁcally, we impose that a certain proportion of the arbitrageur’s
trades are not executed at the observed (best) price, but at the next best price
instead, which is assumed to be available in inﬁnite supply. The next best price
in the context of our work means a one-tick increment down the limit order book,
equivalent to 50 pence and 50 Euro cents for the FTSE 100 and DAX contracts,
respectively. The objective of this exercise is to see what eﬀect this restriction has
on the proﬁtability of the individual arbitrageur. The results are shown in Figure 9.
For each contract pair, Figure 9 reveals the sensitivity of an arbitrageur’s proﬁts
to the risk of executing part of a trade at the next best price. This sensitivity is
particularly high for the FTSE-DAX pair, which is an intuitive result, given the
generally low per-trade proﬁtability of this pair as seen in Figure 8.
Further, we interpret the results of this section within the context of Table 4, and
ask: How is the probability of price slippage aﬀected by increasing the number of
contracts per trade? In our data set, around 29% of FTSE 100 quotes on either the
bid or ask side carry a size of 5 contracts or less, and around 46% carry 11 or more
contracts. The corresponding ﬁgures for the DAX are 49% and 22% respectively.
Therefore, the FTSE 100 futures contract carries a greater per-quote liquidity. Based
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

36
Figure 9. Slippage Risk. The eﬀect of having a percentage of trades fulﬁlled at the next
best price (horizontal) on the proportion of otherwise available proﬁt opportunities (vertical).
on this, we suggest that the risk of price slippage is relatively less profound when
the contract being traded is the FTSE 100.
One additional risk inherent in this type of trading stems from the fact that the contracts under investigation are not perfect substitutes. Arbitrage in this context relies
on exploiting a statistical relationship based on economic fundamentals. Invariably,
arbitrageurs are vulnerable to noise traders, who may trade the individual contracts
for reasons other than to exploit pricing disequilibria (De Long et al. (1990)), at
highly unfavourable times for arbitrageurs.
Besides risk, the costs associated with trading in this market setting act as a significant deterrent to arbitrage. Figure 8 shows the directional forecasting accuracy to
be high. However, in order to proﬁt from a trade, an arbitrageur has to not only be
directionally accurate, but also overcome the bid-ask spread. Given that the majority of trades individually extract very small amounts of proﬁt, the bid-ask spread
is a major cost incurred by arbitrageurs. Furthermore, arbitrageurs face ﬁxed rents
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

37
and other costs incurred through co-location subscriptions and access to live market
feeds. Hedge funds implementing these kinds of strategies must also hire analysts to
create and maintain computer code. To the extent that these extra costs collectively
diminish the proﬁts reported in Table 4, they act as a deterrent to arbitrage. Due
to the costs involved, we suggest that arbitrage operations in this setting can most
readily be undertaken by larger hedge funds and proprietary trading desks whose
co-located infrastructure is not dedicated solely to this pursuit, but forms part of
their overall business activity.
Overall, this section highlights that technological infrastructure costs and the risk of
price slippage present signiﬁcant limits to arbitrage in the market for international
futures contracts.
5. Conclusion
This paper complements previous work by examining pricing relationships in the
important but overlooked market setting of international index futures. We document clear evidence of consistent sub-second lead/lag patterns across the S&P 500,
FTSE 100, and DAX futures contracts (in order of leadership), suggesting that the
diﬀusion of information across these markets is not instantaneous.
Importantly, we show that these lead/lag patterns induce predictability in lagging
assets, and give rise to proﬁtable disequilibria. Taken together, these observations
provide evidence against auto-eﬃciency across international futures markets, and
suggest that arbitrage is an important component to information ﬂow across markets.
However, arbitrage proﬁts are sensitive to the risk of price slippage, and
proﬁtable opportunities rarely exist for more than 300 milliseconds. Therefore, we
highlight slippage risk and technological costs as the most signiﬁcant limits to arbitrage in this market setting.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

38
The data we employ consists of the three most highly liquid futures contracts, with
no capital controls and no restrictions to cross-border arbitrage. Based on this, we
suggest that the results obtained in this paper are generalizable to other global markets, and we are keen to examine pricing relationships across index futures of emerging markets. Furthermore, we highlight the importance of utilizing high-frequency
data, based on compelling evidence that most of the price adjustment mechanisms
in these markets operate deep into the sub-second domain.
Future work could focus on extending the lead/lag analytical framework into the
multi-dimensional space. This would facilitate the analysis of global ﬂows of information and collectively transitive eﬀects across multiple geographical markets.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

39
References
Abhyankar, A. (1998). Linear and Nonlinear Granger Causality: Evidence From the UK
Stock Index Futures Market. Journal of Futures Markets 18, pp. 519 -540.
Abhyankar, A., L.S. Copeland, and W. Wong (1997). Uncovering Nonlinear Structure
in Real-Time Stock-Market Indexes: The S&P 500, the DAX, the Nikkei 225, and the
FTSE-100. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 15(1), pp. 1-14.
Andreou, P.C. and Y.A. Pierides (2008). Empirical Investigation of Stock Index Futures
Market Eﬃciency: The Case of the Athens Derivatives Exchange. European Journal of
Finance 14, pp. 211-23.
Antoniou, A., G. Pescetto, and A. Violaris (2003). Modelling International Price Relations
and Interdependencies between the Stock Index and Stock Index Futures Markets of Three
EU Countries: A Multivariate Analysis. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 30,
pp. 645-667.
Ayuso, J. and R. Blanco (2001). Has Financial Integration Increased during the 1990s?
Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 11, pp. 265-287.
Brennan, M.J. and E.S. Schwartz (1990). Arbitrage in Stock Index Futures. Journal of
Business 63, pp. 7-31.
Brooks, C., and I. Garrett (2002). Can We Explain the Dynamics of the UK FTSE 100
Stock and Stock Index Futures Markets? Applied Financial Economics 12, pp. 25-31.
Brooks, C., A.G. Rew, and S. Ritson (2001). A trading strategy based on the lead-lag
relationship between the spot index and futures contract for the FTSE 100. International
Journal of Forecasting, 17, pp. 31-44.
Cummings, J. and A. Frino (2011). Index Arbitrage and the Pricing Relationship Between
Australian Stock Index Futures and Their Underlying Shares. Accounting and Finance
51, pp. 661-683.
De Jong, F. and T. Nijman (1998). Intraday lead-lag relationships between the Futures,
Options, and Stock market. European Finance Review 1, pp. 337359.
De Long, B. J., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. Waldmann, (1990). Noise Trader Risk
in Financial Markets, The Journal of Political Economy, 98, pp. 703-738.
Eiteman, D., A. Stonehill, M.H. Moﬀett, and M. Moﬀet (1994). Multinational Business
Finance. Addison Wesley. ISBN: 9780201845532.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

40
Epps T. (1979). Co-movements in Stock Prices in the Very Short Run. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 74, pp. 291298.
Eun, C. and S. Shim (1989). International Transmission of Stock Market Movements.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 24(2), pp. 241-256.
Evans, M.D. and V. Hnatkovska (2005). International capital ﬂows, returns and world
ﬁnancial integration. NBER Working Paper 11701.
Figlewski, S. (1984). Hedging Performance and Basic Risk in Stock Index Futures. Journal
of Finance 39, pp. 657-670.
Figlewski, S. (1985). Hedging with Stock Index Futures: Theory and Application in a
New Market. Journal of Futures Markets 5, pp. 183-200.
Goetzmann, W., L. Li, and K.G. Rouwenhorst (2005). Long-Term Global Market Correlations. Journal of Business 78(1), pp. 1-38.
Griﬃn, J.E. and R.C.A. Oomen (2011). Covariance measurement in the presence of nonsynchronous trading and market microstructure noise. Journal of Econometrics 160(1),
pp. 5868.
Grossman, S. and J. Stiglitz (1976). Information and competitive price systems. American
Economic Review 66, pp. 246-252.
Grossman, S. and J. Stiglitz (1980).
On the impossibility of informationally eﬃcient
markets. American Economic Review 70, pp. 393-408.
Gulen, H. and S. Mayhew (2000). Stock Index Futures Trading and Volatility in International Equity Markets. Journal of Futures Markets 20(7), pp. 661-685.
Hamao, Y., R. Masulis, and V. Ng (1990). Correlations in Price Changes and Volatility
Across International Stock Markets. Review of Financial Studies 3(2), pp. 281-307.
Hasbrouck, J. and G. Saar (2012). Low-Latency Trading. Working Paper.
Hayashi, T. and N. Yoshida (2005). On covariance estimation of non-synchronously observed diﬀusion processes. Bernoulli 11(2), pp. 359-379.
Hendershott, T., C.M. Jones, and A.J. Menkveld (2011). Does algorithmic trading improve
liquidity? Journal of Finance 66, pp. 133.
Herbst, A.F., J.P. McCormack, and E.N. West (1987). Investigation of a LeadLag Relationship between Spot Stock Indices and Their Futures Contracts. Journal of Futures
Markets 7, pp. 373-381.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

41
Hoﬀmann, M., M. Rosenbaum, and N. Yoshida (2010). Estimation of the lead-lag parameter from non-synchronous data. Working Paper.
Huth, N. and F. Abergel (2012). High Frequency Lead/lag Relationships: Empirical facts.
Working Paper.
Innocenti, A., P. Malpenga, L. Menconi, and A. Santoni (2011). Intraday Anomalies in
the Relationship between U.S. Futures and European Stock Indexes. Journal of Index
Investing 1(4), pp. 40-52.
Johnson, N., G. Zhao, E. Hunsader, J. Meng, A. Ravindar, S. Carran, B. Tivnan (2012).
Financial black swans driven by ultrafast machine ecology. Working Paper.
Jorion, P. and E. Schwartz (1986). Integration vs. segmentation in the Canadian stock
market. Journal of Finance 41, pp. 603-616.
Kawaller, I.G., P.D. Koch, and T.W. Koch (1987). The temporal price relationship between S&P 500 futures and the S&P 500 index. Journal of Finance 42(5), pp. 13091329.
Kenourgios, D.F. (2004). Price Discovery in the Athens Derivatives Exchange: Evidence
for the FTSE/ASE-20 Futures Market. Economic and Business Review 6, pp. 229-243.
Kearney, C. and B.M. Lucey (2004). International equity market integration: Theory,
evidence and implications. International Review of Financial Analysis 13(5), pp. 571583.
Kozhan, R. and W.W. Tham (2012). Execution Risk in High-Frequency Arbitrage. Management Science 58(11), pp. 2131-2149.
Lo, A. and C. MacKinlay (1990). When are contrarian proﬁts due to stock market overreaction? Review of Financial Studies 3, pp. 175-205.
Medeiros, O., G. de Oliveira, B. van Doornik (2009). Testing for Lead-Lag Eﬀects Between
the American and the Brazilian Stock Markets. University of Brasilia Working Paper.
Richie, N., R. Daigler, and K. Gleason (2008).
The Limits to Stock Index Arbitrage:
Examining S&P 500 Futures and SPDRs. Journal of Futures Markets 28(12) pp. 11821205.
Schultz, P. and S. Shive (2010). Mispricing of Dual-Class Shares: Proﬁt Opportunities,
Arbitrage, and Trading. Journal of Financial Economics 98, pp. 524-549.
Stoll, H.R. and R.E. Whaley (1990). The dynamics of stock index and stock index futures
returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 25, pp. 441468.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753

42
Thomas, S. (2002). The Saga of the First Stock Index Futures Contract: Benchmarks,
Models, and Learning. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking. 34(3), pp. 767-808.
Tse, Y.K. (1995). LeadLag Relationships between Spot Index and Futures Price of the
Nikkei Stock Average. Journal of Forecasting 14, pp. 553-563.
Voev, V. and A. Lunde (2007). Integrated Covariance Estimation Using High-Frequency
Data in the Presence of Noise. Journal of Financial Econometrics 5(1), pp. 68104.
Wahab, M., and M. Lashgari (1993). Price Dynamics and Error Correction in Stock Index
and Stock Index Futures Markets: A Cointegration Approach. Journal of Futures Markets
13, pp. 711-742.
Wang, P., and P. Wang (2001). Equilibrium Adjustment, Basis Risk and Risk Transmission in Spot and Forward Foreign Exchange Markets. Applied Financial Economics 11,
pp. 127-136.
Werner, I. and A. Kleidon (1996). U.K. and U.S. trading of British cross-listed stocks:
An intraday analysis of market integration. Review of Financial Studies 9, pp. 619-664.
Zeckhauser, R. and V. Niederhoﬀer (1983).
The performance of market index futures
contracts, Financial Analysts Journal 39(1), pp. 59-65.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2225753
