Why do trading frenzies motivate ‘locals’ to make
better trading decisions?*
Wei Lu†
Peter L. Swan‡
Joakim Westerholm§
July 16, 2025
Abstract
Using utility maximization and an indicator for trend following by uninformed foreigners, we
recover the private informational signals possessed by Finnish domestic households and institutions (‘locals’). Our model generalizes existing theories of partially revealing rational expectations equilibria (PRRE). Informed locals buy ‘low’ when prices are falling and sell ‘high’
when prices are rising. The dominant methodology known as ‘Calendar-Time’ (C-T) claims to
find that households are unsophisticated and subject to the ‘disposition effect.’ Establishing a
powerful identity between a trader’s accrued and realized accounting (FIFO) gains, we show
that this methodology is contrary to PRRE. To explain the home bias ‘puzzle’, analysis based
on our holding period invariant (HPI) methodology establishes that ‘locals’ are highly informed
relative to their foreign counterparts. Both Finnish households and institutional investors generate sizable Jensen’s Alphas and Internal Rates of Return, with the supposed ‘disposition effect’
simply a by-product of superior information.
JEL Classification: G11, G12, G14.
Key words: Local advantage, Home bias, Calendar-time, Horizon-invariant, Disposition effect.
*We wish to thank Linda Allen, Michael Brennan, John Campbell, Jie (Jay) Cao, Phillip Dybvig, Gerald Garvey,
Harald Hau, David Hirshleifer, Karel Hrazdil, Petko S. Kalev, Ron Kaniel, Andre Levy, Richard Morris, Marco
Pagano, Masahiro Watanabe, and participants at the 30th Annual Conference of the Multinational Finance Association, 2024, for which the paper received the Best Paper Award, Indonesian Financial Management Association’s Finance and Banking Conference, Sanur, Bali, the participants at the SIRCA Young Researcher Workshop
4, Sydney, The Israel Behavioral Finance Conference, FMA Doctoral Student Consortium, Orlando, Australasian
Finance and Banking Conference, Sydney, Auckland Finance Meeting, the Financial Research Network (FIRN)
Conference, the Luxembourg Asset Management Summit, Vrije Universiteit (VU) Amsterdam seminar, New
York University, VINS Conference, Shanghai for valuable comments. We also thank Zhen Wang for excellent
research assistance.
†RQI Investors, Email: lsw2471@gmail.com.
‡Corresponding author: School of Banking and Finance, UNSW-Sydney Business School, Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia. Email: peter.swan@unsw.edu.au; tel: +61418601392.
§Discipline of Finance at the University of Sydney Business School, Correspondence Address: H69, University
of Sydney Business School, NSW, 2006, Australia. Email: joakim.westerholm@sydney.edu.au; tel: +612-93516454.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Why do trading frenzies motivate ‘locals’ to make
better trading decisions?
July 16, 2025
Abstract
Using utility maximization and an indicator for trend following by uninformed foreigners, we
recover the private informational signals possessed by Finnish domestic households and institutions (‘locals’). Our model generalizes existing theories of partially revealing rational expectations equilibria (PRRE). Informed locals buy ‘low’ when prices are falling and sell ‘high’
when prices are rising. The dominant methodology known as ‘Calendar-Time’ (C-T) claims to
find that households are unsophisticated and subject to the ‘disposition effect.’ Establishing a
powerful identity between a trader’s accrued and realized accounting (FIFO) gains, we show
that this methodology is contrary to PRRE. To explain the home bias ‘puzzle’, analysis based
on our holding period invariant (HPI) methodology establishes that ‘locals’ are highly informed
relative to their foreign counterparts. Both Finnish households and institutional investors generate sizable Jensen’s Alphas and Internal Rates of Return, with the supposed ‘disposition effect’
simply a by-product of superior information.
JEL Classification: G11, G12, G14.
Key words: Local advantage, Home bias, Calendar-time, Horizon-invariant, Disposition effect.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

1
Introduction and literature review
In this paper, we show that there are two quite conflicting literatures, one indicating that households and locals are unsophisticated and seriously poor investors who are psychologically challenged as they suffer from the ‘disposition effect’ by hanging on to losers, and the second
indicating that households perform better with respect to local investment. Since these two literatures are in direct conflict, which one is right? We argue that the first literature arises from a
major methodological flaw in the way investment performance is often measured. Crucially, it
depends on the calendar and the name of the methodology is telling: ‘calendar-time’ (C-T). It
is shown in this paper that investment depends primarily on price movements and the behavior
of one’s counterpart, with the calendar being irrelevant.
In the C-T approach, the investor acquires stock or some other investment over some interval, for example, a day or a year at which point it is marked-to-market but remains unsold, and
sells stock over the same interval. It then seems quite logical to define a superior performer
as one who obtains a higher mark-to-market return on the purchased assets over the interval,
compared with the return on the assets which were actually sold. Superiority is asserted when
assets purchased are ‘gems’ and those sold, ‘dogs’. But this apparent intuitive support is built
on quicksand. The C-T methodology only records the investor’s portfolio over sequences of
the designated interval, with all earlier portfolio additions discarded. Hence, the fate of earlier
investments remains unrecorded.
Consider the trend. If the investor buys assets when their price is rising and sells when the
price is falling, the trend alone will generate a C-T profit but not an actual profit. Assets purchased when price is rising will be sold in some subsequent interval when price is falling. This
sale will generally be made at a loss that is not recorded by the C-T methodology. When an investor purchases in a rising market, the price may have already reached its peak. When the sale
occurs, its nadir may already have been reached. Purchases made in a rising market will generally be at high prices, and sales in a falling market will generally occur at low prices. Hence,
despite the above observation of a C-T profit, the sequence is loss-making. Since households
and locals generally buy when prices are falling and sell when rising, with their counterparts
2
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

doing the opposite, this literature reports highly profitable household trades as detrimentally
loss-making according to the C-T orthodoxy. Thus, one can immediately see the reason why
the siren call of the C-T methodology is so persuasive. Disregarding illogicality, a complex
multi-period optimization problem is reduced to what appears to be a sequence of one-period
intervals with a simple and emotionally appealing solution.
If it is false to reduce sophisticated optimization problems to the consideration of a single
calendar interval as the notional investment holding period, how should one proceed? We
propose and apply two solutions: 1) to sum the accrued but unrealized capital gains/losses over
the entire period of the investment by marking-to-market to achieve a holding-period-invariant
(HPI) methodology, or 2) to sum the realized first-in, first-out (FIFO) accounting profits while
marking-to-market the value of any unrealized assets at the end of the investment period. In
what we believe to be a remarkable advance in understanding accounting principles, we prove
that these two solutions are identical.
Using these twin robust methodologies, we establish that supposedly unsophisticated Finnish
households earn exceedingly high internal rates of return (IRR) and sizable Jensen’s Alphas
when applying the Capital Asset Pricing Methodology (CAPM), augmented by the FamaFrench approach, when trading with foreign institutional investors, mostly United States (US),
over the entire period of our comprehensive daily data for the period from January 1995 to
December 2017. Similarly, domestic Finnish institutions trading with foreign institutions also
earn exceedingly high returns and Jensen’s Alphas. All local investors, household and institutional, enjoying high returns at the expense of foreign investors who suffer correspondingly
negative IRRs and negative Alphas.
But how did supposedly unsophisticated local Finnish households and institutional investors
outperform apparently highly sophisticated US investors over decades to extract many billions
of dollars profit? To explain this, in the Internet Appendix we develop what we believe to be the
first-ever theoretical model capable of extracting the informed private signal from counterpart
trades in a fully empirically testable manner. The model also explains frenetic trading, pricing
bubbles, and otherwise inexplicable market booms and collapses. Although agency models
typically incorporate a private signal, until now none have been in an estimable form. To test
3
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

whether our model conveys essential information to Finnish investors, we empirically estimate
the model in the body of this paper to confirm its salience and its ability to explain apparently
irrational trading frenzies and its downside, such as a burst market bubble.
An informational advantage does not have to take the form of sophisticated short-term price
discovery around earnings announcements, access to expensive data terminals, datasets, trading floors, and all the expensive apparatus of professional money management. The answer
can be far simpler. For example, if one’s nation’s investors identify that the allegedly sophisticated foreign counterpart is driving prices away from fundamentals by trend-following, this
can create considerable informational profit, as we show. Thus, a highly profitable trader does
not need any private information of her own. Her only requirement is the knowledge that either
her counterpart knows even less or is destabilized by having inappropriate rules for fund entry
and exit.
Our findings help to explain the long-standing ‘home bias puzzle’, which casts doubt on
diversification as one of the foundation stones of finance and has remained unexplained for
decades. French and Poterba (1991) noted that in December 1989, 94 percent of United States
(US) equity was held domestically with 82 percent in the case of the United Kingdom (UK).
UK investors required returns 500 basis points higher to justify their lack of diversification. See
Cooper, Sercu, and Vanpée (2013) for a survey. Coval and Moskowitz (1999) suggested that an
informational advantage could be the answer to the puzzle. Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp
(2009) explain the home bias puzzle by arguing that investors have an incentive to learn more
about their home, the country in which they have a comparative advantage. Our explanation is
quite different: domestic (Finnish) investors learn about the trading weaknesses of their foreign
counterparts, who are the dominant owners of the large local Finnish stocks and exploit frenzied
trading to extract sizable trading profits that are far in excess of the buy-and-hold returns from
investing in Finnish stocks or from simply providing liquidity to foreign buyers.
The first literature, which is based largely on the C-T methodology, includes Odean (1998)
and (1999), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000), Barber and Odean (1999), (2000), (2001), Hong,
Kubik, and Stein (2008), Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2009), Barber, Lee, Liu, and Odean (2009),
Solnik and Zuo (2011), Doskeland and Hvide (2011), Barber, Huang, Odean, and Schwarz
4
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

(2022), and Barber, Lin, and Odean (2023). Using an algorithm to identify household trades,
Barber, Lin, and Odean (2023) find that households predict returns in the short run, but,
nonetheless, their trades are unprofitable. In their survey, Barber and Odean (2013, p.1539)
conclude that “individual investors are subpar investors” and “the aggregate (or average) performance of individual investors is poor.” Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000) categorize Finnish
households as the “least sophisticated” and foreign institutions as the “most sophisticated” investors in Finland using the first two years available to them at that time, of the otherwise
identical dataset that we use. However, we find the reverse using the same two years of data
using a far more robust methodology, as well as for the full 23 years of our data.
Furthermore, individual investors are alleged to overinvest in local stocks, do not diversify,
and sell winners while holding on to losers. Hence, they are subject to a psychological problem
known as the ‘disposition effect’. See, for example, Shefrin and Statman (1985), Odean (1998),
Weber and Camerer (1998), Heath, Huddart, and Lang (1999), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000),
(2001), Feng and Seasholes (2005), Grinblatt and Han (2005), Dhar and Zhu (2006), Frazzini
(2006), Barber, Lee, Liu, and Odean (2007), Kaustia (2010), Barberis and Xiong (2009), Seru,
Shumway, and Stoffman (2010), Hens and Vlcek (2011), Heimer (2016), Chang, Solomon, and
Westerfield (2016), and Meng and Weng (2018). In contrast, Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012,
p.2518) take a critical stance toward this literature as they typify the ‘disposition effect’ as no
more than both rational and informed speculation: “for a given signal quality, a lower profit
(greater loss or smaller gain) implies that the market on average impounded the signal less,
thus increasing the incentive to hold on to the stock. This information impounding effect alone
creates an incentive for selling that increases as a function of profit.”
The issue here is not whether many households sell winners and hang on to losers, but
whether this is part of a profitable investment strategy. Odean (1998) could have examined the
actual profitability of household trades, but is content to hypothesize different future realization
dates. Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) use a limited amount of the same data as in this study
to show that Finnish households are subject to the disposition effect. We show that these same
households are extremely profitable traders, in contrast to the C-T based performance literature.
But the second and conflicting literature indicates that local investors not only pay greater
5
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

attention to local stocks, see Seasholes and Zhu (2010), but also have superior information
processing skills with respect to local rather than distant stocks. See, for example, Hau (2001),
Ivkovic and Weisbenner (2005), Malloy, 2005, Choe, Kho, and Stulz (2005), Dvoˇrák (2005),
Massa, and Simonov (2006), Ivkovic, Sialm, and Weisbenner (2008), Agarwal, Faircloth, Liu,
and Ghon Rhee (2009), Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2008), Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp
(2009), 2010, Kaniel, Liu, Saar, and Titman (2012), Shive (2012), Kelley and Tetlock (2013),
Barrat, Kaniel, and Scaer (2016), Hendershott, Menkveld, Praz, and Seasholes (2022), Swan
and Westerholm (2018), Boehmer and Song (2021), Boehmer, Jones, Zhang, and Zhang (2021),
Welsh (2022), Mengoli, Pagano, and Pattitoni (2024), Bryzgalova, Pavlova, and Sikorskaya
(2023), and Bogousslavsky and Muravyev (2024). Ivkovic and and Weisbenner (2005) use
conventional Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) estimates to find that households earn a
premium on their local holdings relative to distant of an annualized 3.2%, but their findings are
challenged by Seasholes and Zhu (2010) using the C-T methodology, which conflicts with the
CAPM.
Since in this paper we test all our theories explaining local advantage using highly transparent and granular Finnish data, we need to recognize the market dominance of one stock,
namely Nokia, which was cross-listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in 1994. Its
dominance arose due to a trading frenzy originating in the US On January 3rd, 1995, its Yahoo!
Finance-designated split adjusted price was USD 2.31 but by June 20, 2000, it had reached its
highest ever peak of USD 61.88, a rise of 25.8 times in five years. Nokia’s earnings growth
of 50 percent per annum to mid-2000 set off a trading frenzy followed by a growth lull, which
precipitated the price collapse. Growth did not resume until 2005 with sales and profit almost
doubling until January 9, 2007, with the launch of the first-generation Apple iPhone and the
beginning of the global financial crisis. This second growth spurt triggered another short-lived
stock market frenzy.
Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013) explain such trading frenzies in terms of the interaction between speculative and real investment. The firm decides to undertake real investment
based on two signals, an idiosyncratic signal, and a correlated signal. The private idiosyncratic
signal depends on the firm’s knowledge of its own productivity, whereas the correlated signal
6
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

depends on the stock price. As speculators put more weight on the correlated information that
most traders use, the change in stock price motivates the feedback to real investment. The
model predictions are borne out by Nokia with Nokia’s annual reports showing capital expenditure rising from USD 436.02 million (2,028 million Markka) in 1996 to USD 1,488.8 million
(EUR 600 million) in 2000, a rise of 2.42 times over four years (60 percent per annum).
There are alternative hypotheses, apart from superior information, that might explain the
success of domestic investors in Finland relative to their foreign counterparts. Market makers
sell when prices are going up and buy when prices are going down. That is, they make money
by providing liquidity and are not necessarily informed. Using data from a French discount
broker, Barrot, Kaniel, and Sraer (2016) find that households who trade in a contrarian fashion
just like Finnish investors provide liquidity, especially when institutional liquidity dries up as it
did in 2008 and 2009 during the US subprime crisis. Yes, Finnish investors provided liquidity
as did French investors. This inevitably follows from being both contrarian and informed.
But, as Barrot, Kaniel, and Sraer (2016) correctly point out, the average holding period by
French households of over 300 days was too long to benefit from liquidity provision. Finnish
households with a similarly long, or even longer, holding period also did not benefit directly
from liquidity provision either, but they did benefit from herding behavior by US institutional
investors. If one countries investors herd, and another exploits this to earn billions of dollars
in profit, this still constitutes a relative informational advantage that goes well beyond liquidity
provision.
Another possible explanation is that locals may face fewer constraints than foreigners. It
is true that US institutional investors are less inclined to invest in small stocks where they
face a greater informational disadvantage and potentially higher trading costs. However, in our
dataset, US investors incur their largest losses in large stocks such as Nokia and we mostly
consider smaller stocks in which US investors take sizable positions. A contributing factor are
passive and uninformed index investment funds that dominate large stocks. It is also true that
individual US funds face an additional reporting requirement in that they must file forms 13D
or 13G if their holdings exceed 5 percent, but such reporting requirements are unlikely to account for their lackluster investment record. US institutional investors may also face mandates
7
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

and other constraints that could lower their performance (e.g., Beber, Brandt, Cen, and Kavajecz, 2021), but it seems unlikely that this is why Finnish institutional investors significantly
outperform their US counterparts.
A pertinent question to ask is the nature of the precise informational mechanism that allows domestic investors to outperform foreigners. It is clearly not the presence of Bloomberg
terminals, analysts’ teams, and sell-side reports, as both Finnish and US institutional investors
possess these even though households do not. Moreover, US brokers advising US institutional
investors would have access to data from the Helsinki Stock Exchange as well as the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) on the trading of Finnish stocks, if not the much more granular ownership data on which our analysis is based. Finnish investors did not base their investments on
watching queues of people lined up every day outside, for example, Dunkin Donuts.
The important point here is that in the capital city, Helsinki, investors are much more informed than investors located elsewhere in Finland. This is not coincidental as nearly all the
major Finnish companies including Nokia are located here, along with all the major institutional investors. Most of Nokia’s thousands of employees are also located in Helsinki. What
information did then these employees pass on to their investing neighbors? They were far
from being insider traders, as their message was clear: At Nokia and other major businesses
it was business as usual irrespective of whether the stock price was rising 25 times or more,
or collapsing. Nothing was happening on the ground to justify the huge gyrations in the stock
price. Hence, the feedback from employees was: take a contrarian position because the price
movements on the NYSE are unrepresentative of fundamentals.
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) find that institutional investors who buy past winners and
sell losers can benefit over intervals of three to twelve months from such trend-following momentum. However, utilizing up to 40 years of data, Novy-Marx (2012) finds that stocks that
have fallen the most over the past six months but performed strongly over the first half of the
preceding year yield a far higher return than a momentum strategy. But why are foreign (US)
institutional investors trend-followers (i.e., momentum investors)? It is not because they are
unaware that it can cause sizable losses. For mutual and other open-ended funds, it is essentially a requirement. Return-chasing investors put money into mutual funds when returns go up
8
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

and withdraw when returns turn negative. Hence, mutual funds are forced to buy when prices
rise due to the cash injection and sell when they fall. This can lead to underperformance and
systematic losses. Typically, private equity prevents such systematic losses by imposing severe
controls on withdrawal.
2
A model of informed trading
The remarkable feature of the private signal revealed to locals that we derive and extract from
local trading data is that it represents a dynamic generalization of the partially revealing rational expectations (PRRE) models of Brennan and Cao (1996). The origins of these models can
be traced back to the classic article by Hayek (1945, p.521). Hayek conjectured that the market
mechanism is efficient.1 Hayek pointed out that every individual possesses unique knowledge,
“the knowledge of the particular circumstances of time and place”, and potentially such individuals can profit by trading on such information.2 Hellwig (1980) developed the standard
PRRE model in which prices are not fully revealing due to random supply shocks, and from
which Brennan and Cao (1996) provided their version of the model.
From the Internet Appendix, we have the informed investor’s derived demand function as
a downward sloping function of the contemporaneous stock price pt and depends positively on
the lagged stock price pt−1:
˜st = ρr (1 −λ) ˜α0 −pt (1 −(1 −λ) α) + λpt−1
 + λ˜st−1,
(1)
where ˜st is her signed investment demand (order flow), ˜st−1 is her signed lagged order flow, ρ,
her risk tolerance, i.e., inverse of her CARA constant absolute risk aversion coefficient, r, is the
precision (i.e., inverse of the variance) of her normally distributed informed investor signal, and
information from past order flow and price movements decays in period t −1 at the geometric
rate 0 ≤1 −λ ≤1. The more extreme the autocorrelation coefficient with λ approaching 1
1See the survey by Allen and Jordan (1998).
2Hayek (1945, p.521) stated: “Practically every individual has some advantage over all others in that he possesses
unique information of which beneficial use might be made, but of which use can be made only if the decisions
depending on it are left to him or are made with his active cooperation.”
9
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

(that is, perfect survival of past information), the greater the counterpart trend following, and
the greater the departure from an efficient market.
3
Data
3.1
Source of trader-level transactions
Our data source is the well-established database from Euroclear Finland Ltd (formerly Finnish
Central Securities Depository) that includes all transactions in the share depository for all 1.448
million investor accounts (classified into 1,360,349 households, 1,178 institutions, 150 foreign
investor nominee accounts, and 86,814 others) with holdings in 277 unique common stock
listed on the Nasdaq OMX Helsinki Exchange, Finland. The entire data set is adjusted for
stock splits and the switch from the local Finnish currency, Markka, to Euros. Not only is
this data an official legal record of every trade and trader, but it aggregates all trades by one
individual across all brokerages for the life of the participant while providing an enormous
amount of detail concerning each trader.
In this paper, we focus on the three main groups of investors: households, domestic institutional investors, and foreign investor nominee accounts, including all transactions for these
accounts in Nokia and 32 other major Finnish stocks, as of January 1, 1995, carrying the analysis through December 31, 2017, a period of 23 years, inclusive. The length and comprehensive
nature of our data set far exceed any comparable data set.3
We selected 33 leading Finnish firms based on three criteria. The first criterion is that the
firms be leading firms from the sample of approximately 100 firms that survive and have an
average market capitalization larger than EUR 100 million, sorted by average traded value per
day during the entire sample period. The second criterion is that the firms be ranked in the top
50 for the proportion made up of the trades of foreign nominees and their value traded. The
3For example, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000, 2001) analyze two and three years, respectively, of this data. Barber
and Odean (2000)’s dataset of anonymous discount broker clients with anonymous counterparties is restricted to
less than 5% of our database and 26% of the years. Balasubramaniam, Campbell, Ramadorai, and Ranish (2023)
analyze the cross section of an Indian database of direct investors with 3,103 stocks and 9.7 million investors for
August 2011. The average portfolio value is $11,540 with 8.45 stocks. Unlike ours, it makes up only a small part
of what is a huge market.
10
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

third criterion is that the number of trading days for the stock should be at least 250 trading
days. We combine these three ranking filters with a limit of 33 firms.
Our method implies a ‘look ahead’ bias in the choice of the 33 stocks to analyze, but
this counts against our findings in that our stock sample is precisely chosen because foreign
institutional investors chose to trade these relatively large stocks due to a self-selection process
in which this investor class chose stocks for which they expected outperformance. To eliminate
any possibility of sample selection bias, in Table A.6 in the Internet Appendix we examine
the trading performance results for the entire set of 232 Finnish stocks for Finnish locals with
foreign nominee institutional investors, 1995 to 2011, without introducing any specific sample
selection criteria4. There is a small deterioration in the trading performance of local versus US
institutional traders consistent with the much lower participation of US institutions in small
Finnish stocks. Without much uninformed US participation, and thus less mispricing due to
trend following, it is harder for locals to profit.
By the nature of our paired informed and uninformed counterparties, a sizable level of participation by foreign institutional investors is required in the stocks that we investigate so as
to avoid any bias in favor of Finnish households in our paired trading group framework. Of
course, without adequate foreign participation, there can be no assessment of relative trading
prowess. Hence, we must largely consider the data sample that captures sizable matched trades
between each paired group. Otherwise, our findings may be biased toward the investor category
that has undertaken less trading activity. Moreover, the matched trading group will eventually
end up with many zero-balance trades and perhaps too few paired trades to draw strong statically significant conclusions if the sample is too unbalanced. We argue that the selected sample
minimizes bias towards any of the investigated investor categories.
4We thank Ron Kaniel for suggesting to test the entire 232 Finnish stocks to eliminate concerns over the sample
selection bias.
11
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

3.2
Data steps
From our data set, we compute the daily buys and sells carried out by each individual household
and and foreign nominee5 investors, in every market that conducts trades in Finnish stocks over
the 23 years of our daily data. By eliminating daily-basis trades between households, between
domestic financial institutions, and between foreign nominees, we are left with the daily net
buys and sells of the three groups, (i) households and foreign nominees; (ii) households and
domestic institutions, and (iii) domestic institutions and foreign nominees. In doing so, we
deliberately exclude indirect third-party trades between any two groups. For example, ‘Government’ is an excluded group, but households and foreigners could indirectly trade via such a
third-party. This means that our observations are not contaminated by the trading skills of the
third party. Moreover, long and variable holding periods by these third parties cannot corrupt
our trade pricing data or distort our inferences with respect to trading ability.
Since domestic households and institutions are both local, we hypothesize that they are
informatively very evenly matched. We find that both institutional and household investors
massively outperform foreign investors. If only one category, but not both, outperformed foreign, it would no longer be the case that local outperforms foreign.
Although many trades between these three groups can be matched at the level of individual
trades, this is not possible for all trades. However, since we have the entire population of trades
from households, domestic institutions, and foreign nominees’ institutional investors that include off-market trades, we solve the unique allocation of trades that equates to daily buys and
sells between each of the three groups. For example, if the net holdings of foreign institutions
in (say) Nokia increase by x shares on day t, while the holdings of domestic institutions decreased by y shares and households by z shares, with a constant total stock of Nokia shares
held collectively by these three shareholder categories, then foreigners purchased y shares from
domestic institutions and z shares from households, totaling x shares. Since the holdings of
both classes of domestic investors diminished on this occasion, neither was a net buyer from
the other.
The official daily investor records on which we rely do not specify individual or group
5The official name of all non-Finnish institutional investors.
12
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

holdings on the opening day of these records in January 1995. Hence, we infer these initial
holdings of our three groups by backward induction using the requirement that the holdings
of households and domestic mutual funds can never be negative over the entire period of our
daily database (neither group can have a short position in the shareholder registry). To make
inferences for the January 1995 opening, we used the daily sequences of matched buys and
sells inclusive of off-market trades for each participant group and the marking-to-market of
each investor group’s entire portfolio on the last day of the dataset. (Naturally, investors can
take short positions, but then these are covered through share lending typically facilitated by
the broker.)
In our validation of the results, we estimate factor model-adjusted abnormal returns for the
investor category-level portfolios, using alternatively six US factors and four Finnish factors.
The data for the US factor models are sourced from Wharton Research Data Service (WRDS)
reported Kenneth French, Dartmouth College Data. The data for Finnish factor models are
sourced from Nasdaq Nordic and Bank of Finland for Finnish stock and index return data and
risk-free rates, and AQR Capital Management for the remaining Finnish stock factors.
3.3
Data summary
Table 1 summarizes our basic data for households, domestic institutions, and foreign institutions over the 23 years of our study. For our sample of the 33 most active stocks, there are
160,589 household accounts, holding a total market capitalization of EUR 4.1 billion and an
average household portfolio size of EUR 21,468. The corresponding total holdings and mean
portfolio size are EUR 2.4 billion and EUR 8.5 million for domestic institutions, and EUR
67.7 billion and EUR 4.7 million for foreign nominee accounts. Hence, foreign and largely US
institutional investors dominate the Finnish market. Columns 2, 7, and 12 of Table 1 report the
year-by-year changes in total holdings for the three investor categories. It is evident that there is
a difference between households and local institutional investors, on the one hand, and foreign
institutional investors, on the other, and these changes often take opposite signs, indicating that
locals and foreigners are commonly on opposite sides of the trade.
13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Based on US discount brokerage data, Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2000) claim
that households turnover their portfolios too rapidly and that this activity is negatively associated with calendar-time returns. We compute average stock turnover rates for our three trading
groups to find that foreign nominees, the least informed group, have by far the highest turnover
rate of 0.08688 per annum (just over one month) and, as predicted by Brennan and Cao (1997),
followed by domestic Finnish institutions with 0.7805 pa. (9.4 months) and finally Finnish
households, with by far the lowest turnover rate of 1.7379 per annum (nearly 21 months).
Other traders, such as corporations and the ‘Government’, have a rate of 1.1176 per annum
(13.4 months). Hence, not only do Finnish households have very low turnover rates compared
with their US counterparts, they also generate far higher returns, as indicated below. Negative
calendar-time returns imply positive accounting returns and wealth gains for these household
participants.
During the full period of the data, the total value of household accounts has grown approximately 20 times, with a commencement value of around EUR 0.3 billion and an ending
value of EUR 6.1 billion. However, at the height of the Nokia bubble period in the year 2000,
this value temporarily rose to EUR 12 billion. Over the same period, the market capitalization held by domestic institutions has doubled and for foreign institutions has increased by 16
times. These increases are partly a result of greater share market participation by households
and a globalization of the shareholder base for Finnish firms with the cross-listing of Nokia and
other Finnish stocks in US markets, leading to greater holdings in nominee accounts. For all
categories of investors, the much higher mean than median portfolio size shows that the distribution of shareholder wealth is skewed to a smaller number of very large portfolios, which
corresponds to what is reported in the literature investigating other equity markets. For by far
the largest Finnish stock, Nokia, at its peak in 2000, Nokia’s Annual Report reveals that foreigners owned a huge 89.47 percent of the stock, with Finnish households owning 4.03 percent
and Finnish institutional investors, 2.35 percent. The ownership was highly concentrated, with
just 21 shareholders, who were largely foreign, owning a massive 92.75 percent. Since concentrated foreign ownership entirely dominated very large Finnish stocks, one would imagine,
along with Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2009), that these largely distant owners would
14
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

have a strong incentive to be better informed than Finns, who were effectively a tiny minority.
Such is the power of locality that the precise opposite was the case.
Barrot, Kaniel, and Sraer (2016) report that 49 percent of individuals in their sample based
on a French discount broker make at least one trade a year, while Kumar and Lee (2006) report
45 percent for a major US discount broker. Analyzing the household holdings more thoroughly,
see Appendix Table A.1, we find that apart from an average of 16,822 ‘active’ households (that
transact at least 100 times during the period), many households adopt a ‘buy and hold’ strategy that does not involve much trading. Continuing our scrutiny of households, we find that
over the period the mean number of stocks per household account has risen from only 1.9 to
a maximum of 3.3 in 2010, with the median value remaining at one stock for most of the period, while recently increasing to a modest two stocks per household account. Ivkovic, Sialm,
and Weisbenner (2008) show that concentrated household portfolios outperform more diversified portfolios, consistent with less diversified households possessing more information about
stocks in their portfolio (and being rewarded for their higher risk exposure). Samuel Clemens
(Mark Twain) (1894) described the benefits of concentration in a very apt way.6 Finally, and
perhaps surprisingly, on average, female-headed accounts make up a sizable 31.4 percent of
the total. Institutions hold significantly more stocks in their portfolios, typically between 20-50
different companies.
[Insert Table 1 about here]
We hypothesize that collectively Finnish households and domestic institutional investors
share a sizable local knowledge superiority relative to foreign institutional investors, despite
the dominant magnitude of foreign holdings. If so, both households and domestic institutions
should trade extensively with foreigners, but not much with each other. Table 2 summarizes
our three samples of household portfolio trades, 1995-2017, and the overall traded value of
our three investor groups, households, domestic, and foreign institutions. It strongly supports
our hypothesis, as the mean number of trades between households and foreign institutions
is 38,962 and between domestic and foreign institutions is 45,161, but only 5,652 between
6Behold, the fool saith, “Put not all thine eggs in the one basket” - which is but a manner of saying, “Scatter your
money and your attention”; but the wise man saith, “Put all your eggs in one basket and - watch that basket.”
15
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

households and domestic institutions. Unsurprisingly, the bulk of the average annual traded
value is between domestic and foreign institutions totaling EUR 196 million, as the average
trade size is much higher. These findings, namely, that domestic investors trade predominantly
with foreign counterparts (domestic typically being on the opposite side of trades to foreigners),
strongly support the idea that differential information forms the basis for trade participation,
not liquidity provision, risk sharing, or other motivations. Where there is little differential
information, as in trades between domestic households and institutions, the trade volume is
comparatively small.
[Insert Table 2 about here]
The average trading volume of Nokia over the entire 23-year period (1995-2017) represents
more than 50 percent of the average daily trading volume supplied by the 33 large Finnish
stocks. In terms of the average daily market trading value and average market capitalization,
Nokia alone makes up a similar percentage rate of approximately 50 percent among the 33
stocks and 40 percent of the 126 major Finnish stocks.
4
Testing the inferred signal of informed trading
We now turn to the empirical estimation of the informed investor signal, Equation (1), using
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) with a lagged dependent variable. Durbin h-test values are
used to check for autocorrelation. Since we aggregate all trades of domestic investors, that
is, informed households or informed domestic institutions, the weight on the price difference
made up of the product of risk tolerance and the precision of the squared informed signal, ρr,
in Equation (1) is denoted as the impact coefficient β.
Table 3 presents summaries of daily trading strategies for each trader group for the period
January 1995 - December 2017. Contrarian strategies dominate household trade with domestic and foreign institutions, with these strategies accounting for 36.36 - 44.94 percent (21.57 -
25.50 percent) of trades for households (domestic institutions), when trading with foreign investors. Household trading is far more contrarian in nature than institutional trading. Column
16
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

(1) summarizes the 5,200 daily household trades in Nokia with foreign institutional investors
over the entire period. Of these buys and sells, 44.9 percent are in the opposite direction to the
contemporaneous price movement, 14.7 percent are in the same direction, and on 40.4 percent
of days there was no trade. As expected, the contrarian trades between more equally informed
households and domestic institutional investors are much lower at 7.31-9.88 percent. There
should not only be very little trade between nearly equally informed participants, but when it
does occur very little should be contrarian in nature. In unreported results, we also break up
the proportions of contrarian and positive feedback trading into three periods, January 1995December 2001, January 2002-December 2011, and January 2012-December 2017, to indicate
very little variation between the periods.
[Insert Table 3 about here]
The main results of the estimates for the informed investor signal are presented in Table
4. Clustered by Stock ID Standard Errors are used in both panels and in Panel B, stock fixed
effects, to better control for potential heteroskedasticity due to variations in stock size. The
coefficients themselves altered only imperceptibly with the introduction of stock fixed effects.
Panel A presents the results for Nokia and Panel B for the 33 stocks that include Nokia and
the 32 stocks that exclude Nokia. Three sets of results are reported: households versus foreign institutional investors; households versus domestic institutional investors; and domestic
institutional investors versus foreign. In all three contests, weekly analysis of trades is shown.
This weekly analysis indicates better explanatory power than the unreported daily analysis, as
these aggregated trades capture more of the interaction between the participants due to fewer
non-trading outcomes.
The estimation results are striking with virtually all coefficients of expected sign and significant at the 1% level, with only a few intercept terms α0 indistinguishable from zero. The
R-Square explanatory power is 19.45% for the weekly trades in Nokia between Domestic Institutional Investors (DI) and Foreign Nominees (FN). By far the most important finding is the
estimated value for the survival rate of (past) information, λ, especially in column (6) trades
between domestic and foreign institutions with a λ value of 0.38. With an estimated coeffi17
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

cient value of α of 0.9133, the calculated coefficient for the contemporaneous stock price is
−(1 −(1 −λ) ∗α) of -0.9208, which is substantially negative and is much higher absolutely
than the coefficient on the lagged price of λ of 0.381. Naturally, the smallest values for the
highly statistically significant informational survival rates are for contests between households
and domestic institutional traders with a value of only 14 percent. Since both groups enjoy a
local informational advantage, local institutions are less inclined to rely on momentum in this
contest.
In all three contests, the informed trader responds exceedingly negatively at the 1% significance level to a higher closing price and exceedingly positively to the lagged closing price.
This is important as it indicates that stock trading and turnover depend largely on contemporaneous and lagged price movements, together with the informational survival rate λ, rather than
calendar dates or the popular ‘calendar-time’ methodology. The implied ˜α0 private signal and
intercept of the investment demand schedule for households trading with foreigners is quite
small at 0.122 and highly statistically significant when trading in the top 32 stocks. But some
of the other intercepts do not differ from zero. This indicates that the private information signal
reflected in the stock price intercept does not appear to be the main driver of informed local
trading. Clearly, the informational advantage comes from local investors who exploit momentum trading by foreign institutions. The high degrees of autocorrelation (λ) in trading volume
represents one of its main drivers.
The Nokia β investment sensitivity coefficients in Panel A for weekly trades between all
households and foreign investors appear high at 1,081,679 but column (1) of Table A.1 in
the Appendix shows the mean number of active household participants at 16,822. Hence, the
coefficient per active investor is a β coefficient of 64.3. The mean daily standard deviation of
the returns is 0.01636. This implies an annual average variance of 0.0674 with an estimated
CARA coefficient of 0.2307 and a risk tolerance coefficient of ρ of 4.335. Simulations carried
out by Babcock, Choi, and Feinerman (1993) indicate that this is quite a high estimate, unless
the bet size is relatively low. The fairly small portfolio values for Finnish households indicate
low bet sizes.
The weekly horizon regression results for all 33 major Finnish stocks are presented in
18
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

columns (1), columns (3), and columns (5) of Table 4 and exclude Nokia, in columns (2),
(4), and (6), but the results are more modest compared to Nokia alone. For example, the estimated lambda value for domestic institutions trading with foreign nominees is only about half
the magnitude of Nokia alone at 17 percent and the explanatory power is far lower. This is
probably because we do not see the vastly dominant role of foreign nominees in these smaller
stocks together with the same sizable swings in valuation as with Nokia. In other words, the
informational home advantage is not as great, as foreigners did not invest as much and distort
asset values by as much.
The negative sensitivity of investment to the contemporaneous price is also lower. For
example, if we take weekly trades between domestic and foreign institutions in the entire 33
stocks, the estimated λ coefficient is 0.2980 and the α coefficient is 0.9678. Hence, the slope of
the contemporaneous price schedule is −(1 −(1 −λ) ∗α) is -0.3206. This coefficient is almost
equal in absolute value to the λ coefficient on lagged price. Thus, in this instance, Finnish stock
investments are driven by price falls and divestments by price increases. The significant value of
autocorrelation, i.e., λ, coefficient value on the lagged investment level indicates considerable
persistence in purchases or sales, depending on changes in the price level.
Based on a purely ‘efficient markets’ benchmark, the informed trader’s survival rate of information in the stock price should be zero percent, not the estimated 22 to 38 percent value
of λ per week that we find if we exclude the contest between households and domestic institutional investors. Hence, the profitable trader groups we analyze act as if they receive a signal
based on information extracted from the contemporary and previous period’s stock price, and
the previous period’s order flow (trade direction and magnitude), in order to formulate their
investment strategy, which we show to be ‘contrarian’ in nature with the purchase of ‘losers’
and the sale of ‘winners’. Thus, we have demonstrated that changes in both past prices and
order-flow contain sufficient information on which to base a successful trading strategy. This
is especially so for households located close to Nokia headquarters, as in unreported results,
they seem to receive the best signal of future shareholder value. Households located in Helsinki
outperform investors located in the countryside, but investors located in the country still outperform foreign investors. Having neighbors working at Nokia is presumably one of the reasons
19
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

for the out-performance of Helsinki investors.
[Insert Table 4 about here]
Our investment specification extracted from the trades of local investors with their counterparties, as reflected in Equation (1), works exceedingly well in explaining our 23-years of
trading data with a very high degree of explanatory power. Our estimated coefficients shown
in Table 4 differ markedly from Brennan and Cao’s (1996) PRRE that we derived in Equation (A8) in the Internet Appendix as a limiting case of our model when λ →1. Hence, we
would expect our data to reject the PRRE model. When we tested this by regressing the first
difference in trade magnitude on the first difference in price, i.e., estimating Equation (A8) in
the Internet Appendix in place of Equation (1), as expected, we found a significantly positive
intercept because purchases exceed sales and a significantly negative slope for the change in
price as buyers respond to price falls. But all the R-Square significance terms were either zero
or indistinguishable from zero. Hence, we can safely reject the rational expectations limiting
value specification of our model.
5
Evaluating Relative Trader Performance
So far we have established that apparently informed domestic traders, be they households or
institutional investors, trading with trend-following foreigners can extract a signal from past
trades and price changes which seems to explain their trading behavior. But how should we
compare the trading performance of our three sets of paired counterparties? We point to considerable bias in the conventional approach and revive a neglected approach that is bias-free.
This bias explains virtually all of the findings that claim that household investors are uninformed and suffer from the disposition effect.
5.1
Calendar-Time Portfolio (C-T) Methodology
A popular variant of the approach applied to groups of traders consists of two steps: In Step 1
an aggregate portfolio of buy trades for the group is constructed on (say) a daily basis and then
20
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

the return or the excess return is computed over a given horizon such as one day, one week, or
a year. Similarly, a portfolio of sell trades by the same group is constructed with the difference
in return or excess return between the buy and sell portfolios over the same given horizon that
is recorded. The calendar-time methodology assumes that a trading group has value-relevant
information if the stocks they buy outperform the stocks they sell. Trading prowess is greater
the more positive the net difference in return. The method is then reapplied from scratch for
the next day, week, or a year, depending on the assumed horizon. These aggregate periodby-period portfolio return differences are then regressed on a set of market factors with the
intercept interpreted as the performance Alpha.
One could adopt a pooled cross-sectional-time series approach even with thousands of participants, but as Seasholes and Zhu (2010) point out, cross-sectional correlation of stock returns
might bias the statistical significance of agent-type returns. Hence, they recommend aggregating all the trades of each agent type.
To construct the C-T buy portfolio and explain in more detail how this approach imposes
an implicit trade reversal at the specified calendar horizon length, N, we denote the net buy-sell
number of shares bought and sold in stock i by the two types of trader on date t as xA
i,t ≡−xB
i,t
for the two types of trader. For a horizon of N periods, the buy-and-hold return that begins
in period t consists of the product of the buy-and-hold return times the purchase price. It is
indicated by rN
i,tpi,t−1, where rN
i,t = (pi,t + Di,t −pi,t−N)/pi,t−N is the ‘buy and hold’ return over
this period. The cumulative buy-and-hold return over the horizon N commencing at time t for
agent type A is identical to minus the same return for the counterpart, agent type B:
CRA
t+N =
Xn
i=1
Xj=t+N
j=t
xA
i,jrN
i,jpi,j ≡−
Xn
i=1
Xj=t+N
j=t
xB
i, jrN
i,jpi,j−1 = −CRB
t+N.
(2)
At time t + N, by the implicit assumption underlying the C-T approach, all trades undertaken
N periods earlier at time t are deleted (i.e., expunged from the investor’s portfolio) at the end
of the horizon. Hence:
xA
i,t ≡−xA
i,t+N and −xB
i,t ≡xB
i,t+N,
(3)
21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

over the next horizon, and are then deleted again to yield a stable time series of purchases
and removals based on the calendar with the entire portfolio of purchased shares turning over
every N period. Thus, portfolio performance within any given interval, N, is entirely dependent
on purchases made during that interval since earlier holdings that the trader-type retains have
been counterfactually removed. Hence, an entirely defective methodology makes calendar-time
profitability extremely sensitive to the arbitrarily assumed investment horizon. The informed
trader’s purchases undertaken when the stock price is trending down will generally be expunged
from the recorded trading portfolio before the gains that the trader makes when the trend is
subsequently reversed. Hence, they are not recorded in the relevant record.
5.2
Holding Period Invariant Methodology
We proceed as follows: Since trading skill is most meaningful in comparison between two
agent types in the same market over identical periods, mark the portfolio value of both agents
to market on the initial day with sufficient holdings to ensure only nonnegative holdings in
future.7 Initially include only net buys or sells between the two agent types, since this is the
most relevant comparison. As indicated above, trades made indirectly via third parties without
the two agent types trading directly with one another may simply imply some commonality in
belief (and trading direction) that is irrelevant to the initial comparison.
We adopt Hasbrouck and Sofianos’s (1993, p.1577) definition of the mark-to-market profit
for a trader as the accrued but unrealized price appreciation (capital gain/loss) of a stock in
a given interval, here a day, times the initial share inventory of that stock held by that trader
at the beginning of the day. We then accumulate these unrealized inventory-weighted capital
gains/losses.8 Suppose the signed net purchases (trades) of agent type A with type B that trades
stock of the n stocks that are traded in common on date t, j ∈(1, ..., t), are denoted by xA
i,j, and
for type B, xB
i,j = −xA
i,j, as the sum of the signed order flows must be zero. The cumulative
net buys of an individual stock by the type-A agent in the trade portfolio until the close of
7There is no need to consider short-sales as these are handled by brokers and do not appear in the official trading
record.
8While Hau (2001) provides an excellent application of this methodology, the number of applications seems small
relative to the entirely flawed calendar-time methodology.
22
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

business on the previous evening is denoted XA
i,t−1 = Pj=t−1
j=1
xA
i,j and constitutes type-A agent’s
pre-existing trade portfolio, i.e., inventory.
For simplicity, we focus on only the current period’s arithmetic return (that is, as given by
ri,t = (pi,t + Di,t −pi,t−1)/pi,t−1, where Di,t represents the dividend). Henceforth, prices reflect
reinvested dividends. We ignore transaction costs and other frictions for now.9 The total dollar
(Euro) profit/loss, PA
t , recorded for agent type-A for all stocks in the agent-type trade portfolio
on date t is simply the sum of the unrealized inventory-weighted capital gains, as in Hasbrouck
and Sofianos (1993):
PA
t =
Xn
i=1 ri,tpi,t−1XA
i,t−1
(4)
so that the entire opening (preexisting) trade portfolio of each agent type is marked to market
according to the closing price at the end of each period (e.g., day). In essence, this methodology
simply takes snapshots of the value of each investor type’s trade portfolio at (say) daily intervals
but does not counterfactually assume regular realizations. In the absence of transaction costs,
trading is a zero-sum game. Hence, every dollar of profit made by one party in a transaction
is the loss made by the counterpart. Therefore, the cumulative trade dollar profit of one agent
type, which we dub the holding-period invariant (HPI) amount, is identical to that of the other
after taking account of the sign difference:
HPIA
t ≡CPA
t =
Xn
i=1
Xj=t
j=2 ri,jpi,j−1XA
i,j−1 ≡−CPB
t ≡−HPIB
t = −
Xn
i=1
Xj=t
j=2 ri,jpi,j−1XB
i,j−1.
(5)
This mark-to-market, that is, HPI, return is simply the sum of the investor’s accrued but unrealized portfolio gains/losses.
5.3
First-In, First-Out (FIFO) realized accounting returns
By definition, portfolio sales result in realized portfolio gains/losses, which are equivalent to
the accrued but unrealized gains/losses. That is, the sum of accrued but unrealized gains is
definitionally equal to the sum of the investor’s realized (accounting) returns from purchases
9While not of concern for this paper, households trading options in the US do incur substantial transaction costs.
See Bryzgalova, Pavlova, and Sikorskaya (2023) and Ernst and Spatt (2022).
23
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

and sales based on the first-in, first-out (FIFO) inventory approach. The investor’s net dollar
value of sales in stock i with m transactions in the period, at date j, for example, day j, is
ZA
i,j =
mP
k=1 pi,j,kxA
i,j,k. A sale is assigned a positive sign and a purchase a negative sign. The
identical FIFO realized return to the accrued HPI return is:
FIFOA
t =
n
X
i=1

t−1
X
j=1
ZA
i,j + pi,tXA
i,t
≡−FIFOB
t = −
n
X
i=1

t−1
X
j=1
ZB
i,j + pi,tXB
i,t
,
(6)
where pi,tXA
i,t is the mark-to-market value of the investor type A’s inventory of unsold securities
of type i in the terminal period t.
Note that time lapse according to the calendar plays no role in either of the two equivalent
approaches–unrealized or realized gains. Our daily HPI returns are inputs into the CAPM
with Fama French factors and for our internal rate of return (IRR) calculations reported in the
Internet Appendix.
5.4
A simple analytical proof that the two measures are identical
Consider a Type A investor who purchases xA
0 shares from a Type B investor at a price p0 at
time 0. At the end of the period 1 a proportion 1 > y > 0 of these shares is sold back to the
Type B investor at the price p1. In the final period 2, the residual shareholding (1 −y) is sold
to the Type B investor at the price p2. All prices are inclusive of dividends and, for simplicity,
there are no transaction costs. The FIFO profit/loss of the Type A investor is identical to minus
the FIFO profit/loss of the Type B investor:
FIFOA = xA
0
−p0 + yp1 + (1 −y) p2
 = xA
0
−y (p2 −p1) + p2 −p0
 ≡−FIFOB.
(7)
The HPI profit/loss of the type A investor is also identical to his FIFO profit/loss and identical
to minus the type B investor HPI and FIFO profit/loss:
HPIA = xA
0
p0 (p1 −p0)/p0 + (1 −y) p1 (p2 −p1)/p1
 = xA
0
−y (p2 −p1) + p2 −p0
 ≡−HPIB.
(8)
24
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

5.5
Numerical simulation of the three profit methodologies
Unfortunately, for some, the mathematical derivation of the precise relationship between the
C-T, HPI, and FIFO methodologies may seem daunting. To help in understanding the three
profit methodologies C-T, HPI, and FIFO, it is beneficial to provide simple and understandable
numerical simulation analyzes presented in Table 5, which has seven periods in total. Suppose
that Agent A is an uninformed momentum trader and his counterpart, Agent B, is an informed
contrarian trader. Although not shown in the table due to space limitations, at the end of the
initial period 1, Agent A owns 100 shares purchased at $1 each and has $900 in cash, which is
the total wealth of $1,000 shown in Column A6 of Table 5, while Agent B has 300 shares and
$100 in cash, with a total wealth of $400 shown in Column B6. Also not shown in the table,
the stock price of $1 in Period 1 increases in each period by one dollar to reach a peak of $4
in Period 4. In the remaining three periods, it decreases by $1 in each period to reach its initial
value and its floor of $1 in Period 7.
In each of the periods 2 to 4, Agent A buys 100 shares from B, and in each of the periods 5
to 7, Agent A sells 100 shares to B. The dollar portfolio values of the two agents at the end of
each of the seven periods are shown in Columns A1 and B1, respectively. Agent A finishes at
the end of Period 7 with 100 shares valued at $100 and $600 in cash making a total wealth of
$700, while Agent B ends with 300 shares worth a total of $300 and $400 in cash, also making
a total wealth of $700. The wealth of the momentum trader, Agent A, decreases by $300, from
the wealth made up of shares and cash at the end of Period 1 of $1,000, to $700 at the end of
Period 7, while the wealth of the contrarian trader, Agent B, increases by $300 from $400 to
$700.
Based on the indicated price changes but not shown in the table, the two-period buy and
hold return in Period 2 is 1, in 3, 0.5, in 4, 0.33, 5, -0.25, 6, -0.33, and in 7, -0.5. The ‘calendartime’ ‘Buy’ Portfolio return of trader A, which, by definition, excludes the information from
the older trades, is made up of a $100 gain on the initial purchase of shares worth $100, as
shown in Column A2, as the value has increased to $200 according to the two-period return,
and identical returns of $100 each in Periods 2 and 3. However, the price drop following the
25
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

purchase of 100 shares in Period 4 at a cost of $400 generates a C-T loss of $100. The sale of
100 shares in Periods 5 and 6 yields losses to the sale portfolio of $100 in each period, shown
in Column A3. Hence, the net gain of $200 in the ‘Buy’ portfolio is matched by a loss of $200
in the ‘Sell’ portfolio with an overall net gain, according to the C-T methodology, of $400 to
the momentum trader, as shown in the second-last row of the table.
By contrast, the same analysis indicates that the counterpart contrarian trader B makes a
negative return of -$200 on buys and a gain of $200 on sells, as shown in Columns B2 and
B3, with an overall C-T loss of $400, which is identical to the gain made by A with the sign
reversed. As predicted and not surprisingly, the severely flawed C-T methodology generates
sizable phantom profits of $400 for the momentum trader A and comparable phantom losses of
$400 for the contrarian trader B, despite the significant wealth loss suffered by the momentum
investor A of $300 and comparable wealth gain of the informed contrarian investor B by $300,
as shown in Column B6.
Our Holding Period Invariant (HPI) methodology reveals what is actually going on: Column
A1 of Table 5 shows that the portfolio value of Agent A’s shares rises from $100 in Period 1, to
$200 in Period 2, to a peak of $1,600 in Period 4. Then it drops to $900 in Period 5, $400 in 6
and back to $100 in 7. The mark-to-market unrealized capital gains shown in Column A4 are,
respectively, $100 in period 1, $200 in Period 2, $300 in Period 3, - $400 in Period 4, -$300
in 5 and - $200 in 6, with a total loss of $300, corresponding precisely to A’s wealth loss. A’s
counterpart, B, earns the corresponding HPI gain of $300 over the entire period.
Finally, Investor A’s FIFO realized overall accounting loss shown in Column A5 is -$300,
consisting of a gain of $200 in Period 5, since sales amount to $300 and with a FIFO inventory
cost of $100 incurred in period 1, a gain of zero in Period 6, since the sales revenue of $200 is
offset by the FIFO inventory cost of $200 from Period 2, and recognition of residual inventory
costs of $300 from Period 3 and $400 from Period 4, offset by $100 earning from the sale of
shares in Period 7 and the residual share value of $100, making a net inventory cost of -$500.
The FIFO counterpart gain for the contrarian investor B is $300. Hence, the HPI unrealized
gains and losses and the FIFO realized gains and losses are identical. Moreover, they correspond precisely to the respective wealth changes shown in Columns A6 and B6, respectively.
26
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

[Insert Table 5 about here]
5.6
What is the difference between ‘actual’ profits and ‘calendar-time’
profitability?
As indicated by the identity between the two analytical profit specifications, Equations (7) and
(8), accumulating each trader’s profit account over any interval provides an exact value of the
net trading gain to agent-Type A and exactly opposite gain/loss for agent-Type B. Moreover,
the sum of the trading profits over both parties is always zero, as it should be (with zero trading
costs). Unlike the C-T methodology, the profit or loss measured by HPI and the identical FIFO
method precisely captures the timing ability of each party to predict future price movements
without imposing arbitrary assumptions about endogenous trader horizons within either or both
groups. The identity of the HPI and FIFO methodologies provides a robust check on our results.
If they are not identical, there is an error. Fortunately, all our empirical findings meet the
identity test. In this framework, the profitable agent type with the greatest foresight is the
type that systematically buys (sells) to be eventually followed by a positive (negative) return at
which point the agent sells (buys). The agent could incur sizable but unrealized notional losses
prior to the completion of the profitable round-trip trade, as is the case with investors deemed
to suffer the ‘disposition effect’.
In their defense of either a one-day or relatively short-term horizon, Barber, Lee, Liu, and
Odean (2009, p.620) consider evaluating cumulative counterparty trading over longer intervals
than six months (without forced short-term trading intervals as their primary analytic method),
but reject it on the basis that there are well-known statistical problems associated with making
comparisons over longer periods. In the following, we propose and introduce a method for
overcoming these statistical problems by using Monte Carlo simulation with a benchmark based
on a random daily uninformed trading direction.
Adding additional stocks does not change the nature of the argument, with the C-T approach
promoting the idea that incorporating multiple stocks in a portfolio increases the robustness of
that methodology and therefore also the HPI and FIFO methodology. Adjusting for transaction
27
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

costs is largely unnecessary if both agent types incur the same costs, but the usual presumption
is that households incur higher transaction costs per trade than do either domestic or foreign
institutional investors. We add transaction costs to our findings in Tables 6 and A.3 and A.6 in
the Internet Appendix that are four times higher for households to show that it makes negligible
difference to our findings. Our empirical estimates of the CARA coefficient of absolute risk
aversion are reported above based on Equation (1) and estimates provided in Table 4.
What benchmark should one adopt to assess both the economic and statistical significance
of the trading ability of participants?
Grinblatt and Titman (1993) propose an innovative
method that bypasses the need for a conventional market benchmark, and hence much of the
controversy within the asset pricing literature. They compute the difference between the realized return on a particular portfolio and the expected return they would have achieved had the
portfolio manager been uninformed and thus acted randomly.
We utilize this insight and apply it to our problem by performing Monte Carlo simulations.
For any given sequence of daily trades over any given interval between two types of participant,
here collective households and foreign nominee institutional investors, we can only observe one
outcome corresponding to the realized wealth gain to one party and corresponding loss to the
other on the trade portfolio. Although ex post it is clear that one investor type achieved a better
outcome than the other, the favorable outcome may simply have been due to chance rather than
superior knowledge, information, and trading ability, no matter how great the wealth gained to
one party at the expense of the other. How can one tell?
Using 10,000 trials and the actual trades in each stock traded on every day, we randomly
select the trade direction of the two participants to calculate the randomized wealth gains and
corresponding losses that simulate informationless trading. By examining the proportion of
times that one category achieves the same or better outcome purely by chance, we attach statistical probabilities to each actual outcome based on this random benchmark.10
6
Comparative Performance Findings
10We thank Michael Brennan for suggesting this extension of Grinblatt and Titman’s (1993) insight.
28
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

6.1
The magnitude of the measurement error induced by calendar-time
Portfolios
When net buyer and net seller portfolios based on the flawed C-T methodology are formed
and investor horizons are imposed that are inconsistent with the trading data used to construct
the buyer and seller portfolios, this introduces measurement errors that can bias findings toward
one agent type. Certainly, as a minimum, both sizable and unnecessary measurement errors
are introduced. For example, with an imposed one-month horizon, the error in measuring
cumulative profit and loss for household trades with foreign nominee in the 33 stocks inclusive
of Nokia is minus EUR 33.8 million, with a six-month horizon, minus EUR 627.3 million, to
minus EUR 601.2 million with a one-year horizon (see Table 7 below with the HPI findings
compared to the C-T findings in Table 6. These errors are not only sizable, but unnecessary as
correct HPI or identical FIFO profits/losses can be calculated just as easily.
The standard justification for adopting a specific holding period, whether it be (say) one
day, one month, or six months, is that the individual trade data display some type of average
turnover rate. However, these individual trades include trades within each agent type, as well
as between agent types, and at the level of the aggregate type, there may be no meaningful
turnover rate of fixed duration. For example, during the 23-year period in Finland between
January 1995 and 2017, inclusive, households collectively largely sell the main stock, Nokia,
to foreign nominee institutional investors when the stock price is rising and buy when it is
falling, with these price movements most likely representing price pressure due to the order
imbalances of foreign nominee investors. These price movements do not occur based on any
mechanical pattern such as a horizon of a day, a month, or a year. Furthermore, the findings of
the current paper suggest that the pattern of trading carried out within households is based on
fundamental information on whether the stock is under or overpriced, as set out in Section 2
above, and, as such, is endogenous.
Due to Nordic countries such as Finland and Sweden reporting far much more disaggregated data on investors than available from other countries, there is extensive information on
household investor behavior which is unavailable from more opaque countries. Calvet, Camp29
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

bell, and Sodini (2007) observed mutual fund holdings in Sweden at the individual level, as
well as individual direct investment in shares, to report that many Swedish households are
well-diversified and achieve high Sharpe ratios.
The C-T portfolio profit and loss for horizons ranging from one month to one year is calculated using the buy and hold formula given by Equation (2) above and reported in Table
6.
[Insert Table 6 about here]
Figure 1 shows the errors introduced by the calendar-time methodology for the three different investment horizons, one month, six months, and one year for trades between households
and foreigners.
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
Figure 2 (a) graphs the daily net purchases of Nokia for households and foreign nominees
for our entire data period and Nokia’s share price. It shows foreigners’ purchases from households taking off when the stock price rises spectacularly with a leveling out when Nokia’s price
begins its collapse in the new millennium. Nokia experienced another boom in the lead-up to
the subprime crisis in 2007 with additional foreign purchases followed by a decade of sales
to households. Just as our model predicts, Figure 2 (b) shows that the cumulative profits of
foreigners almost precisely follow Nokia’s stock price over the 23-year period.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]
6.2
Relative trading performance in Nokia and with 33 major Finnish
stocks inclusive of Nokia and without Nokia
Once the net trade flows in Nokia between the various types of agent, household and foreign nominees, households and domestic institutions, and domestic and foreign institutions
have been calculated, the HPI and FIFO methodology set out in Equations (5) and (6) above
is applied to trades between households and foreign nominees, trades between households and
30
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

domestic institutional investors, and, finally, between domestic institutional investors and foreign nominees in Table 7. The two methods yield precisely identical profits as when unrealized
profits are placed on the market, unrealized profits are converted to identical realized profits. In Table 6 we analyze the trading performance for our three investor groups for Nokia
and our main sample of 33 (32) major Finnish stocks, including (and also excluding) Nokia.
When households trade with foreign nominee investors, they earn a sizable HPI/FIFO profit of
EUR 2,232.6 million, which is significant at the 1% level. Our 10,000 simulations show that
had households traded randomly, their mean profit was a loss of EUR 1.27 with a 95% confidence interval of EUR -7.47 million. to EUR 4.93 million. The sizable actual profit earned by
households far exceeds the random benchmark. Even more spectacularly, domestic institutions
trading with foreigners gain EUR 6,213.3 million. Households perform better than domestic
institutions in the 32-stock sample with a modest gain of EUR 846.5 million, but when Nokia
is included, the gain falls by EUR 45.1 million. Both households and domestic institutions
outperform foreign nominees with a profit of EUR 5,117.8 million and EUR 6,823 million,
respectively, in the 33 stocks. For households inclusive of Nokia, these profit rates range from
11 percent vs. domestic institutions to 12 percent vs. foreign nominees, and 9 percent and 1
percent, respectively, if Nokia is excluded.
In other words, domestic institutions perform well against foreign in Nokia but receive only
very modest gains in the 32 large stocks (but small relative to Nokia). Although the absolute
value of the losses sustained by distant and relatively uninformed traders is identically equal
to the gains made by informed local traders, this is no longer the case once transaction costs
are included. If transaction costs are the same for the two trader-types, then identical amounts
are subtracted from the positive returns made by one trader-type and negative returns made
by the other. This results in an absolute difference in profit between the two trader types, but
in Tables A.3 and A.6 in the Internet Appendix and utilizing reasonable assumptions, we find
these differences to be small in magnitude.
[Insert Table 7 about here]
Figure 3 extends the analysis of Figure 2 to the portfolio of 33 stocks. It shows the same
31
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

pattern of informed trades by households and the loss-making momentum trading by foreigners.
Once again, with the onset of the subprime crisis, foreign institutions switch from buying to
selling.
[Insert Figure 3 about here]
Figure 4 extends the analysis of Figure 3 to the portfolio of 33 stocks from households to
domestic institutions. It shows the same pattern of informed trades by domestic institutions
and the loss-making momentum trading by foreigners. Inclusive of Nokia, foreign institutions
lose EUR -18,803 million during the period, falling to only EUR -1,573 million if Nokia is
excluded. Once again, with the onset of the subprime crisis, foreign institutions switch from
buying to selling, but their losses continue to mount.
[Insert Figure 4 about here]
6.3
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) utilizing Fama French Factors
In Table 8 we regress daily holding period invariant returns on trades between investor categories, for each pair of the main investor categories, HH, FN, DI, and using alternatively six
US factors and four Finnish factors, following Fama and French (2018). Due to the zero-sum
nature of counterpart returns, the informed party earns a positive Jensen’s Alpha, and the counterpart a negative Jensen’s Alpha of the same absolute magnitude. The US factor model can be
seen as benchmarking the investor category returns to world-risk and stock-specific factors, and
the Finnish factor model to factors specific to Finland. These results confirm our results that
both households and domestic institutions perform better than foreign nominees, with positive
Alphas of 4.7% per annum adjusting for the US factors when trading Nokia and 4.6% Alphas
when adjusting for Finnish factors. For the portfolio of 32 large Finnish stocks (but considerably smaller than Nokia), the Jensen’s ‘calendar-time’ values are considerably lower, with
households receiving an Alpha of 1.9% using US factors (domestic institutions, 2%) and 1.7%
with Finnish factors (domestic institutions, 1.7%). Naturally, the foreign nominee counterpart
earns the same Alphas, but with negative signs. Hence, the Alpha superiority of the informed
32
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

party over the uninformed is precisely double the positive Alpha value. In addition, households
generate Alphas of 4.7% and 4.6%, with domestic institutions, respectively, earning negative
Alphas of the same absolute magnitude in this analysis. In Table A.5 in the Internet Appendix
the same analysis is repeated but giving each stock in the portfolio an equal weight. In terms
of statistical significance, the equal-weighted results are much stronger with Jensen’s Alphas,
which are significant at the 1% level.
[Insert Table 8 about here]
7
Conclusions
In this paper, we revisit the long-standing ‘home bias’ puzzle: the empirical tendency of
investors to disproportionately favor domestic equities, arguing that the prevailing explanations
fail to account for evidence of informed trading by local investors. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the often cited underperformance of local ‘buy’ portfolios relative to ‘sell’ portfolios
in short-term calendar-time intervals is consistent with and generally implies informed and
highly profitable trading behavior, not investor irrationality. We showed that a whole new and
irrational concept of ‘profit’, based on, of all unlikely things, the calendar, has dominated academic financial analysis in recent decades. Its irrationality arises because it adopts a fixed
calendar horizon, such as a day or a year, which means ignoring prior purchases such that what
appear to be profits turn out to be losses when the disregarded purchases are sold.
Importantly, we derived for the first time and presented a new accounting identity that
demonstrates the equivalence between unrealized and realized capital gains under the FIFO
accounting rules, thus establishing a new fundamental identity to dramatically improve accounting practice and reinforcing the internal consistency of our profit analysis.
Utilizing simple numerical simulations, the Calendar-Time methodology is demonstrated to
yield substantial momentum trader profits, despite the trader suffering sizable loss of wealth. As
a valid alternative to the discredited Calendar-Time methodology, we introduced a methodology
known as HPI that captures the trader’s unrealized capital gains. This methodology ensures
33
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

invariance to the investor’s holding period horizon and agrees precisely with the trader’s FIFO
accounting earnings and the trader’s change in wealth.
Using a capital asset pricing model (CAPM) augmented with Fama-French factors, we find
that Finnish domestic investors, both households and institutions, earn significantly positive
Jensen’s alphas, while foreign investors earn equally negative alphas, particularly in their trades
with Nokia, Finland’s most traded stock internationally.
We highlight the role of Nokia’s extreme price volatility, driven by trading frenzies from
foreign (mainly US) investors and the ability of local investors to profit by trading against this
volatility. Local investors achieved exceptionally high internal rates of return (IRRs), 43.52
percent per year for households and 51.22 for domestic institutions in Nokia, in contrast to
much lower returns in other internationally traded Finnish stocks. For foreign investors, the
corresponding IRRs are the same, but with the sign reversed. We also criticized Nokia’s real
investment strategy, which reflected market sentiment rather than fundamentals, strengthening
sizable price swings.
We also provide several new insights: First, informational asymmetries are relational, not
absolute. Locals may outperform not because they know a lot, but because their counterparts
know little or follow flawed signals. Alternatively, US funds receive cash when prices rise
and are denuded of cash when prices fall. These injections and withdrawals result in very destructive and destabilizing trend-following. Second, local concentration can outperform diversification, especially in markets dominated by uninformed or trend-following capital. Finally,
households are not inherently subpar investors; rather, their performance depends on context,
counterparty behavior, and, critically, on the choice of valid comparison profit methodology.
In conclusion, our paper offers a reconciliation of three major strands of literature: local informational advantage, alleged poor retail investor performance, and behavioral biases such as
the alleged household investor disposition effect, for which we showed that there is no evidence
of its existence. It also poses a major methodological challenge to a widely used academic evaluation technique (calendar-time portfolios). Finally, it provides a new lens to understand price
formation, bubbles, and market efficiency, especially in international investment flows.
34
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

References
Agarwal, Sumit, Sheri Faircloth, Chunlin Liu, and S. Ghon Rhee, 2009, Why do foreign
investors underperform domestic investors in trading activities? Evidence from Indonesia, Journal of Financial Markets 12, 32–53.
Allen, B. and J. S. Jordan, 1998, The Existence of Rational Expectations Equilibrium: a
Retrospective, in Majumdar, M. (ed.) Organizations with Incomplete Information: Essays in Economic Analysis (Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University Press) 42–60. Also
available as Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report
252.
Babcock, Bruce A., E. Kwan Choi, and Eli Feinerman, 1993, Risk and Probability Premiums for CARA Utility Functions. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics
18, 17-24.
Contrarian Investment Strategies, Journal of Finance 55, 745-769.
Balasubramaniam, Vimal, John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish,
2023, Who owns what? A factor model for direct stockholding, Journal of Finance 78,
1545-1591.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 1999, The Courage of Misguided Convictions,
Financial Analysts Journal 55, 41-55.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The
common stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55,
773–806.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence,
and common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261–292.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2013, The Behavior of Individual Investors. Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Elsevier, 1533-1570.
Barber, Brad M., Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean, 2007, Is the Aggregate Investor Reluctant to Realize Losses? Evidence from Taiwan, European Financial
Management 13, 423–447.
Barber, Brad M., Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean, 2009, Just How Much
Do Individual Investors Lose by Trading? Review of Financial Studies 22, 609-632.
Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu, 2009, Do retail traders move markets?,
Review of Financial Studies 22, 151–186.
35
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Barber, Brad M., Shengle Lin, and Terrance Odean, 2023, Resolving a paradox: Retail
trades positively predict returns but are not profitable, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, First View, 1-35.
Barber, Brad M., Xing Huang, Terrance Odean, and Christopher Schwarz, 2022, AttentionInduced Trading and Returns: Evidence from Robinhood Users, Journal of Finance, 77,
3141-3190.
Barberis, Nicholas and Wei Xiong, 2009, What Drives the Disposition Effect? An Analysis of a Long-Standing Preference-Based Explanation, Journal of Finance, 64, 751-784.
Barrot, Jean-Noel, Ron Kaniel, and David Sraer, 2016, Are retail investors compensated
for providing liquidity? Journal of Financial Economics 120, 146-168.
Beber, Alessandro, Michael W. Brandt, Jason Cen, and Kenneth A. Kavajecz, 2021, Mutual fund performance: Using bespoke benchmarks to disentangle mandates, constraints
and skill, Journal of Empirical Finance 60, 74-93.
Ben-David, Itzhak, and David Hirshleifer, 2012, Are investors really reluctant to realize
their losses? Trading responses to past returns and the disposition effect, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2485–2532.
Berkman, Henk, Paul D. Koch, and P. Joakim Westerholm, 2014, Informed trading
through the accounts of children, Journal of Finance 69, 363–404.
Boehmer, Ekkehart and Wanshan Song, 2021, Smart Retail Traders, Short Sellers, and
Stock Returns, SSRN Working Paper No. 3723096.
Boehmer, Ekkehart, Charles M. Jones, Xiaoyan Zhang, and Xinran Zhang, 2021, Tracking Retail Investor Activity, Journal of Finance 76, 2249-2305.
Bogousslavsky, Vincent and Dmitriy Muravyev, 2024, An Anatomy of Retail Option
Trading, SSRN ID No. 4682388, August.
Brennan, Michael J., and H. Henry Cao, 1996, Information, trade, and derivative securities, Review of Financial Studies 9, 163–208.
Brennan, Michael J., and H. Henry Cao, 1997, International portfolio investment flows,
Journal of Finance 52, 1851–1880.
Bryzgalova, Svetlans, Anna Pavlova, and Tasya Sikorskaya, 2023, Retail trading in options and the rise of the big three wholesalers, Journal of Finance 78, 3465-3514.
36
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2007, Down or Out: Assessing
the Welfare Costs of Household Investment Mistakes, Journal of Political Economy 115,
707-747.
Chang, Tom Y., David H. Solomon, and Mark M. Westerfield, 2016, Looking for Someone to Blame: Delegation, Cognitive Dissonance, and the Disposition Effect, Journal of
Finance 71, 267-302.
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and Rene M. Stultz, 2005, Do domestic investors have an
edge? The trading experience of foreign investors in Korea, Review of Financial Studies
18, 795–829.
Cooper, Ian, Piet Sercu, and Rosanne Vanpée, 2013, The Equity Home Bias Puzzle: A
Survey, Foundations and Trends® in Finance 7, 289-416.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home Bias at Home: Local Equity
Preference in Domestic Portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2073.
Dhar, R. and N. Zhu, 2006, Up close and personal: investor sophistication and the disposition effect, Management Science 52, 726–740.
Doskeland, Trond M. and Hans K. Hvide, 2011, Do Individual Investors Have Asymmetric Information Based on Work Experience? Journal of Finance 66, 1011-1041.
Dvoˇrák, Tomas, 2005. Do domestic investors have an information advantage? Evidence
from Indonesia, Journal of Finance 60, 817–839.
Ernst, Thomas and Chester Spatt, 2022, Payment for Order Flow And Asset Choice,
SSRN ID 4056512.
Fama, Eugene. F. and Kenneth R. French, 2018. Choosing factors, Journal of Financial
Economics 128, 234-252.
Feng, Lei and Mark S. Seasholes, 2005, Do investor sophistication and trading experience eliminate behavioral biases in financial markets?, Review of Finance 9, 305–351.
Frazzini, Andrea, 2006, The disposition effect and underreaction to news, Journal of Finance 61, 2017–2046.
French, Kenneth R. and James M. Poterba, 1991, Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 3609.
Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan, 2013, Trading frenzies and their im37
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

pact on real investment, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 566–582.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Gordon Y. Liao, 2018, Asset Price Dynamics in Partially Segmented Markets, Review of Financial Studies 31, 3307-3343.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Bing Han, 2005, Prospect theory, mental accounting, and the disposition effect, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 311–339.
Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance
of various investor type: A study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 43–67.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, What makes investors trade?, Journal of Finance 56, 589–616.
Grinblatt, Mark and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Performance Measurement without Benchmarks: An Examination of Mutual Fund Returns, Journal of Business 66, 47-68.
Hasbrouck, Joel and George Sofianos, 1993, The Trades of Market Makers: An Empirical Analysis of NYSE Specialists, Journal of Finance 48, 1565-1593.
Hau, Harald, 2001, Location matters: An examination of trading profits, Journal of Finance 56, 1959-1983.
Hayek, Friedrich A., 1945, The Use of Knowledge in Society, American Economic Review 35, 519-30.
Heath, C., S. Huddart and M. Lang, 1999, Psychological Factors and Stock Option Exercise, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 601–627.
Hellwig, Martin F., 1980, On the Aggregation of Information in Competitive Markets,
Journal of Economic Theory 22, 477-498.
Hendershott, Terrence, Albert J. Menkveld, Rémy Praz, and Mark S. Seasholes, 2022,
Asset Price Dynamics with Limited Attention, Review of Financial Studies 35, 962–1008.
Hens, Thorsten, and Martin Vlcek, 2011, Does Prospect Theory Explain the Disposition
Effect? Journal of Behavioral Finance 12, 141–157.
Heimer, Rawley Z., 2016, Peer Pressure: Social Interaction and the Disposition Effect,
Review of Financial Studies 29, 3177-3209.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2008, The only game in town:
38
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Stock-price consequences of local bias, Journal of Financial Economics 90, 20-37.
Ivkovic, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of the Geography of Individual Investors’ Common Stock Investments, Journal of
Finance, 60, 267-306.
Ivkovic, Zoran, Clemens Sialm, and Scott Weisbenner, 2008, Portfolio concentration and
the performance of individual investors, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
43, 613-656.
Jaffe, Jeffrey F., 1974, Special information and insider trading, Journal of Business 47,
410–428.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2008, Individual investor trading and
stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 273–310.
Kaniel, Ron, Shuming Liu, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2012, Individual investor
trading and return patterns around earnings announcements, Journal of Finance 67, 639680.
Kaustia, Markku, 2010, Prospect theory and the disposition effect, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 45, 791–812.
Kelley, Eric K., and Paul C. Tetlock, 2013, How wise are crowds: Insights from retail
orders and stock returns, Journal of Finance 68, 1229–1265.
Koyck, L. M., 1954, Distributed Lags and Investment Analysis, Amsterdam: NorthHolland Publishing Co.
Kumar, Alok, and Charles M.C. Lee, 2006, Retail investor sentiment and return comovements, Journal of Finance 61, 2451–2486.
Malloy, Christopher J., 2005, The Geography of Equity Analysis, Journal of Finance 60,
719-755.
Mandelker, Gershon, 1974, Risk and return: The case of merging firms, Journal of Financial Economics 1, 303–335.
Massa, Massimo and Andrei Simonov, 2006, Hedging, Familiarity and Portfolio Choice,
Review of Financial Studies 19, 633-685.
39
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Meng, Juanjuan and Xi Weng, 2018, Can Prospect Theory Explain the Disposition Effect? A New Perspective on Reference Points, Management Science 64, 3331–3351.
Mengoli, Stefano, Marco Pagano, and Pierpaolo Pattitoni, 2024, The Geography of Investor Attention, The Review of Corporate Finance Studies, online first, 1 - 52.
Novy-Marx, Robert, 2012, Is momentum really momentum? Journal of Financial Economics 103, 429–453.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses? Journal of Finance 53, 1775–98.
Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89,
1279–1298.
Seasholes, Mark S. and Ning Zhu, 2010, Individual Investors and Local Bias, Journal of
Finance 65, 1987–2010.
Seru, Amit, Tyler Shumway, and Noah Stoffman, 2010, Learning By Trading, Review of
Financial Studies 23, 705–739.
Shefrin, H. and M. Statman, 1985, The Disposition to Sell Winners too Early and Ride
Losers too Long: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Finance 40, 777–790.
Shive, Sophie, 2012, Local investors, price discovery, and market efficiency, Journal of
Financial Economics 104, 145-161.
Solnik, Bruno and Luo Zuo, 2011, A global equilibrium asset pricing model with home
preference, Management Science 58, 273–292.
Swan, Peter L. and P. Joakim Westerholm, 2018, Are Domestic Household Investors Better Performers than Foreign Institutions? New Evidence from Finland. Itzhak Venezia
(Ed.) Behavioral Finance: Where do Investors Biases Come From? World Scientific
Publishers, London, pp. 115-155.
Twain, Mark, 1894, Pudd’nhead Wilson in Century Magazine XLVII vi 817.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2009, Information Immobility and the
Home Bias Puzzle, Journal of Finance 64, 1187-1215.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2010, Information Acquisition and UnderDiversification, Review of Economic Studies 77, 779-805.
40
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Weber, M. and C. F. Camerer, 1998, The Disposition Effect in Securities Trading: An
Experimental Analysis, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 33, 167–184.
Welsh, Ivo, 2022, The Wisdom of the Robinhood Crowd, Journal of Finance 77, 14891527.
41
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 1. Errors introduced by the use of the Calendar-Time C-T Methodology
The Daily Difference in Cumulative Profit and Loss for the direct trades between Households
and foreign nominees, as measured by Horizon Free method and calendar-time (C-T) method
for horizons of 1 month, 6 months, and 12 months, 1995-2017.
-3000.00
-2000.00
-1000.00
0.00
1000.00
2000.00
Difference HH & FN Cumulative P&L (Eur M)
1995
1997
2000
2003
2006
2008
2011
2014
2017
Year
Horizonfree and 12m
Horizonfree and 6m
Horizonfree and 1m
42
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 2. Cumulative daily net purchases, and Profit and Loss for Household and Foreign
Nominees on Nokia and Nokia’s Closing Price
(a) Cumulative daily net purchases for Household and Foreign Nominees - January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
Daily Close Price Nokia (€)
-200.00
-100.00
0.00
100.00
200.00
Daily Cumulative Net Purchases (000,000)
1995
1997
2000
2003
2006
2008
2011
2014
2017
Year
HH Cum trades
FN Cum trades
Close Price (€)
(b) Cumulative daily Profit and Loss for Household and Foreign Nominees - January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
Daily Close Price Nokia (€)
-5000.00
0.00
5000.00
Daily Cumulative P&L (Eur M)
1995
1997
2000
2003
2006
2008
2011
2014
2017
Year
HH Cum P&L
FN Cum P&L
Close Price (€)
43
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 3. Cumulative daily net purchases, and Profit and Loss for Household (HH) and Foreign
Nominees (FN) on 33 Sample Stocks
(a) Cumulative daily net purchases for Household and Foreign Nominees - January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
-400.00
-200.00
0.00
200.00
400.00
Daily Cumulative Net Purchases (000,000)
1995
1997
2000
2003
2006
2008
2011
2014
2017
Year
HH Cum trades
FN Cum trades
(b) Cumulative daily Profit and Loss for Household and Foreign Nominees - January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
-5000.00
0.00
5000.00
Daily Cumulative P&L (Eur M)
1995
1997
2000
2003
2006
2008
2011
2014
2017
Year
HH Cum P&L
FN Cum P&L
44
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 4. Cumulative daily net purchases, and Profit and Loss for Domestic (Finnish) Institutions (DI) and Foreign Nominees (FN) on 33 Sample Stocks
(a) Cumulative daily net purchases for Domestic Institutions and Foreign Nominees - January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
-500.00
0.00
500.00
Daily Cumulative Net Purchases (000,000)
1995
1997
2000
2003
2006
2008
2011
2014
2017
Year
DI Cum trades
FN Cum trades
(b) Cumulative daily Profit and Loss for Domestic Institutions and Foreign Nominees - January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
-20000.00
-10000.00
0.00
10000.00
20000.00
Daily Cumulative P&L (Eur M)
1995
1997
2000
2003
2006
2008
2011
2014
2017
Year
DI Cum P&L
FN Cum P&L
45
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 1. Household (HH), Domestic (Finnish) Institutions (DI), and Foreign Nominees (FN) Investor Summary Statistics, 19952017, 33 Stocks.
HH
DI
FN
Total HH value
Portfolio Value
Total DI value
Portfolio Value
Total FN value
Portfolio Value
Year
Level
Change
Mean
Median
Std Dev
Level
Change
Mean
Median
Std Dev
Level
Change
Mean
Median
Std Dev
EUR (B)
%
EUR
EUR
EUR
EUR (B)
%
EUR
EUR
EUR
EUR (B)
%
EUR (M)
EUR
EUR (M)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
1995
0.335
2,756
280
13,259
0.289
937,285
3,065
3,768,228
2.75
80.97
225,337
283.64
1996
0.593
76.83%
4,644
665
31,462
0.806
179.12%
2,566,156
5,800
11,237,552
4.57
66.16%
114.35
24,543
540.37
1997
0.425
-28.34%
4,569
350
27,994
0.116
43.95%
4,280,040
14,435
14,789,008
7.10
55.11%
202.71
311,285
910.91
1998
0.838
97.19%
8,299
1,825
42,593
1.67
44.35%
5,874,557
22,810
19,757,516
14.44
103.55%
370.30
283,381
1992.59
1999
2.56
205.39%
6,525
2,642
46,183
2.90
73.35%
7,678,236
18,530
33,035,765
36.51
152.84%
986.90
1,612,730
5383.81
2000
12.22
377.39%
45,095
6,039
428,588
6.78
133.57%
17,981,682
61,545
103,986,183
249.47
583.20%
5,543.83
3,855,297
33,816.86
2001
3.06
-74.93%
16,573
2,254
31,6871
3.65
-46.22%
10,536,738
54,806
43,481,215
133.31
-46.56%
3,100.26
2,779,566
18490.10
2002
2.53
-17.43%
21,035
2,972
301,074
3.21
-11.88%
10,102,565
110,600
33,978,583
87.90
-34.08%
2,253.22
1,377,876
12,749.58
2003
2.75
8.78%
19,064
2,838
242,625
2.42
-24.61%
7,273,416
130,140
26,189,941
77.82
-11.44%
1,809.78
1,850,592
10081.87
2004
3.14
14.03%
18,059
1,628
171,638
2.1.93
-9.45%
5,756,165
30,791
24,553,162
80.45
3.37%
1,870.83
2,369,705
10085.89
2005
3.07
-2.14%
17,909
1,313
181,593
1.52
-30.75%
4,547,370
23,000
24,654,997
76.54
-4.86%
1,779.96
3,041,889
8195.83
2006
3.07
-0.11%
19,820
1,496
212,921
1.32
-13.46%
5,035,867
47,832
21,887,588
102.00
33.27%
2,372.11
4,300,462
9781.26
2007
4.12
34.53%
25,560
1,974
289,707
3.21
143.87%
10,543,848
140,032
42,324,854
113.27
11.05%
1887.79
3,896,651
9052.33
2008
4.72
14.46%
30,676
4673
262,944
3.02
-5.86%
11,217,387
197,784
42,703,541
92.94
-17.94%
1,689.88
5,287,967
7762.57
2009
3.89
-17.57%
22,684
4038
408,402
2.44
-19.20%
8,236,484
131,624
3,2821,073
55.44
-40.35%
1,131.52
3,911,556
4789.63
2010
5.57
43.10%
27,987
4,025
503,956
3.37
38.35%
10,252,206
151,509
39,697,249
51.01
-8.00%
1,040.99
6,547,950
4,289.89
2011
6.06
8.90%
27,548
3,817
618,563
4.22
25.22%
12,956,396
204,224
51,404,704
47.31
-7.26%
1,182.69
4,949,146
4,446.21
2012
5.77
-4.86%
28,099
3,564
590,038
3.59
-15.07%
10,613,455
128,150
40,865,136
38.78
-18.02%
945.89
5,478,419
3,772.18
2013
7.24
25.46%
33,445
3,068
888,929
1.60
-55.31%
7,597,857
149,040
29,000,562
47.05
21.32%
1,094.19
18,097,633
4,511.25
2014
5.55
-23.26%
25,170
2,071
1,017,241
1.51
-6.07%
7,567,159
31,399
29,553,259
47.06
0.02%
1,344.60
3,734,381
6090.86
2015
5.80
4.36%
29,399
3,043
1,242,204
1.58
5.17%
10,419,579
77,649
37,375,775
55.52
17.98%
2,056.43
13,566,311
7,931.95
2016
5.31
-8.42%
28,883
3023
11,46,869
1.65
4.39%
11,480,866
19,194
36,445,980
62.31
12.22%
2,396.58
7,799,119
8463.48
2017
6.12
15.28%
29,972
2,692
1,150,613
1.57
-4.88%
11,563,361
0
56,622,326
73.47
17.90%
3,194.21
29,442,377
10,541.68
Mean
4.1
21,468
2,621
440,707
2.4
8,479,073
76,259
34,788,443
67.7
1672
4,715,492
7,998
HH indicates household investor; DI indicates Domestic (Finnish) Institutional investor; and FN indicates Foreign Nominee investor. The total
value of all household, domestic financial institutions, and foreign nominees accounts, at the end of each year is displayed in the column (1), (6),
and (11), respectively, with the percentage change shown in column (2), (7), and (12). The mean value of each account, regardless of its activity
status, is displayed in column (3), (8), and (13) the median value in column (4), (9), and (14) and the standard deviation value in column (5),
(10), and (15).
46
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 2. Summary Statistics of daily Portfolio Trades and Trading Value in EUR (millions) by Households (HH), Foreign Nominees
(FN) and Domestic (Finnish) Institutions (DI) from 1995 to 2017, respectively.
Descriptive Statistics
Household trades with Foreign
Household trades with
Domestic Financial Institutions
Nominees
Domestic Financial Institutions
trades with Foreign Nominees
Domestic
Foreign
Foreign
Household
Household Traded
Household
Institutions Traded
Nominees
Nominees Traded
Trades
Value (EUR M)
Trades
Value (EUR M)
Trades
Value (EUR M)
Mean
38,962
1.8393
5,652
1.2365
45,161
195.53
Median
2,333.50
0.2998
0
0.1430
0
18.1155
Maximum
36,299,621
547.68
2,203,815
337.62
13,533,875
49,440.74
Standard Deviation
190,919.20
6.64
37,089.07
4.46
153,213.80
837.11
47
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 3. Daily Trading Strategy Summary in each Trading Group, Households (HH), Domestic
Institutions (DI), and Foreign Nominees (FN), respectively, January 1995 - December 2017
Trading Action
HH vs FN
HH vs DI
DI vs FN
Nokia
32
33
Nokia
32
33
Nokia
32
33
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Contrarian Strategy
Purchase following a negative return
24.74%
19.15%
19.39%
3.27%
4.99%
4.91%
9.14%
13.27%
13.58%
Selling following a positive return
20.20%
16.83%
16.97%
4.04%
4.90%
4.86%
12.43%
11.79%
11.92%
Sum
44.94%
35.97%
36.36%
7.31%
9.88%
9.77%
21.57%
25.07%
25.50%
Positive Feedback Strategy
Purchase following a positive return
6.81%
8.65%
8.57%
1.54%
2.72%
2.67%
20.43%
10.03%
9.99%
Selling following a negative return
7.87%
9.58%
9.51%
1.42%
2.53%
2.48%
14.76%
10.13%
10.23%
Sum
14.68%
18.24%
18.08%
2.96%
5.25%
5.15%
35.19%
20.16%
20.22%
Hold position - No action
40.38%
45.79%
45.56%
89.73%
84.86%
85.07%
43.25%
54.77%
54.28%
Sum
40.38%
45.79%
45.56%
89.73%
84.86%
85.07%
43.25%
54.77%
54.28%
Obs
5,200
115,626
120,826
5,200
115,626
120,826
5,200
115,626
120,826
HH indicates household investor; DI indicates Domestic (Finnish) Institutional investor; and FN indicates Foreign Nominee investor. This table summarizes the daily Household trading strategy with
Foreign Nominees, daily Households trading strategy with Domestic (Finnish) Financial Institutions
(DI), and daily Domestic (Finnish) Financial Institutions (DI) with Foreign Nominees (FN) from 1995
to 2017, in Nokia, with 32 stocks and 33 stocks, respectively. Trading actions are shown relative to the
number of stock-days in the sample.
48
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 4. Household and Domestic Institutional Investment Strategy
Panel A. Model Explaining the Weekly Household Nokia Stock Purchases by Households (HH) from
Foreign Nominees (FN), Households from Domestic (Finnish) Institutional Investors (DI), and Domestic (Finnish) Institutional Investors (DI) from Foreign Nominees (FN), respectively, January 1995December, 2017.
HH vs FN
HH vs DI
DI vs FN
Variable: Stock Purchases
(1)
(2)
(3)
Intercept
108,279.4
19,083.6*
37,879.1
(t-value)
(1.31)
(1.79)
(0.63)
Closing price
-277,787.7***
-11,530.9**
-115,627.6***
(t-value)
(-6.79)
(-2.20)
(-3.91)
Lag closing price
269,229.6***
11,018.8**
101,353.0***
(t-value)
(6.59)
(2.10)
(3.43)
Lag net household purchase (λ)
0.249***
0.143***
0.381***
(t-value)
(8.46)
(4.66)
(13.36)
Number observations
1,043
1,043
1,043
R Square
0.108
0.023
0.192
Implied values
Lambda measure of informational survival
0.2490
0.1430
0.3810
(t-value)
(8.46)
(4.66)
(13.36)
α0
0.1333
0.2890
0.2300
(t-value)
(1.31)
(1.79)
(0.63)
Alpha (α) coefficient
0.9895
0.9922
0.9133
(t-value)
(6.79)
(2.20)
(3.91)
Beta (β)investment sensitivity
1,081,244
77,054
266,018
(t-value)
(12.94)
(2.20)
(3.91)
Panel B. Model Explaining the Weekly Stock Purchases by Households (HH) from Foreign
Nominees (FN) in 33 stocks (and 32 excluding Nokia), Households from Domestic (Finnish)
Institutional Investors (DI), and Finnish Institutional Investors (DI) from Foreign Nominees
(FN), respectively, January 1995-December, 2017.
HH vs FN
HH vs DI
DI vs FN
33
32
33
32
33
32
Variable: Stock Purchases
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Intercept
25,518.4**
15,609.8***
5,550.7***
4,652.4***
17,903.1
3,040.9
(t-value)
(2.41)
(4.12)
(5.72)
(4.69)
(0.9)
(1.13)
Closing price
-58,108.6**
-36,445.5***
-5,013.6***
-4,357.5***
-30,204.9**
-20,716.9***
(t-value)
(-2.30)
(-3.46)
(-3.37)
(-3.21)
(-2.73)
(-3.64)
Lag closing price
56,486.5**
35,673.0***
4,770.9***
4,150.7***
28,076.6***
20,402.4***
(t-value)
(2.31)
(3.41)
(3.29)
(3.13)
(2.89)
(3.66)
Lag net household purchase (λ)
0.247***
0.218***
0.166***
0.176***
0.298***
0.168***
(t-value)
(15.65)
(5.37)
(8.68)
(7.07)
(4.7)
(7.3)
Number observations
24,300
23,257
24,300
23,257
24,300
23,257
R Square
0.0774
0.0680
0.032
0.035
0.110
0.033
Stock FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Implied values
Lambda (λ) measure of informational survival
0.2470
0.218
0.1660
0.1760
0.2980
0.1680
(t-value)
(15.65)
(5.37)
(8.68)
(7.07)
(4.7)
(7.3)
α0
0.1482
0.1220
0.2316
0.2394
0.2707
0.0301
(t-value)
(2.41)
(4.12)
(5.72)
(4.69)
(0.9)
(1.13)
Alpha (α) coefficient
0.9906
0.9940
0.9899
0.9894
0.9678
0.9969
(t-value)
(2.30)
(3.46)
(3.37)
(3.21)
(2.73)
(3.64)
Beta (β) investment sensitivity
228,690
163,637
28,740
23,583
94,217
121,443
(t-value)
(2.30)
(3.46)
(3.37)
(3.21)
(2.73)
(3.64)
49
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 5. Simulation of Calendar-Time, HPI, and FIFO Returns for a Momentum and Contrarian Investor
Momentum Investor A
Contrarian Investor B
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
Period
Portfolio
C-T: Buys
C-T: Sells
HPI
FIFO
Wealth
Portfolio
C-T: Buys
C-T: Sells
HPI
FIFO
Wealth
1
100
100
100
1,000
300
100
300
400
2
400
100
200
1,100
400
100
200
100
700
3
900
100
300
1,300
300
100
100
100
900
4
1,600
-100
-400
1,600
0
-100
0
100
1,000
5
900
-100
-300
200
1,200
300
-100
-100
1,000
6
400
-100
-200
0
900
400
-100
-200
900
7
100
-500
700
300
0
700
Sum:
200
-200
-300
-300
-200
200
300
300
Buy-Sell:
+400
+400
Wealth change:
-300
+300
All values are in dollars.
50
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 6. Calendar-Time Portfolio Rebalancing every one month, six months, and 12 months
respectively, for each trading group from January, 1995 to December, 2017.
One Month
Six Months
12 Months
HH
FN
HH
FN
HH
FN
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
Nokia
2,324.08
-2,324.08
2,824.91
-2,824.91
3,118.50
-3,118.50
Inclusive of Nokia
5,151.64
-5,151.64
5,745.15
-5,745.15
5,718.94
-5,718.94
Exclusive of Nokia
2,827.56
-2,827.56
2,920.24
-2,920.24
2,600.44
-2,600.44
HH
DI
HH
DI
HH
DI
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
Nokia
-49.36
49.36
-66.08
66.08
-108.51
108.51
Inclusive of Nokia
813.46
-813.46
799.64
-799.64
699.83
-699.83
Exclusive of Nokia
862.83
-862.83
865.72
-865.72
808.34
-808.34
DI
FN
DI
FN
DI
FN
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
Cum. P&L
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
(EUR M)
Nokia
6,459.58
-6,459.58
6,964.77
-6,964.77
7,290.34
-7,290.34
Inclusive of Nokia
6,858.07
-6,858.07
7,347.88
-7,347.88
7,625.26
-7,625.26
Exclusive of Nokia
398.49
-398.49
383.12
-383.12
334.92
-334.92
51
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 7. Cumulative Profits and Losses, with identity between HPI and FIFO profits, for Direct Trades between each trading pair
group in Nokia and Large Finnish Stocks (33 stocks, January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017, and inclusive of and exclusive of
Nokia, respectively)
Between Households and Foreign Nominees in Nokia and 32 other stocks
HH All Cum.
FN All Cum.
HH No Nokia Cum.
FN No Nokia Cum.
HH Nokia Cum.
FN Nokia Cum.
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
5,117.82***
-5,117.82***
2,885.25***
-2,885.25***
2,232.58***
-2,232.58***
Ratio of trading profits to total trading value
11%
-11%
9%
-9%
17%
-17%
Between Households and Domestic financial institutions in Nokia and 32 other stocks
HH All Cum.
DI All Cum.
HH No Nokia Cum.
DI No Nokia Cum.
HH Nokia Cum.
DI Nokia Cum.
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
801.33***
-801.33***
846.46***
-846.46***
-45.13***
45.13***
Ratio of trading profits to total trading value
13%
13%
17%
-17%
-5%
5%
Between Domestic financial institutions and Foreign Nominees in Nokia and 32 other stocks
DI All Cum.
FN All Cum.
DI No Nokia Cum.
FN No Nokia Cum.
DI Nokia Cum.
FN Nokia Cum.
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
6,822.97***
-6,822.97***
609.72***
-609.72***
6,213.25***
-6,213.25***
Ratio of trading profits to total trading value
12%
-12%
1%
-1%
40%
-40%
The significance of these cumulative profits and losses is tested by running a Monte Carlo simulation 10,000 times, where the daily direction
taken by each of the investor categories in each stock is random. We thus employ an informationless benchmark. The result of this simulation
provides the confidence interval we use to test the significance of the reported profits. Transaction cost per trade for households is EUR 0.005
and EUR 0.001 for Foreign Nominees, respectively. Total trading value is computed as the sum of daily total trading value in two groups from
1995 to 2017.
52
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table 8. Factor Model Regression Tests.
HH vs FN
HH vs FN
HH vs DI
HH vs DI
DI vs FN
DI vs FN
6 Factor Model
4 Factor Model
6 Factor Model
4 Factor Model
6 Factor Model
4 Factor Model
US Factors
Finnish Factors
US Factors
Finnish Factors
US Factors
Finnish Factors
Panel A: Nokia
Alpha p.a.
0.047**
0.046**
0.047**
0.046**
0.047**
0.046**
t-value
2.50
2.03
2.50
2.03
2.50
2.03
Mkt-Rf
0.075***
0.085***
0.075***
0.085***
0.075***
0.085***
t-value
10.18
9.81
10.18
9.81
10.18
9.81
SMB
0.043***
-0.161***
0.043***
-0.161***
0.043***
-0.161***
t-value
3.22
12.56
3.22
-12.60
3.22
12.56
HML
-0.006
-0.018**
-0.006
-0.018**
-0.006
-0.018**
t-value
-0.40
-2.13
-0.40
-2.13
-0.40
-2.13
RMW
-0.028*
-0.028*
-0.028*
t-value
-1.67
-1.67
-1.64
CMA
-0.039*
-0.039*
-0.039*
t-value
-1.81
-1.81
-1.81
UMD
-0.011
-0.003
-0.011
-0.003
-0.011
-0.003
t-value
-1.18
-0.41
-1.18
-0.41
-1.18
-0.04
Nobs
5,030
5,198
5,030
5,198
5,030
5,198
r2
0.0405
0.1783
0.0405
0.1783
0.0405
0.1783
Panel B: 32 Stocks
Alpha p.a.
0.019**
0.017**
0.020***
0.017***
0.020***
0.017***
t-value
2.09
2.12
2.44
2.41
2.44
2.41
Mkt-Rf
0.045***
0.088***
0.048***
0.092***
0.048***
0.092***
t-value
6.88
14.92
9.68
20.69
9.68
20.69
SMB
0.014
0.024**
0.017**
0.018*
0.017**
0.018*
t-value
0.89
1.85
1.75
1.24
1.75
1.24
HML
0.015
0.051***
0.019**
0.060***
0.019**
0.060***
t-value
0.46
7.93
1.72
14.18
1.72
14.18
RMW
-0.009
-0.007
-0.007
t-value
-0.81
-0.65
-0.65
CMA
-0.013
-0.007
-0.007
t-value
-0.63
-0.38
-0.38
UMD
-0.021***
-0.009
-0.017***
-0.010***
-0.017***
-0.010***
t-value
-2.24
-1.25
-2.34
-2.48
-2.34
-2.48
Nobs
114,095
117,715
114,095
117,715
114,095
117,715
r2
0.0133
0.0387
0.0133
0.0387
0.0133
0.0387
This table reports estimations of the six factor model (Fama and French, 2018) using US benchmarks,
and the four factor model (Carhart, 1997) using Finnish factors. The dependent variable is daily value
weighted returns on the stockholdings generated by the average value of stockholdings in Nokia and
the 32 other largest companies analysed in this paper. The holdings are the cumulative intra-investorcategory trades applying the holding period invariant method. The estimations use data from the full
1995-2017 period.
53
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Internet Appendix
Derivation of the Informed Trader’s Investment Demand Function
Until now, there has been a dearth of convincing evidence to establish that knowledge of
past price and order-flow movements, in particular, price and quantity changes, are responsible
for high future trading profitability. Although informed traders are sometimes supposed to
have access to potentially illegal inside information, this does not appear to be the case for
Finnish investors, other than those that utilize their child accounts to provide disguise (see
Berkman, Koch, and Westerholm, 2014). Unsuspectingly, hindsight proves to be a valuable
investment tool. Our model is the first to be able to successfully recover the intimate details of
this informative signal in regression analysis with an explanatory power of up to 19%.
Individual households in their paired relationships with foreign institutions and, similarly,
individual domestic institutions paired with foreign ones receive a signal of the stock’s fundamental value at time t, denoted ˜pF
t prior to their signed trade (order-flow) of size, ˜st, with a
purchase if positive, ˜st > 0 or divestment if negative, ˜st < 0.11 This signal is either not observable or is ignored by either the household’s counterparties, domestic or foreign, including the
local institution’s counterparty, foreign institutions.
If this fundamental valuation is identical to the current observed stock price pt, then the relatively informed party does not trade, ˜st = 0, as in our framework, the informational advantage
rather than, say, the sharing of risk, is the major trading motivation. Alternatively, if ˜pF
t > pt
then a purchase is made, ˜st > 0, with the counterpart making an identical sale. Then again, if
˜pF
t < pt a sale is made, ˜st < 0, with the counterpart making an identical purchase. Hence, the
profitability of informed trading is dependent on the width of the gap between the fundamental
price and the market price. The more frenzied the uninformed trades are, the greater the gap.
To minimize notational clutter, cash holdings are set to zero, as is the interest rate together
with initial holdings of the risky asset. All dividends are reinvested in the stock or imputed to
prices. The informed risk averse trader takes advantage of her signal of expected fundamental
value, ˜pF
t , to choose both the magnitude and direction of her trade, ˜st, at date t, to maximize her
11The informed agent’s stock holdings consists of the sum of prior and contemporaneous signed trades (orderflow), Pt
τ=0 ˜sτ.
54
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

expected exponential Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA) utility function of her wealth
gain from trading:
˜st = arg max
˜st
E −exp (−wt/ρ) = ˜st

˜pF
t −pt

−(1/2) (1/ρr) (˜st)2,
= ρr

˜pF
t −pt

,
(A1)
where wt is the trader’s wealth at time t, exp denotes the exponential value, E [wt] = ˜st

˜pF
t −pt

is the informed trader’s expected wealth gain from trading made up of the product of the trade
magnitude and difference between the fundamental value known only to the informed trader and
the trade price, ρ her risk tolerance, i.e., inverse of her CARA constant absolute risk aversion
coefficient, r is the precision (i.e., inverse of the variance) of the normally distributed informed
investor signal, and the slope of the investment demand function with constant slope is the
product, ρr > 0.
The informed trader knows that her less informed counterpart buys following a price increase, as the price increase is believed to be in response to an informed trader buying. Likewise, the price fall is taken to be in response to an informed trader selling. Moreover, an
ordered sequence of price changes, e.g., pt−1 < pt < pt+1 will lead to the counterpart making
a sequence of trending net purchases, ˜st > 0, ˜st+1 > 0, which exerts price pressure. Thus, the
observed (market) price pt is potentially distorted by this price pressure from its contemporaneous fundamental value, ˜pF
t . If all available information were fully incorporated into the
stock price, then the stock price would follow a trend-free martingale with the contemporaneous price independent of past price movements and the contemporaneous signed order flow, ˜st,
would also be independent of the lagged order flow, ˜st−1. However, the presence of relatively
uninformed trend-following counterparts distorts the price from its fundamental value. Before
making their own trades, we demonstrate for the first time how informed traders extract the
undistorted fundamental price by discounting the distorted past price movements in order to
counteract the stock price ‘bubble’.
How do relatively informed domestic traders obtain this signal about how much the expected fundamental value differs from the contemporaneous price? We can only do so by
55
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

adopting a radical hypothesis in contradiction to the efficient-markets hypothesis. A highly
plausible and, for that matter, simple assumption is that individual informed traders receive as
a signal the magnitude of the geometric survival rate of information from past price movements
with a parameter value 0 ≤λ ≤1 and with a decreasing lower weight (λ)2 at time t −2, etc.
This weighting is given to the informed trader’s lagged valuation signal, i.e., λ ˜pF
t−1, while assigning the residual or remaining information, 1 −λ, to the current observed market price, i.e.,
(1 −λ) pt. Hence, the more distorting due to price pressure are the actions of the relatively
uninformed counterparties, the more the stock’s fundamental value differs from the contemporaneous market price. Clearly, the largest diversions between fundamental and market values,
and hence the greatest profit opportunities, occur during stock price ‘bubbles’. We have posed
a very novel and simple test of the efficient markets hypothesis, as a statistically significant and
positive λ value implies a departure from the hypothesis. Yes, the hypothesis is expected to fail
since one class of investors, namely ‘local’, is privately more informed than another, namely
‘distant’. When information is private and, thus, not shared with the market, the efficient market
hypothesis should fail.
To implement this information revelation methodology, suppose the imperfect signal of the
“fundamental” valuation depends on current and past prices according to the intercept term
that forms part of the signal received by the informed party, 1 > α0 > 0, a multiplicative
constant slope term, 1 > α > 0, with −(1 −α) representing the negative slope of the investment
demand schedule when λ →0 with irrelevant past investment, and information from past price
movements that decays in period t −1 at the geometric rate 0 ≤1 −λ ≤1. Hence, the
fundamental value, ˜pF
t , is dependent on the Koyck’s (1954) distributed lag signal equation of
current and all previous price movements. It is represented by:
˜pF
t = ˜α0 + α (1 −λ)

pt + λpt−1 + λ2pt−2 + · · ·

+ ˜ϵt,
(A2)
where ˜ϵt is independently and normally distributed with mean 0 and precision r. Note that our
fundamental value, ˜pF
t , agrees precisely with Brennan and Cao’s (1996, Equation (1)), private
signal when λ→1: ˜pF
t = ˜α0 + ˜ϵt.
56
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

In other words, lagged transactional prices enter a modified value of the contemporaneous
price with a weight of λ on the lagged price, pt−1, and a smaller weight on earlier prices due to
the diminishing value of the Koyck lag. Hence, the more trending the price series and hence the
larger is λ, the higher this modified contemporaneous price. To arrive at the stock’s fundamental
value, this contemporaneous trend-modified price is then multiplied by the informational decay
rate, (1 −λ). Hence, the more trending the stock price, the greater the difference between the
stock’s fundamental value and its current price. This represents a self-correcting mechanism:
the more relatively uninformed investors drive the price away from fundamentals, as occurs
with a ‘bubble’, the greater the incentive provided to informed traders to correct this error by
undertaking trades which bring market price into alignment with fundamental value.
Expressing the lagged value of the same informed signal by:
˜pF
t−1 = ˜α0 + α (1 −λ)

pt−1 + λpt−2 + λ2pt−3 + · · ·

+ ˜ϵt−1,
(A3)
evaluating ˜pF
t −λ ˜pF
t−1, and rearranging, yields the contemporaneous valuation:
˜pF
t = (1 −λ) (˜α0 + αpt) + λ ˜pF
t−1 + ˜ϵt.
(A4)
If the α slope of the fundamental valuation equation is close to 1 and the intercept ˜α0 close
to zero, as it turns out empirically to be the case, then this Koyck-updating expression for
the fundamental stock value places a geometric weight of λ on the lagged fundamental value
(only observable to the informed trader) and the residual, (1 −λ), on the contemporaneous
market price of the stock. If λ →1 then ˜pF
t = ˜pF
t−1 + ˜ϵt = ˜pF
t−2 + ˜ϵt−1, etc., with the informed
signal simply being a random variable that is constant in expectation. Alternatively, if λ →0,
the previous informed signal does not contain any information today, since all previous and
contemporaneous information is now incorporated into the current market price. Thus, our
model nests the two limiting values of λ and the survival rate, λ, captures the extent to which
the informed trader’s signal is dynamic rather than purely random and stationary in expectation.
Our estimated values of the survival rate of information, λ, are all significantly less than onehalf but statistically significantly higher than zero, indicating that the fundamental price as seen
57
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

by informed Finnish investors was volatile, with major pricing bubbles occurring together with
sizable alterations to the signal of fundamental valuation visible only to the informed.
There are two extreme updating rules: First, if the survival rate of past information, λ →0,
the signal moves only according to the observed current market price and the random error
term, as in the more conventional assumption of an efficient market. Here, the trader gains no
informational advantage from observing past price changes and the magnitude and direction of
past trades, i.e., order flow, and thus cannot be expected to systematically earn trading profits
from such information. Here, the best estimate of tomorrow’s price is simply today’s price with
prices following a random walk or, more strictly, martingale.
The second extreme version of such an updating rule occurs when λ →1 such that only a
negative change in market prices leads to a positive increase in stock holdings. This limiting
solution corresponds precisely to the PRRE of Brennan and Cao (1996, pp.170-171) in which
their valuation signal (Equation (1) on p.167) is both random and normally distributed.
In the world that we investigate empirically, neither extreme is applicable, as the informational survival rate is positive but less than 1, 0 < λ < 1. Valuable information is contained in
both past prices and the rate of order flow in the previous period, enabling informed investors
to make systematic trading profits in a more complex world in which the stock’s fundamental
value, ˜pF
t , can be trending and stochastic, when the best estimate of tomorrow’s price is no
longer today’s price.
Given that the trader receives an informative signal, this signal can be retrieved from the
optimal trading decision of the previous period. Lagging the optimal trading function given by
Equation (1) by one period and solving for the unknown value of the lagged valuation yields a
term that depends on both the previous trade and the previous stock price:
˜pF
t−1 = ˜st−1
ρr + ˜pt−1 + ˜ϵt.
(A5)
Substituting Equation (A5) back into the signal updating expression, Equation (A4), yields an
58
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

expression for the volatile contemporaneous signal:
˜pF
t = (1 −λ) ˜α0 + α (1 −λ) pt + λ
 ˜st−1
ρr + pt−1
!
+ ˜ϵt.
(A6)
Writing the informed trader’s contemporaneous expected profit per share traded as the difference between the informed and contemporaneous market price, ˜pF
t −pt, and solving for the
trading demand schedule, Equation (A7), which we express purely in terms of observable values other than the investor’s risk tolerance (inverse of the CARA coefficient), ρ, yields for the
first time an estimable expression for the magnitude and sign of contemporaneous informed
order flow:
˜st = ρr (1 −λ) ˜α0 −pt (1 −(1 −λ) α) + λpt−1
 + λ˜st−1.
(A7)
This is an expression for the optimal trade size and direction for the informed investor as a function of the observable values that we estimate in Equation (1) in the main text, consisting of the
precision of the informative signal, r, which depends on stock price volatility, the contemporaneous and lagged stock prices, and the exogenous given trade size and direction in the previous
period represented by ˜st−1.1 Adopting the approximate respective empirical values for ˜α0 and α
of close to 0 and 1, respectively, yields the more insightful theoretical trader specification that
we do not estimate:
˜st = −λ ρr (pt −pt−1) −˜st−1
 .
(A8)
1It is important to note that we have a simple and unique equilibrium in a single asset. In more complex models
with multiple assets, in multiple related markets, and with supply shocks such as Greenwood, Hanson, and Liao
(2018), there may exist multiple equilibrium solutions.
59
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Internet Appendix: Additional Tables
Table A.1. Detailed Household Investor Summary Statistics, 1995-2017, 33 Stocks.
Number HH
Total HH value
Portfolio Value
Stock
Age
Female
Year
Total
Active
Passive
Level
Change
Mean
Median
Std Dev
Mean
Mean
Billion EUR
%
EUR
EUR
EUR
No.
Years
%
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
1995
121,048
4,998
116,050
0.360
N.A.
2,972
353
13,804
1.3
49.5
36.0
1996
123,373
6,255
117,118
0.647
79.83
5,243
881
33,687
1.3
50.6
36.6
1997
82,427
6,879
75,548
0.498
-23.06
6,038
687
33,016
1.3
50.1
31.4
1998
92,407
8,857
83,550
0.978
96.50
10,583
2,654
47,423
1.5
47.7
31.4
1999
384,029
12,724
371,305
2.864
192.86
7,458
2,642
48,969
1.3
51.2
47.7
2000
236,333
13,878
222,455
12.841
348.34
54,333
8,629
466,051
1.4
48.6
39.6
2001
165,731
11,849
153,882
3.331
-74.06
20,097
2,570
336,358
1.3
50.7
35.0
2002
105,073
12,671
92,402
2.770
-16.83
26,364
4,707
334,361
1.7
48.0
31.8
2003
126,967
13,833
113,134
3.057
10.37
24,081
4,714
263,531
1.7
50.2
34.8
2004
150,563
16,476
134,087
3.760
22.96
24,970
3,030
206,056
1.9
50.8
32.2
2005
141,687
18,263
123,424
3.771
0.31
26,616
3,222
208,409
2.3
50.5
31.8
2006
118,590
19,054
99,536
3.927
4.14
33,116
4,396
261,329
2.6
50.1
32.2
2007
118,323
18,498
99,825
5.197
32.33
43,922
6,466
353,543
2.5
50.3
30.1
2008
138,337
22,983
115,354
5.492
5.69
39,704
7,293
287,986
2.8
48.5
28.4
2009
159,861
25,121
134,740
4.615
-15.97
28,871
5,915
426,113
3.3
47.8
26.9
2010
180,872
26,267
154,605
6.70
46.70
37,432
6,625
536,507
3.3
47.8
27.6
2011
201,148
24,728
176,420
7.119
5.15
35,393
5,640
653,887
2.7
48.0
27.9
2012
186,335
23,482
162,853
6.552
-7.96
35,165
5,654
624,019
2.6
47.8
25.6
2013
184,613
22,376
162,237
8.218
25.42
44,516
6,375
964,917
2.7
48.8
27.9
2014
176,419
22,934
153,485
7.272
-11.51
41,221
5,703
1,149,130
2.5
49.0
26.5
2015
166,721
19,779
146,942
6.561
-9.78
39,352
5,852
1,352,036
2.4
49.8
27.5
2016
159,022
18,369
140,53
6.041
-7.92
37,990
5,753
1,239,666
2.4
48.5
25.7
2017
173,677
16,629
157,048
6.890
14.05
39,672
5,355
1,251,434
2.4
48.6
27.1
Mean
160,589.4
16,821.9
143,767.5
4.762
28,918
4,570
482,271
2.1
49.3
31.4
60
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table A.2. HPI & FIFO
Between Households and Foreign Nominees in Nokia
HH All Cum.
FN All Cum.
HH No Nokia Cum.
FN No Nokia Cum.
HH Nokia Cum.
FN Nokia Cum.
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
HPI
5,117.82
-5,117.82
2,885.25
-2,885.25
2,232.58
-2,232.58
FIFO
5,117.82
-5,117.82
2,885.25
-2,885.25
2,232.58
-2,232.58
Between Households and Domestic financial institutions in Nokia
HH All Cum.
DI All Cum.
HH No Nokia Cum.
DI No Nokia Cum.
HH Nokia Cum.
DI Nokia Cum.
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
HPI
801.33
-801.33
846.46
-846.46
-45.13
45.13
FIFO
801.33
-801.33
846.46
-846.46
-45.13
45.13
Between Domestic financial institutions and Foreign Nominees
DI All Cum.
FN All Cum.
DI No Nokia Cum.
FN No Nokia Cum.
DI Nokia Cum.
FN Nokia Cum.
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
P&L (EUR M)
HPI
6,822.97
-6,822.97
609.72
-609.72
6,213.25
-6,213.25
FIFO
6,822.97
-6,822.97
609.72
-609.72
6,213.25
-6,213.25
61
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table A.3. Cumulative Profits and Losses after Transaction Costs for Direct Trades between
each trading pair group in Nokia, January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
Between Households (HH) and Foreign Nominees (FN) in Nokia
HH Cum. P&L (EUR M)
FN Cum. P&L (EUR M)
2,232.58 ***
-2,232.58
()
()
Between Households (HH) and Domestic (Finnish) Institutions (DI) in Nokia
HH Cum. P&L (EUR M)
DI Cum. P&L (EUR M)
-45.13
45.13
()
()
Between Domestic (Finnish) Institutions (DI) and Foreign Nominees (FN) in Nokia
DI Cum. P&L (EUR M)
FN Cum. P&L (EUR M)
6,213.25
-6,213.25
()
()
The cumulative Profits and Losses is at the end of day of each period and it is independent which
means that every starting point of the cumulative Profits and Losses is zero. The significance of these
cumulative profits and losses is tested by running a Monte Carlo simulation 10,000 times, where the
daily direction taken by each of the investor categories in each stock is random. We thus employ an
informationless benchmark. The result of this simulation provides the confidence interval we use to test
the significance of the reported profits. Transaction cost per trade for households is EUR 0.005 and EUR
0.001 for Foreign Nominees, respectively.
Conventional investment performance proxy – Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
As a robustness check, we also perform Internal Rate of Return (IRR) calculations without
imposing any horizon assumptions other than the start and end dates of the projects to evaluate
household, domestic institutional, and foreign nominees’ trading ability. IRR takes an NPV
“investment view” of expected financial results based on the annual first-in first-out (FIFO)
accounting cash flows given by Equation (6) above for the period from 3rd January 1995 to 30
December 2017 and is summed over all 32 (33) stocks in the portfolio. The initial portfolio
holdings are marked to market and treated as a negative cash flow at year zero. On the final
day, the value of the portfolio is marked-to-market as the cash realization.
Our continuously compounded IRR formula is standard, (e.g., as in SAS’s IRR solve routine):
j=k
X
j=1
NPVj =
Xj=k
j=1

−IHVj,t=0 +
X j,t=n−1
j,t=1

Daily NCF j,t

e−rt + FHV j,ne−rn
= 0,
(A9)
62
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

where NPV is the net present value of the portfolio of the k stocks with k = 32 or 31 when
there are multiple stocks, IHVj,t=0 is the opening initial holding value of the jth stock in the
portfolio representing the initial investment outlay, t is the designated day commencing at day
0 and finishing at t = n −1, Daily NCF j,t is the daily Net Cash Flow consisting of the EUR
value of sells for the jth stock in the portfolio when a sell occurs and is negative for purchases
representing investment outlays, FHVj,n is the final realized holding value of the jth stock in
the portfolio on the last day, day t = n, and e−rt is discount factor with r the continuously
compounded daily rate of return that is converted to its annual equivalent based on 250 trading
days per year.
The ‘Buy Only’ IRR is represented by:
k
X
j=1
NPV j =
k
X
j=1
−IHV j,0 −
n−1
X
t=1

DailyPurchases j,t

e−rt + FHV j,ne−rn
= 0,
(A10)
where the only difference is that sales are ignored until the end-date with Daily Purchasest
representing the negative cash outlay each day a stock purchase occurs.
Table A.4 presents the IRR results for the sample of a portfolio of the 33 (32) designated
stocks plus Nokia alone for the entire 23-year period. Households receive a 40.03 percent per
annum return when trading Nokia with foreigners. This falls to only 20.6 percent per year in the
portfolio of 32 smaller stocks. Domestic institutional investors trading with foreign institutions
in Nokia do even better with a 46.54 percent per annum, falling to 20.68 percent per annum
for the portfolio of 32 smaller stocks. In the relatively small trading between local investors,
domestic institutional investors trading with households in Nokia do only slightly better with an
IRR of 5.71 percent while households outperform with respect to the portfolio of smaller stocks
yielding an IRR of 12.93 percent in their trades with domestic institutions. The counterfactual
household ‘BuyOnly’ IRR for households trading with foreigners is massively lower at -8.40
percent per year, indicating that it is necessary to include the exact timing of asset sales, as
well as purchases, as does the regular IRR method. The calendar-time (C-T) methodology
used to evaluate informed (i.e., contrarian) investors creates a similar downward bias to that
of ‘BuyOnly’ IRR as the short investment horizons used generally ignore a high proportion of
63
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

sales. Hence, the BuyOnly IRR is just a crude extension of the conventional ‘buy and hold’
calendar-time methodology, with our findings indicating that it severely distorts performance
measurement.
Table A.4 Panel B extends the IRR analysis to the full sample of a portfolio of the 33 (32)
designated stocks, with the entire portfolio treated in the same way as the IRR for a single
stock. The table indicates that the IRR earned by households in trading with foreign nominees
in the 33 stocks sampled earned a similar IRR of 40 percent per annum Thus, relatively high
trading profit rates translate into quite high IRRs, given the magnitude of trading.
64
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table A.4. Summary of the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of daily HPI Trading, January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
Panel A. Summary of the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) and ‘BuyOnly’ IRR using daily HPI Trading for Nokia for Trades within the Three
Groups, (i) Households (HH) vs. Foreign Nominees (FN), (ii) Households (HH) vs. Domestic (Finnish) Institutions (DI), and (iii) Domestic
Domestic (Finnish) Institutions (DI) vs. Foreign Nominees (FN). The IRR is constructed by treating the mark-to-market portfolio value as a
negative cash flow and summing the daily FIFO returns for each stock into annual cash-flow increments with the mark-to-market portfolio value
on the last day treated as positive cash flow. Then for each annual observation summing over the 32 stocks in the portfolio. ‘BuyOnly’ IRR
indicates that sell trades are ignored until the portfolio is realized on the last day.
HH vs FN
HH vs DI
DI vs FN
IRR
43.52%
-5.71%
51.22%
BuyOnlyIRR
-10.35%
-6.69%
-8.68%
65
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Panel B. Summary of the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of daily HPI Trading for 33 stocks (inclusive of Nokia) and 32 stocks
(exclusive of Nokia) for Trades within the Three Groups from 1995 to 2017, respectively. IRR presents the internal rate of return
for 33 (32) stocks with the entire portfolio with the exception of Nokia treated as a single investor in the entire portfolio of stocks.
The IRR is constructed by summing the daily returns for each stock into annual cash-flow increments and then for each annual
observation summing over the 32 stocks in the portfolio. ‘BuyOnly’ IRR is computed using the same single investor methodology
as for the conventional IRR except that sell trades are ignored until the portfolio is realized on the last day.
HH vs FN
HH vs DI
DI vs FN
Inclusive of Nokia
Exclusive of Nokia
Inclusive of Nokia
Exclusive of Nokia
Inclusive of Nokia
Exclusive of Nokia
Number of Stocks
33
32
33
32
33
32
IRR
32.69%
8.74%
6.19%
9.33%
29.31%
13.84%
BuyOnlyIRR
0.70%
6.40%
3.08%
6.75%
5.51%
8.13%
66
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Panel C. Summary of the Internal Rate of Return (IRR), January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2017
IRR treats initial portfolio value as an outlay and adds annual FIFO realized cash flows plus final portfolio value.
HH vs FN
HH vs DI
DI vs FN
Inclusive of Nokia
Exclusive of Nokia
Nokia
Inclusive of Nokia
Exclusive of Nokia
Nokia
Inclusive of Nokia
Exclusive of Nokia
Nokia
Number of Stocks
33
32
1
33
32
1
33
32
1
IRR
32.75%
17.77%
40.03%
10.15%
12.93%
-5.09%
39.69%
20.68%
46.54%
BuyOnlyIRR
5.57%
8.14%
-8.40%
7.09%
8.75%
-5.69%
5.69%
7.00%
-7.21%
67
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table A.5. Factor Model Estimation, 1995-2017, with 33 Internationally Traded Finnish Stocks.
Factor Models Explaining the Daily Return on 33 Stock Purchases by Households (HH) from Foreign Nominees (FN), Domestic (Finnish)
Institutional Investors (DI) from Foreign Nominees (FN), Households (HH) from Domestic (Finnish) Institutional Investors (DI), and Domestic
(Finnish) Institutional Investors (DI) from Households (HH), for the period January 1995-December, 2017. Returns are regressed with six-factor
models on US factors and in four-factor models on Finnish factors. Counterparty factor returns are the opposite of the main party returns. These
estimates are carried out assigning equal weights to all stocks in the sample as opposed to market capitalization weights in the results reported
in Table 8 in the text.
HH vs FN
HH vs FN
DI vs FN
DI vs FN
HH vs DI
HH vs DI
DI vs HH
DI vs HH
6 Factor Model
US Factors
Finnish Factors
US Factors
Finnish Factors
US Factors
Finnish Factors
US Factors
Finnish Factors
Alpha p.a.
0.0355625***
0.0321725***
0.0354525***
0.03208***
0.0355575***
0.032195***
-0.0355575***
-0.032195***
(t-value)
(5.55)
(5.03)
(5.53)
(5.01)
(5.54)
(5.03)
(-5.54)
(-5.03)
Mkt-Rf
0.06343***
0.13565***
0.06345***
0.13576***
0.06343***
0.13562***
-0.06343***
-0.13562***
(t-value)
(26.1)
(56.1)
(26.1)
(56.1)
(26.12)
(56.0)
(-26.1)
(-56.0)
SMB
0.02609***
0.04483***
0.02617***
0.04496***
0.02632***
0.04473***
-0.02632***
-0.04473***
t-value
(5.92)
(38.3)
(5.94)
(12.3)
(5.97)
(12.3)
(-5.97)
(-12.3)
HML
0.02765***
0.08861***
0.02763***
0.08861***
0.02756***
0.08874***
-0.02756***
-0.08874***
t-value
(5.87)
(38.3)
(5.86)
(38.2)
(5.84)
(38.3)
(-5.84)
(-38.3)
RMW
-0.00734
-0.00738
-0.00701
0.00701
(t-value)
(-1.26)
(-1.26)
(-1.2)
(1.2)
CMA
-0.00633
-0.00645
-0.00653
0.00653
(t-value)
(-0.86)
(-0.88)
(-0.89)
(0.89)
UMD
-0.03165
-0.02121
-0.03164
-0.02123
-0.03163
-0.0211
0.03163
0.0211
t-value
(-10.5)
(-11.1)
(-10.5)
(-11.1)
(-10.5)
(-11.0)
(10.5)
(11.0)
No. Obser.
120,824
120,824
120,824
120,824
120,824
120,824
120,824
120,824
R2
0.0135
0.0402
0.0135
0.0402
0.0135
0.0402
0.0135
0.0402
68
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

To eliminate any concerns about sample selection bias, we extended our HPI analysis to all 232
Finnish stocks from 1995 to 2011 and the results are presented in Table A.6. The significance
of these regressions is tested by running Monte Carlo simulations 10,000 times, where the
daily direction taken by each of the investor categories in each stock is random. We still find
that households display significant superior trading ability against both foreign nominees and
domestic institutions, respectively, but with a slightly lower trading profitability rate for each
matched trading pair. Compared to institutional investors, domestic institutions also earn less
of a trading advantage over foreign nominees in the aggregated 232 Finnish stocks HPI trading
portfolio compared to the aggregated HPI portfolio constructed by the large 33 Finnish stocks.
The most likely explanation is that the relative lack of foreign institutional interest in smaller
stocks means less trend following and fewer sizable profit opportunities for both domestic
households and institutional investors. To put it differently, less foreign institutional interest
translates into better pricing and thus fewer domestic profit opportunities.
69
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Table A.6. Cumulative Profits and Losses after Transaction Costs for Direct Trades between each trading pair group in 232 Finnish
Stocks inclusive of and exclusive of Nokia, respectively, January 3, 1995 to December 30, 2011,
The significance of these cumulative profits and losses is tested by running a Monte Carlo simulation 10,000 times, where the daily direction
taken by each of the investor categories in each stock is random. We thus employ an informationless benchmark. The result of this simulation
provides the confidence interval We use to test the significance of the reported profits. Transaction cost per trade for households is EUR0.005
and EUR0.001 for Foreign Nominees, respectively. Total trading value is computed as the sum of daily total trading value in two groups from
1995 to 2011.
Between Households and Foreign Nominees
Periods
Households Cum.
P&L inclusive of
Nokia (EUR M)
Foreign Nominees
Cum. P&L
inclusive of Nokia
(EUR M)
Households Cum.
P&L exclusive of
Nokia (EUR M)
Foreign Nominees
Cum. P&L
exclusive of Nokia
(EUR M)
01/03/1995 - 12/30/1996
-33.56
32.44
-36.79
36.12
01/03/1997 - 07/03/2003
3,434.77***
-3,442.14***
771.22***
-777.14***
07/04/2003 - 03/06/2009
879.5
-892.44
299.27
-310.68
03/07/2009 - 12/30/2011
-689.47
679.07
-76.27
67.52
5,876.32***
-5,908.16***
953.49***
-980.24***
Ratio of trading profits to total
trading value
12.2%
-12.3%
2.5%
-2.6%
Continued
70
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed

Between Households and Domestic financial institutions
Households Cum.
P&L inclusive of
Nokia (EUR M)
Domestic
Institutions Cum.
P&L inclusive of
Nokia (EUR M)
Households Cum.
P&L exclusive of
Nokia (EUR M)
Domestic
Institutions Cum.
P&L exclusive of
Nokia (EUR M)
01/03/1995 - 12/30/1996
-12.28
11.78
-9.96
9.63
01/03/1997 - 07/03/2003
238.35***
-240.79***
130.03***
-130.03***
07/04/2003 - 03/06/2009
31.37
-34.80
-101.62
98.53
03/07/2009 - 12/30/2011
-36.51
33.61
24.13
-26.65
265.02***
-274.30***
88.68***
-80.64***
Ratio of trading profits to total
trading value
1.9%
-1.9%
-0.8%
0.7%
Panel C Between Domestic financial institutions and Foreign Nominees
Domestic
Institutions Cum.
P&L inclusive of
Nokia (EUR M)
Foreign Nominees
Cum. P&L
inclusive of Nokia
(EUR M)
Domestic
Institutions Cum.
P&L exclusive of
Nokia (EUR M)
Foreign Nominees
Cum. P&L
exclusive of Nokia
(EUR M)
01/03/1995 - 12/30/1996
-80.54
77.01
-67.52
65.38
01/03/1997 - 07/03/2003
7,606.44***
-7,619.03***
329.35***
-339.66***
07/04/2003 - 03/06/2009
1,000.44
-1,014.36
837.43
-850.10
03/07/2009 - 12/30/2011
-154.65
147.03
-32.00
25.23
15,111.45***
-15,149.12***
998.73***
-1,030.61***
Ratio of trading profits to total
trading value
22%
-22%
1.8%
-1.8%
∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01
71
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5356904
Preprint not peer reviewed
