 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2671732 
 
PERSPECTIVES: Quantitative Systems and Model Design 
 
1               
© July 2015 MAEG. Reprint with permission only.                                                                                                                
 
 
Why Most Quantitative Investing and Trading Systems Fail 
By Baijnath Ramraika and Prashant Trivedi  
July 28, 2015 
 
 
This article first appeared on Advisor Perspectives.  
 
 
 
“Invert, Always Invert.” – Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi, German Mathematician 
 
“Hundreds of studies have shown that wherever we have sufficient information to build a model, it will 
perform better than most people.” – Daniel Kahneman (as you read this statement, don’t forget to 
consider the implication of the word “sufficient”) 
 
“Roger Federer plays tennis using Wilson racquets. I use Wilson racquets. Does that make me Roger 
Federer?” – Paraphrasing a friend of ours. 
 
 
In an interesting post, the fund manager Dominique Dassault talked about a time when he was 
fascinated with quantitative black box trading systems. As he was talking to a leading quantitative 
portfolio manager about quantitative systems, the portfolio manager said something that surprised 
Dassault: While quantitative algorithms may work for a while, even for a long while, eventually, they all 
just completely blow up. When asked about the reasons for the blow up, here is what the he had to say: 
 
Because despite what we all want to believe about our own intellectual uniqueness, at its core, 
we are all doing the same thing. And when that occurs a lot of trades get too crowded...and 
when we all want to liquidate (these similar trades) at the same time…that’s when it gets very 
ugly. 
 
Dominique went on to offer a good summary of what quantitative managers are doing, including lowenforced back-test volatility, high leverage and increased concentration of risk. All have a very logical 
rationale.  
 
However, at the core of this problem is a much more basic issue: logical fallacy. 
 
Defining quality – The quantitative way 
 
Most, if not all, quantitative systems are designed by selecting factors that were present in successful 
investments/trades over the selected back-test period. Typically, a system developer will pick up a host 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2671732

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2671732 
 
PERSPECTIVES: Quantitative Systems and Model Design 
 
2               
© July 2015 MAEG. Reprint with permission only.                                                                                                                
 
 
of factors and run simulations in order to identify which factors were associated with better investment 
returns.  
 
To further expound upon this process, let’s consider the case of quality as an investment factor. It has 
received a lot of attention by academics as well as developers of quantitative investment strategies. It is 
the latest fad in the jungle of investment factors. 
 
Most quantitative strategies that promise to utilize quality as the dominant selection factor employ 
returns on capital or some variation of it. This is driven by the finding that companies that generated 
higher returns on capital have been associated with higher subsequent investment returns. Of course, as 
quantitative managers try to step over each other in an effort to showcase the superiority of their 
system, most of them gravitate towards significantly more complex systems, introducing a multitude of 
factors in their models.  
 
The idea that a high-quality business generates higher returns on capital passes the muster of 
commonsense as well. Let’s say that the average return on capital of all businesses is 10%. What this 
means is that when you invest $100,000 in a business, on average, you will expect to earn US$10,000 
from your investment. But what if the business that you invested your $100,000 was earning you 
$15,000 instead? Most quantitative systems, as they define quality currently, will likely conclude that we 
have a high-quality business on our hands.  
 
The fallacy of the converse 
 
Clearly, for a business to be considered superior, it needs to generate returns on capital that are greater 
than the average business. While this statement, if correct, establishes that all high-quality businesses 
are associated with high returns on capital, it does not follow that all businesses that earn high returns 
on capital are high quality businesses. But, that’s exactly what most quantitative systems are likely to 
conclude. As high returns on capital are likely to be present in every high-quality business, the 
quantitative system will likely conclude that every business that earns excess returns on capital is a highquality business. This argument is not very different from saying that because I play using Wilson 
racquets, I am Roger Federer! 
 
This kind of an argument construction falls in the trap of fallacy of the converse, also known as affirming 
the consequent. Consider the following argument form: 
 
1. If Dog, Four Legs (another way of saying that dogs have four legs). 
2. Four Legs (I found something with four legs). 
3. Therefore, Dog (this thing is a dog). 
 
Obviously, this is an invalid argument. Not everything that has four legs is a dog. Similarly, not every 
company that is earning returns on capital in excess of cost of capital is a high quality business. 
 
High returns on capital – Necessary but not sufficient condition 
 
As Daniel Kahneman said, wherever we have “sufficient” information to build a model, it will perform 
better than most people. We posit a key question here: While ability to earn higher returns on capital is 
a necessary condition for the presence of a high-quality business, is it the sufficient condition? 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2671732

 
PERSPECTIVES: Quantitative Systems and Model Design 
 
3               
© July 2015 MAEG. Reprint with permission only.                                                                                                                
 
 
 
Before you jump to a conclusion, we thought it instructive to share with you the business experience of 
Baijnath’s father. Back in the 1970s, in a small town of Northern India, the elder Mr. Ramraika started a 
business selling clothes. His industry showed up in his business performance, and he was quickly able to 
earn returns on capital that were well above the cost of capital. The necessary condition of high returns 
on capital was met. But did he have a high-quality business? 
 
Over the next few years, the business landscape changed. Attracted by the success of businessmen like 
the elder Ramraika, many more entrepreneurs entered the business, using either their own capital or 
borrowings. The same town, which had about five such businesses in the seventies, now houses more 
than 100 such businesses. So while the target customer base increased by a factor of three, the number 
of competitors increased more than 20-fold! Not surprisingly, the end result of this process was sub-par 
returns for everyone involved. 
 
What happened? Why did the number of competitors mushroom? The answer lies in the absence of 
barriers to entry. The barriers to entry, if there were any, were surmountable. It was possible for other 
entrepreneurs to enter the business. As additional capital flowed in, returns on capital were driven 
down.  
 
Clearly, it was not a high-quality business. It was a business that was enjoying a temporary competitive 
advantage that emanated from a demand-supply mismatch. A situation that had an over-rectification as 
capital flowed to reap the perceived excess rewards. 
 
Avoiding the fallacy of the converse: Invert, always invert 
 
The key issue here is that most quant systems seek out factors that were associated with 
trades/investments that generated superior investment returns. Such a process ignores Jacobi’s insight, 
“Invert, Always Invert.” It is as important, if not more so, to understand those cases that shared the 
same characteristics but did not work well.  
 
For example, if one were to study the fate of the elder Ramraika’s business, it would be abundantly clear 
that the lack of entry barriers drove returns on capital down. This insight leads to the conclusion that 
excess returns on capital is not a “sufficient” condition. For the business to be able to sustain the excess 
returns, barriers to entry need to be present, and they need to be strong. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Be careful before jumping to yet another conclusion. Much like the error with accepting returns on 
capital as the sufficient condition, if you conclude that barriers to entry is the sufficient condition, you 
will be falling prey to the same fallacy. If barriers to entry are present, but they do not lead to higher 
returns on capital, a business is still not high quality. Judging the presence or absence of barriers to 
entry is best handled by qualitative, human judgement, while judging the superiority of returns on 
capital is best handled by the machine. 
 
The underlying cause of eventual failure of most quantitative investing and trading strategies has to do 
with how the factors are identified. Those that apply Jacobi’s suggestion and focus on sufficiency of 
conditions in their model definitions will carry much lower risk of system failure. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2671732

 
PERSPECTIVES: Quantitative Systems and Model Design 
 
4               
© July 2015 MAEG. Reprint with permission only.                                                                                                                
 
 
 
 
Baijnath Ramraika, CFA, is the CEO and CIO at Multi-Act EquiGlobe Limited (MAEG). Contact him at 
ramraika@gmail.com. He maintains a blog at Symantaka. 
 
Prashant Trivedi, CFA, is the Chairman at MAEG and is the founding chairman of Multi-Act Trade and 
Investments Pvt. Ltd. MAEG is an investment manager based in Mauritius managing investment funds 
focused on high quality businesses.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2671732
