A Critical Examination of Ensemble Q-Learning for
Pairs Trading
Arnav Rayaprolu
April 2, 2026
Abstract
Rayaprolu (2025), “An Empirical Assessment of Pairs Trading Using Ensemble Q-Learning,” reports
a six-month portfolio return of 105.2% and a Sharpe ratio of 2.08 on NIFTY 50 constituents. This
review examines the paper’s design choices, stated methodology, and accompanying codebase as a
single interconnected system. We identify a cascade of compounding flaws spanning every stage of the
pipeline: lookahead bias in z-score normalisation that invalidates both training and evaluation signals;
pair selection conducted on the evaluation window, introducing selection leakage; a spread construction
that contradicts the paper’s own theoretical framing; a state space that violates the Markov property the
paper invokes to justify Q-learning; a reward function with an economically meaningless PnL formula; a
capital model disconnected from real position mechanics; benchmark comparisons that are categorically
inappropriate for a market-neutral strategy; and a computational design requiring an estimated 33 to
80 hours of wall-clock time per full run with zero parallelisation. These flaws compound rather than
cancel: each one inflates the reported performance figures independently, and no single correction would
salvage the results. The paper’s reported numbers are not evidence of a profitable strategy.
1

Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Data Pipeline and the Lookahead Problem
3
2.1
Static Z-Score Normalisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Spread Construction Contradicts the Paper’s Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Pair Selection on Evaluation Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
The Reinforcement Learning Formulation
4
3.1
The Markov Property Is Not Satisfied
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
State Encoding: Aliasing and Information Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
The Reward Function Is Economically Meaningless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
Action Space Design and the Hold Redundancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Training Protocol and Computational Intractability
6
4.1
Episode Count and Convergence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Parallelisation Is Entirely Absent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
The Bayesian Optimisation Is Not Transfer-Safe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Portfolio Construction and Performance Evaluation
7
5.1
Capital Mechanics Have No Basis in Real Positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.2
CIPLA Concentration Is Unacknowledged . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.3
The Benchmark Comparison Is Categorically Wrong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.4
Sharpe Ratio Inflation from Annualisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.5
The Ten Runs Do Not Validate the Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6
The Gap Between Claims and Evidence
8
6.1
The Performance Comparison with Prior Literature Is Misleading . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.2
The Paper Does Not Report Actual Trade Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
7
Recommendations for a Credible Replication
9
8
Conclusion
9
2

1
Introduction
The application of reinforcement learning to statistical arbitrage is a legitimate and active research
area. Pairs trading provides a natural setting: the
environment is well-defined, the state can be compactly encoded, and the reward can in principle
be tied directly to financial outcomes. Rayaprolu
(2025) attempts to formalise this by combining ensemble Q-learning with Bayesian hyperparameter
search on hourly NIFTY 50 data, reporting a portfolio return that dwarfs every major equity index
benchmark over the same six-month window.
The paper is not without effort. Building a custom
OpenAI Gym environment, running Optuna-based
Bayesian optimisation, maintaining an ensemble
of Q-tables, and generating reproducible capital
curves represents a non-trivial engineering undertaking. The research question is worth asking. But
asking the right question and answering it correctly are different things, and in this case the gap
between them is large.
What follows is not a line-by-line bug report. It
is an attempt to read the paper and its code as
a unified research artifact and ask whether the
design choices, taken together, could plausibly produce the reported results for the right reasons.
The answer, at every stage, is no. The flaws are
not scattered or incidental; they form a coherent
chain in which each stage feeds inflated information forward to the next. We trace that chain from
data procurement through pair selection, spread
construction, state encoding, reward design, training protocol, and evaluation, treating the paper’s
prose and the code simultaneously because the
two frequently diverge in ways that compound the
underlying problems.
2
Data Pipeline and the Lookahead
Problem
2.1
Static Z-Score Normalisation
The most consequential flaw in the entire framework, introduced at the very first processing step,
is the static full-window z-score normalisation in
z-scoring.py and z-scoring2.py:
Listing 1: Static normalisation over the full data
window
1
spread = y - x
2
mean = np.mean(spread)
3
std
= np.std(spread)
4
z
= (spread - mean) / std
The mean and standard deviation are computed
over the entire dataset – all 1,638 hourly observations for the training file and all 853 for the
evaluation file – before any single observation is
normalised. This means the z-score at time t = 1 is
normalised using data from t = 2, 3, . . . , T. Every
single value fed to the RL agent as its primary state
signal encodes knowledge of the future distribution
of the spread. This is textbook lookahead bias.
Its consequences are not subtle. The normalised
signal is guaranteed to be mean-zero and unitvariance across the window by construction. The
agent therefore learns a policy calibrated to a signal
that perfectly reflects the statistical properties of
the entire data sample, including data it could
never have access to at time of decision. No live
deployment can replicate this signal because the
future is unknown.
The trained policy is, in a
precise sense, fitted to a dataset that does not and
cannot exist in practice.
The same problem applies to the evaluation window. Although the evaluation data is temporally
distinct from the training data (January 2025 onward), the evaluation z-scores in z-scoring2.py
are computed by the same static method over the
six-month evaluation period. An agent making a
decision at January 1, 2025, cannot know the mean
and standard deviation of the spread across the
following six months. The reported out-of-sample
performance is therefore not out-of-sample in any
meaningful sense: both the training signal and
the evaluation signal are constructed using future
information.
3

2.2
The Spread Construction Contradicts
the Paper’s Theory
The lookahead problem is worsened by a quiet divergence between the paper’s stated methodology
and what the code actually does. The paper correctly introduces the cointegration-based spread
following Engle and Granger (1987):
Spreadt = log(PA(t)) −β log(PB(t))
where β is estimated from OLS regression and the
stationarity of the residual is what the ADF test
evaluates. The paper is explicit that this is the
theoretically grounded construction and that β
captures the hedge ratio between the two assets.
The code does neither. The actual spread is:
1
spread = y - x
# y = df[a].values , x
= df[b]. values
Raw prices, not log prices. No β. No regression.
This implicitly assumes β = 1 and an intercept
of zero, which is only a reasonable approximation if both assets trade at similar price levels
with similar volatility. For pairs like HDFCBANK
and ICICIBANK, which have different absolute
price levels, a one-unit long-short position is not
a balanced hedge and the resulting spread is not
the cointegration residual the paper claims to be
analysing.
Furthermore,
the
cointegration
test
in
pair selection.py is applied to raw prices:
1
_, pval , _ = coint(s1 , s2)
The Engle-Granger methodology the paper cites is
designed for log prices, since log price series are the
ones expected to follow unit-root processes with
a potentially cointegrating combination. Testing
raw prices inflates apparent cointegration strength,
particularly for assets whose prices have drifted
significantly over the sample. The pair selection is
presented as rigorous application of Engle-Granger,
but it applies neither the log transformation nor
the estimated hedge ratio that the method requires.
2.3
Pair Selection on Evaluation Data
The
pair
selection
code
loads
nifty50 hourly prices2.csv,
the
January
2025 to July 2025 file – the same period used for
out-of-sample evaluation. The five pairs chosen
for the portfolio are therefore the pairs that
exhibited the strongest cointegration and highest
z-score crossing frequency during the evaluation
period itself.
CIPLA-NTPC, which reports the
highest individual return of 212.24%, was selected
precisely because its spread was well-behaved over
the evaluation window.
This is selection leakage. No forward-looking investor could have known in January 2025 which
pairs would exhibit the highest crossing frequency
over the following six months. Selecting on those
pairs and then reporting their returns over that
same window produces numbers that say nothing about the strategy’s predictive ability. The
reported performance is, in part, a description of
which pairs happened to work well, not a prediction
of which pairs would work well.
The composite scoring framework has a further
structural issue: the z-score crossing frequency,
which contributes 50% of the score, is computed
from the same lookahead-biased z-scores discussed
above. A pair with high crossing frequency on
lookahead-normalised z-scores will also have high
crossing frequency on correctly normalised rolling
z-scores if and only if the spread is genuinely meanreverting, but the two are not equivalent. The
static normalisation inflates crossing counts for
pairs whose spread happened to fluctuate around
a level close to the full-window mean, which is a
property visible only in hindsight.
3
The Reinforcement Learning Formulation
3.1
The Markov Property Is Not Satisfied
The paper invokes the Markov Decision Process
framework at length, citing the Markov property
– that the next state depends only on the current
state and action – as the theoretical justification
for Q-learning.
The theoretical convergence of
4

tabular Q-learning to the optimal value function
requires this property to hold. Yet the paper simultaneously encodes the state as a rolling window
of the three most recent z-score values. This is
self-contradictory.
If the Markov property held with respect to the
instantaneous z-score, one observation would be
sufficient state representation and no history would
be needed. Including a window of length three is
an explicit acknowledgment that the single z-score
is not sufficient to predict the next state distribution. The process is, by the paper’s own design, at
least weakly non-Markovian: the agent needs history to act effectively. Using three steps of history
without any theoretical justification for why three
is sufficient – rather than five, ten, or fifty – means
the agent is likely operating on a partially observable MDP (POMDP) with an arbitrarily truncated
information set. Q-learning does not converge to
the optimal policy under partial observability.
3.2
State Encoding: Aliasing and Information Loss
The state is encoded as:
state =


2
X
j=0
bin(zt−2+j) · 15j

· 3 + pos idx
Each z-score value is mapped to one of 15 bins
covering the range [−5, 5], giving a bin width of
10
15 ≈0.667 standard deviations. At the centre of
the distribution, this means z-score values of 0.1
and 0.6 are mapped to the same bin and are completely indistinguishable from the agent’s perspective. The mean-crossing signal the paper places at
the heart of its pair selection methodology – the
number of times the z-score crosses zero – is essentially invisible to the agent, since the zero-crossing
occurs within a single bin spanning [−0.33, +0.33].
At the tails, all values beyond ±5 standard deviations are collapsed into the extreme bins:
1
zidx = [min(Z_BINS - 1, max(0, int((z
+ 5) / 10 * Z_BINS))) for z in
zvals]
A z-score of 5.1 and one of 12.0 are identical states.
The agent cannot distinguish between a large-butrecoverable deviation and an extreme divergence.
This is the region where position sizing and exit
urgency are most consequential, and it is entirely
opaque to the agent.
The total state space of 153 × 3 = 10,125 states
sounds large but is actually a very coarse discretisation of a three-dimensional continuous space.
The fact that the paper reports a Sharpe ratio
of 3.12 for CIPLA-NTPC while the agent operates
on this impoverished state representation should
itself prompt scepticism: an agent that cannot distinguish a z-score of 0.1 from one of 0.6 is unlikely
to be making sophisticated trading decisions.
3.3
The Reward Function Is Economically
Meaningless
The PnL at the heart of the reward function is
computed as:
Listing 2: PnL calculation in the step function
1
pnl = self.entry_amt * self.pos * (
self.entry_z - z_cur) / 10
This multiplies capital by position direction by the
change in z-score, divided by 10. The z-score is
a dimensionless, normalised number. Multiplying
it by a capital amount does not yield a dollar
profit or loss – it yields a number that has units
of rupees-per-standard-deviation, which is not a
financial quantity. The arbitrary division by 10
is unexplained and does not restore dimensional
consistency.
In reality, the profit on a pairs trade depends on
the actual price movements of each leg, the number
of shares held in each leg, and the estimated hedge
ratio.
None of these appear in the calculation.
The capital curve plotted in the paper and used to
compute returns and Sharpe ratios does not reflect
what a real investor would have earned. It reflects
the accumulation of an internally defined quantity
that has a superficial resemblance to capital but
no connection to market prices.
The paper’s reward function compounds this with
several additional incentive problems. The entry
5

reward:
rentry = 0.5 · |zt| + 0.05
rewards the agent for entering when the absolute zscore is large, regardless of direction. An agent can
receive an identical entry reward by entering a longshort or short-long position when the z-score is at
+2 or −2. The direction of the trade relative to
the sign of the z-score – which determines whether
the trade is mean-reverting or mean-diverging – is
not part of the reward signal at entry. The agent
is incentivised to trade when the spread is large
in magnitude, not to trade in the direction that
exploits mean reversion.
The growth bonus rgrowth = 0.05 · (Ct −C0)/C0
is applied unconditionally at every step, regardless of any action taken. Its effect is to create a
persistent upward reward signal for any episode in
which capital has previously been above the initial
level. Combined with the inertia introduced by
this bonus, the agent is implicitly penalised for
exiting positions that are in profit, since exiting a
profitable position does not increase Ct beyond its
current level. This pushes against the very meanreversion exit behaviour the strategy is supposed
to exploit.
Transaction costs are charged twice per round trip:
once on entry:
1
self.cap
-= self.tc * amt
and once on exit:
1
self.cap += pnl - self.tc * self.
entry_amt
Both charges are levied on the full entry capital.
A round trip therefore incurs a cost of 2×0.09% =
0.18% of capital, which is double the stated cost of
a single trade. This is inconsistent with the paper’s
description of a 0.09% cost per trade.
3.4
Action Space Design and the Hold Redundancy
The action space contains six actions: hold, two
long-short entry variants, two short-long entry variants, and exit.
Actions 1, 2 (long-short) and
actions 3, 4 (short-long) are described as entry
and “alternative entry” respectively, but the code
treats them identically:
actions 1 and 2 both
set self.pos = 1, and actions 3 and 4 both set
self.pos = -1. There is no functional distinction
between the two variants. This means the agent
has an effective action space of four (hold, longshort entry, short-long entry, exit) but is searching
over a Q-table of size 10,125 × 6. The redundant
actions do not expand the agent’s capability; they
expand the search space without adding information, slowing convergence and increasing the number of Q-table entries that need to be visited before
estimates stabilise.
4
Training Protocol and Computational Intractability
4.1
Episode Count and Convergence
The main agent (rl agent.py) trains for 50,000
episodes per Q-table, with 3 Q-tables per run and
10 independent runs per pair across 5 pairs. This
gives 50,000 × 3 × 10 × 5 = 7,500,000 total training
episodes. At an average of roughly 400 steps per
episode – accounting for early termination when
the 25% drawdown limit is hit, which occurs frequently in early random-exploration episodes – this
amounts to approximately 3 × 109 environment
steps.
A pure-Python OpenAI Gym environment of this
complexity – with multiple conditional branches,
list appends,
attribute lookups,
and a listcomprehension-based state computation – typically
executes at between 20,000 and 50,000 steps per
second on a modern CPU core. At 30,000 steps
per second:
3 × 109
30,000 ≈100,000 seconds ≈28 hours
for the main training loop. The Bayesian optimisation (bayesian optimisation.py) adds 60×15×
8,000×400 = 2.88×109 additional steps, contributing another 16 to 27 hours. The full pipeline from
Bayesian search through final evaluation therefore
requires an estimated 33 to 80 hours of wall-clock
time on a single CPU core.
6

This is not a minor inconvenience. A strategy that
requires over a day of compute per training run
cannot be retrained in response to regime changes,
cannot be cross-validated across multiple time windows within a reasonable timeframe, and cannot
be iterated on during development. For a tabular
Q-learning approach – one of the simplest RL algorithms, with a Q-table totalling just 60,750 scalar
entries of 475 KB – this is a sign of a fundamental
design mismatch between the method and the scale
at which it is applied.
4.2
Parallelisation Is Entirely Absent
The code contains no parallelisation. The 10 evaluation runs per pair, the 3 ensemble members per
run, and the 60 Bayesian optimisation trials are
all executed sequentially. Each of these loops is
trivially parallelisable: ensemble members share no
state, evaluation runs share no state, and Bayesian
trials (after the initial warm-up) can be dispatched
in parallel batches. On an 8-core machine, straightforward use of multiprocessing.Pool would reduce the main loop from 28 hours to roughly 3.5
hours with no changes to the algorithm. The paper
does not mention this as a limitation or as future
work.
4.3
The Bayesian Optimisation Is Not
Transfer-Safe
The hyperparameter search is conducted exclusively on the BPCL-CIPLA pair and the resulting values – learning rate 0.015, discount factor
0.99, ϵ decay 0.999, entry threshold 0.01 – are
applied unchanged to all five pairs. The implicit
assumption is that optimal hyperparameters for
one pair generalise to all others. This is not justified. CIPLA-NTPC involves a pharmaceutical
stock paired with a power utility; EICHERMOTM&M involves two automotive manufacturers;
HDFCBANK-ICICIBANK involves two large-cap
banks. These pairs have different spread volatilities, different mean-reversion speeds, and different
liquidity profiles, all of which affect the optimal
learning rate and discount factor. Using BPCLCIPLA as a proxy for all five pairs adds another
source of miscalibration to an already flawed evaluation.
The optimised entry threshold of 0.01 standard deviations is itself a failure of the search. A threshold
of 0.01 is functionally zero: the absolute z-score of
the spread exceeds 0.01 almost continuously, meaning the entry condition is effectively always active.
The purpose of an entry threshold in pairs trading
is to define a zone of significant divergence from
the mean, typically ±1 or ±2 standard deviations.
Optimising this threshold using a contaminated
z-score signal over a single pair and arriving at 0.01
suggests the search is not finding a meaningful signal – it is finding the configuration that maximises
a noisy, lookahead-biased objective.
5
Portfolio Construction and Performance Evaluation
5.1
Capital Mechanics Have No Basis in
Real Positions
The environment deploys the full capital on each
trade:
1
amt = self.cap
2
self.entry_amt = amt
In a genuine pairs trade, capital is deployed across
two legs simultaneously: a long position in one
asset and a short position in the other. The capital
required is the sum of both notional exposures,
and the hedge ratio β determines the relative size
of each leg. The code represents capital as a single
scalar with no leg decomposition, no share counts,
and no hedge ratio. There is no connection between the capital number in the simulation and
the capital a real portfolio manager would need to
allocate to execute the trade.
5.2
CIPLA Concentration Is Unacknowledged
The portfolio consists of five pairs: BPCL-CIPLA,
CIPLA-NTPC,
ADANIENT-TATACONSUM,
EICHERMOT-M&M,
and
HDFCBANKICICIBANK. CIPLA appears in two of the
five pairs, meaning any position in the CIPLANTPC spread creates additional exposure to
7

CIPLA beyond what is already present in the
BPCL-CIPLA spread. The paper treats all five
pairs as independent allocations of equal capital
and computes the portfolio return as the mean
of five independent returns.
This understates
the effective concentration and overstates the
diversification of the portfolio.
5.3
The Benchmark Comparison Is Categorically Wrong
Table 1 of the paper compares the strategy’s sixmonth return against the NIFTY 50, S&P 500,
FTSE 100, MSCI World Index, and Hang Seng
Index, presenting up to 103.74 percentage points
of “excess return” α. This comparison is not valid.
Pairs trading is a market-neutral strategy: by construction, it takes simultaneous long and short
positions in correlated assets, hedging out broad
market exposure. Its returns are not earned by
taking on equity beta and should not be compared
against long-only equity indices. The appropriate
benchmark for a market-neutral strategy is the
risk-free rate (the 10-year government bond yield,
approximately 6.79% annualised at the time, or
roughly 3.4% over six months), or alternatively a
hedge fund index with comparable leverage and
sector profile. Comparing against equity indices inflates the apparent excess return by the full magnitude of the equity risk premium, which the strategy
was never exposed to.
5.4
Sharpe Ratio Inflation from Annualisation
The Sharpe ratio is computed as:
1
sharpe = (excess_returns .mean () /
returns.std()) * np.sqrt(
periods_per_year )
with periods per year = 853.
The evaluation
window provides approximately 853/2 ≈426 return observations, since the evaluation covers six
months.
Annualising a Sharpe ratio computed
from only 426 observations by multiplying by
√
853
introduces a known upward bias when returns
happen to be positive and have low estimated
volatility over that window.
A Sharpe ratio of
3.12 for CIPLA-NTPC, reported to two decimal
places from a single six-month sample with a flawed
capital curve, has enormous sampling uncertainty
that the paper does not acknowledge.
5.5
The Ten Runs Do Not Validate the
Strategy
The paper reports standard deviations across 10
independent training-evaluation runs for each pair,
presenting this as evidence of stability. But the
variance captured by these 10 runs is entirely the
variance of the training stochasticity – different random seeds, different Q-table initialisations – not
the variance of the strategy’s performance across
different market conditions. A strategy can have
very low run-to-run variance (i.e., the RL training converges consistently) while having extremely
high regime-to-regime variance (i.e., the trained
policy performs very differently in bull markets,
bear markets, or sideways markets). The paper
conflates these two entirely different sources of uncertainty and uses the first to make implicit claims
about the second.
6
The Gap Between Claims and Evidence
6.1
The Performance Comparison with
Prior Literature Is Misleading
The paper compares its 105.2% six-month portfolio return against Gatev et al. (2006)’s annualised
excess return of 11%, Pizzutilo (2013)’s 11.84%
annual gross return, and Yang and Malik (2024)’s
31.53% annualised profit. The comparison is presented as evidence of superior performance. However, the earlier studies use correctly constructed
backtests with proper out-of-sample separation,
realistic spread constructions, and – in the case
of Gatev et al. – multiple decades of data. The
present paper’s 105.2% figure is derived from a single six-month evaluation window on a lookaheadbiased signal with selection-leaked pairs. These
numbers are not commensurable. Presenting them
side by side as if they measure the same thing
misleads the reader about the magnitude of the
improvement.
8

6.2
The Paper Does Not Report Actual
Trade Details
The paper reports aggregate statistics – average return, Sharpe ratio, maximum drawdown, win rate
– but does not provide granular trade-level data:
what the actual entry and exit z-score thresholds
were in practice, how many trades were executed
per pair, what the average holding period was, or
whether the agent consistently held the correct
direction. Without this detail it is impossible to
determine whether the agent has learned a coherent mean-reversion policy or whether the returns
are driven by a small number of large lucky trades.
The win rate is mentioned but not tabulated in
the paper.
7
Recommendations for a Credible
Replication
A corrected version of this framework would need
to address each of the above issues as an integrated
whole, not as isolated patches. The most important
changes, in order of impact:
The z-score normalisation must use a rolling window whose length is treated as a hyperparameter.
Mean and standard deviation should be computed
only from data available at or before time t. The
same rolling parameters estimated on the training
period should be applied to normalise the evaluation data, not recomputed on the evaluation
window. The spread should be constructed as the
cointegration residual, log PA −ˆβ log PB, using the
estimated hedge ratio from an OLS regression on
the training period.
Pair selection must use only training-period data.
The cointegration test and crossing frequency metric should be applied to training-period spreads,
and the five selected pairs should be fixed before
the evaluation window is examined. The use of log
prices in the cointegration test aligns the implementation with the Engle-Granger methodology
the paper cites.
The PnL calculation must be grounded in actual
price movements. Profit on a pairs trade is:
PnL = nA(P exit
A
−P entry
A
) −nB(P exit
B
−P entry
B
)
where nA and nB are share counts satisfying the
dollar-neutral condition nAPA = nBPB or the
beta-neutral condition nAPA = ˆβ · nBPB. This
calculation requires the raw price series to be available inside the environment, which they currently
are not.
The state representation should be extended and
the encoding approach reconsidered. A window
of 10 to 20 steps provides more context for the
agent’s mean-reversion decisions.
More importantly, switching to a continuous state representation with function approximation (even a linear
approximator or a shallow neural network) eliminates the aliasing problem entirely and allows the
agent to generalise across neighbouring z-score levels rather than treating each bin as an isolated
state.
Evaluation must cover multiple non-overlapping
windows and report performance distributions
across those windows, not a single-window point
estimate. Walk-forward testing – reselecting pairs
and retraining the agent at each rebalancing date
using only historical data – is the minimum standard for a credible backtest.
Benchmarking should use the risk-free rate and a
suitable hedge fund or statistical arbitrage index.
Reporting excess return over the NIFTY 50 is
not appropriate for a market-neutral strategy and
should be removed.
8
Conclusion
This review has traced a chain of compounding
methodological failures through the Rayaprolu
(2025) framework. The chain begins with the first
data processing step – static z-score normalisation
– which embeds future information into every signal
the agent ever sees. It continues through pair selection conducted on the evaluation window, which
selects the pairs that happened to perform well
rather than the pairs expected to perform well. It
runs through a spread construction that contradicts
9

the paper’s theoretical framing by discarding the
hedge ratio central to the Engle-Granger methodology.
It passes through a state encoding that
violates the Markov property the paper uses to justify Q-learning, aliases distinct market conditions
to identical states, and ignores the zero-crossing
signal the pair selection framework is built to find.
It reaches the reward function, where the PnL calculation has no financial meaning and the incentive
structure pushes the agent in the wrong direction.
It continues through a capital model disconnected
from real position mechanics and a portfolio construction that counts overlapping CIPLA exposure
as independent diversification. And it concludes
with an evaluation framework that compares a
market-neutral strategy against long-only equity
indices and presents run-to-run training variance
as evidence of strategic robustness.
None of these failures is accidental or isolated. Together they form a system in which the reported
performance figures are an artefact of the design
rather than a reflection of genuine predictive power.
The 105.2% portfolio return and 2.08 Sharpe ratio cannot be taken as evidence that ensemble Qlearning works for pairs trading. They are evidence
of what happens when lookahead bias, selection
leakage, and an incoherent reward function are
compounded through 7.5 million training episodes.
The underlying research question – whether ensemble Q-learning can improve on rule-based pairs
trading – remains worth pursuing. The path to an
honest answer requires a clean pipeline in which no
future information contaminates any earlier step.
Building that pipeline correctly is substantially
harder than building the pipeline in the current
paper. The difficulty is not a reason to avoid it; it
is the reason the results need to be taken seriously
when the work is done properly.
10

Appendix: Summary of Identified Flaws
Table 1: Catalogue of critical issues identified in Rayaprolu (2025)
Component
Issue
Recommended Fix
Z-score normalisation
Static over full window; both train and
eval contaminated with future data
Rolling window; eval normalised with
train-period parameters
Spread construction
Raw prices, β = 1 implicit; contradicts
Engle-Granger framing
Log prices;
OLS-estimated
ˆβ from
training period
Pair selection
Conducted on evaluation-period data;
selection leakage
Train-period data only; pairs fixed before eval window is seen
Cointegration test
Applied to raw prices, not log prices
Apply to log-transformed price series
Composite score
Crossing frequency is a consequence
of cointegration; redundant doublecounting
Use independent metrics or justify the
combination
Markov property
Three-step history implies POMDP;
convergence guarantee lost
Longer history; or explicit recurrent/POMDP formulation
State encoding
Coarse binning aliases distinct z-scores;
tails collapsed
Continuous state with function approximation
Action space
Two identical entry pairs inflate Qtable size without adding capability
Reduce to 4 effective actions
PnL formula
Z-score difference scaled by arbitrary
constant; not a financial quantity
Price-based
PnL
with
hedge-ratiodetermined share counts
Transaction costs
Double-charged per round trip
Single commission per trade
Entry threshold
Optimised to 0.01, effectively always
active
Search over [0.5, 2.5]σ range
Growth bonus
Applied unconditionally every step; penalises exits
Tie explicitly to profitable closed trades
Capital model
Full capital as scalar; no leg decomposition
Per-leg allocation with dollar-neutral
or beta-neutral sizing
CIPLA concentration
Appears in two pairs; treated as independent
Adjust for overlapping asset exposure
Benchmark
Long-only indices vs. market-neutral
strategy
Risk-free rate or stat-arb hedge fund
index
Sharpe annualisation
Annualised from 6-month sample; inflated by short window
Report
non-annualised
Sharpe
or
widen confidence interval
Evaluation window
Single 6-month window; variance is
train stochasticity only
Multiple
non-overlapping
windows;
walk-forward testing
Hyperparameter transfer
BO on BPCL-CIPLA only; applied to
all five pairs
Pair-specific search or pooled multipair objective
Computational design
33–80 hours for full pipeline; zero parallelisation
Parallelise ensemble/runs; use function
approximation
11

References
[1] Rayaprolu, A. (2025). An empirical assessment of pairs trading using ensemble Q-learning. International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and Science, 7(7), 2152–2164.
[2] Gatev, E., Goetzmann, W. N., & Rouwenhorst, K. G. (2006). Pairs trading: Performance of a
relative-value arbitrage rule. Review of Financial Studies, 19(3), 797–827.
[3] Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction (2nd ed.). MIT
Press.
[4] Watkins, C. J. C. H., & Dayan, P. (1992). Q-learning. Machine Learning, 8(3–4), 279–292.
[5] Anschel, O., Baram, N., & Shimkin, N. (2017). Averaged-DQN: Variance reduction and stabilization
for deep reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, 176–185.
[6] Engle, R. F., & Granger, C. W. J. (1987). Co-integration and error correction: Representation,
estimation, and testing. Econometrica, 55(2), 251–276.
[7] Avellaneda, M., & Lee, J. H. (2010). Statistical arbitrage in the US equities market. Quantitative
Finance, 10(7), 761–782.
[8] Yang, H., & Malik, A. (2024). Reinforcement learning pair trading: A dynamic scaling approach.
Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 17(12), Article 555.
[9] Vidyamurthy, G. (2004). Pairs Trading: Quantitative Methods and Analysis. John Wiley & Sons.
[10] Poterba, J. M., & Summers, L. H. (1988). Mean reversion in stock prices: Evidence and implications.
Journal of Financial Economics, 22(1), 27–59.
12
