 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875 
High Frequency Trading and Fundamental Trading∗
Sarah Draus†
First version: February 2017
Abstract
I develop a multi-period trading model to analyze how a fundamental trader adjusts
his trading strategies and information production decisions to the existence of high frequency trading (HFT). I show that these decisions diﬀer strongly depending on the type
of information that the HFT can observe. Information correlated with past trading activity reduces fundamental trading and information production, and leads to lower price
informativeness, compared to a benchmark without HFT. HFT information correlated
with fundamental information does not induce these eﬀects, and prices may become more
informative on average. Moreover, I study the ability of prices to reﬂect the asset value
and produced information over time. My results are consistent with empirical ﬁndings
highlighting that HFT enhances price discovery in the short run, and others suggesting
that HFT reduces the ability of prices to reﬂect long-term fundamental information.
JEL Codes: G1, G14
Keywords: high frequency trading, fundamental information, price eﬃciency, price
informativeness, front-running
∗I would like to thank seminar participants at the university of Naples as well as Marco Pagano for valuable
comments.
†Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University, Department of Finance, Burgemeester Oudlaan 50,
P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands. E-mail: draus@rsm.nl.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875 
High frequency traders have become major players on ﬁnancial markets. Although they are
not genuinely interested in collecting fundamental information, empirical evidence indicates that
they trade on average in the direction of permanent price changes (Brogaard et al. (2014)). A
salient characteristic of high frequency traders is their co-location at numerous exchanges. Not
only does this allow fast trading, it also enables these traders to get a privileged and fast access
to market data on transactions and limit order books. In addition, their algorithms typically
collect a large amount of data from press releases, analyst reports and other information sources
(Menkveld 2016). Such data conveys information about trading strategies or signals of other
market participants, and is used by high frequency traders to implement their own trading
strategies.1 Recent empirical evidence suggests that these resources enable them speciﬁcally to
detect and predict order ﬂow coming from fundamental traders who seek to exploit privately
collected information (Hirschey (2016), Clark-Joseph (2014)). This allows to trade in the same
direction as fundamental traders, and, combined with the fast trading technology, to front-run
these, presumably lowering their information rents.
In this paper, I investigate how a fundamental trader adjusts his information collection
and trading decisions to the existence of high frequency trading. Using a three-period trading
model, I demonstrate that these adjustments depend crucially on the type of information that
the high frequency trader can observe. If this information is correlated with the fundamental
trader’s past trading activities (this may be the case if the high frequency trader processes
order book data and ﬁlters out (imperfectly) noise trading), the latter will strongly adjust both
information collection and trading decisions to avoid being detected by the high frequency
trader. However, if the high frequency trader observes a signal correlated with the information
of the fundamental trader (by processing data from analyst reports and other sources of hard
information to evaluate the consensus beliefs of better informed market participants), the decisions of the fundamental trader are little aﬀected. Indeed, in this case the fundamental trader’s
actions cannot inﬂuence the information obtained by the high frequency trader.
Moreover, I explore how the decisions of the fundamental trader in the presence of high
frequency trading inﬂuence the incorporation of information into prices in the short run and
in the long run. Since the collection of fundamental information may be modiﬁed with the
existence of high frequency trading, my analysis highlights the importance to consider how both
producible information and produced information are reﬂected in prices over time. To this end,
I construct and evaluate two diﬀerent measures. The ﬁrst one, labelled price informativeness,
refers to producible fundamental information and assesses the extent to which prices reﬂect the
fundamental value of the asset. The second one, labelled price eﬃciency, measures how much
of the information produced by the fundamental trader is incorporated in prices. Compared
to a benchmark economy without high frequency trading, both measures might increase or
decrease with high frequency trading, depending on the nature of the high frequency trader’s
information. Interestingly, both measures might diverge over time: prices might incorporate
1High frequency traders use a wide range of trading strategies implying both aggressive trading and liquidity
provision (see e.g. Hagströmer and Norden (2013). For a more detailed description of high frequency trading
see Menkveld (2016), Gomber et al. (2011) and Biais and Woolley (2011).
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875 
more produced information, but they might reﬂect the asset value less well eventually.
The model is based on the following building blocks. In each trading round, liquidity traders
and informed traders submit orders to a risk neutral and competitive market maker. Market
clearing is modelled similarly to Kyle (1985). Among informed traders, there is a fundamental
trader who can trade only at a low frequency (i.e.
in periods 1 and 3) but who has the
necessary means to collect and process costly information about the asset value (henceforth
called fundamental information). There is also a high frequency trader who can trade in every
period but who is unable to collect directly fundamental information.
The high frequency
trader, however, is not completely uninformed: he can discover imperfectly the direction of
past fundamental order ﬂow in order to predict coming fundamental trading. He can do so
either by observing realized transactions on multiple exchanges, or by observing an exogenous
signal on the information collected by the fundamental trader. Both information types cannot
be observed by the market maker. Hence he can exploit this information in any trading round,
including the period in which the fundamental trader cannot access the market (t = 2). The
analysis focuses on the trading decisions of the fundamental trader in every period in which he
can trade, as well as on the amount of information he chooses to produce at the beginning of
the game, and which, in this model, corresponds to the precision level of his signal.
The results show that the type of information observed by the high frequency trader has a
crucial impact on the way in which the decisions of the fundamental trader change with high
frequency trading compared to the benchmark case without high frequency trading. Moreover,
the dynamics of price eﬃciency and price informativeness also depend on the information type.
If the high frequency trader observes past trading activity, the fundamental trader changes
his behavior in two ways compared to the benchmark case: i) he reduces his trading intensity
in the ﬁrst trading round, and ii) he might reduce the precision of his signal. The lower trading
intensity reduces the ability of the high frequency trader to detect past fundamental trading.
Thereby, the high frequency trader predicts less accurately future fundamental order ﬂow and
his own trading is noisier. This raises the information rent of the fundamental trader in the
last period at the expense of a lower information rent in the ﬁrst period. Overall, producing
fundamental information becomes less proﬁtable compared to the benchmark.
If, instead, the high frequency trader can infer imperfectly the signal observed by the fundamental trader, the latter has no incentive to change his trading strategies in the ﬁrst period,
as this no longer contributes to hiding future trading intentions from the high frequency trader.
However, the optimal information precision is lower than in the benchmark (when information costs are suﬃciently high), since the information rent in the last period is reduced by
the front-running high frequency trader. Nevertheless, information precision is higher than in
the previous case in which the high frequency trader inferred information from past trading
activity.
Turning to the consequences of these changes in decisions on price informativeness and eﬃciency, both measures decrease in all periods relative to the benchmark when the high frequency
trader has information on past trading activity. Indeed, the reduced trading intensity lowers the
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

portion of produced information reﬂected in prices. This eﬀect combined with less information
production lowers also the extent to which prices reﬂect the asset value. Remarkably, price
eﬃciency (and informativeness) is also reduced in the second period in which the fundamental
trader never trades but the high frequency trader always trades upon his own information.
In this period, price eﬃciency would not have changed relative to the previous period in the
benchmark case (due to lack of informed trading). Here however, eﬃciency improves relative
to the previous period (thanks to high frequency trading), yet it remains lower than in the
benchmark. This is caused by the reduced trading intensity of the fundamental trader in the
ﬁrst period that lowers the incorporation of information in prices not only in that period, but
also in all subsequent periods. These results imply that when high frequency traders observe
information about trading activity, the information produced by the fundamental trader is incorporated in prices at a lower pace than in the benchmark case, resulting in ultimately less
informative prices. These results hold regardless of whether the fundamental trader reduces
the precision of his signal. Hence, in this scenario, the main driver behind persistently lower
price eﬃciency and informativeness is the lower intensity of fundamental trading in the ﬁrst
trading round.
In the second case, in which the high frequency trader observes a signal on the fundamental
trader’s information, diﬀerences in the dynamics of price eﬃciency and informativeness relative
to the benchmark case are more nuanced than previously. The unchanged trading decisions
of the fundamental trader combined with additional informed trading by the high frequency
trader lead to higher price eﬃciency in all periods except the ﬁrst one in which eﬃciency
does not change.
Thus, a higher portion of produced information is reﬂected in prices on
average. However, this does not necessarily lead to more informative prices. Compared to the
benchmark, price informativeness is always higher in the intermediate period in which only the
high frequency trader participates on the market, but it might be lower in the other periods
due to less information production. Hence, small information costs lead ultimately to a price
incorporating better the fundamental asset value thanks to the positive eﬀect of high frequency
trading, while high information costs reduce the ability of the price to reﬂect the fundamental
asset value due to less accurate fundamental information. With this information type, the
average eﬀect of high frequency trading on price informativeness over time also depends on
information costs: if these are small enough price informativeness increases on average relative
to the benchmark, otherwise it diminishes, despite equally intense fundamental trading and
despite additional information being always incorporated in the price in the second period.
This case features a disconnect between the speed at which prices reﬂect (partially) the asset
value and the portion of that value that is ultimately incorporated in the price. With low
information costs, the prices reﬂect better the actual asset value and the incorporation of
information occurs at a higher speed compared to the benchmark.
With high information
costs, in turn, some information is incorporated faster, but the price reﬂects less well the asset
value eventually.
The main contribution of this paper is the demonstration that the equilibrium decisions of a
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

fundamental trader diﬀer strongly depending on the type of information that is observed by the
high frequency trader. These results shed a new light upon the commonly expressed concern
that high frequency trading harms price discovery by lowering information rents and by inducing
thereby less informed trading and less information production (e.g. Stiglitz (2014)). While high
frequency trading lowers information rents of the fundamental trader in all scenarii considered
in this model, the rent reduction per se has only a negligible eﬀect on price informativeness.
Rather it is the interdependence between high frequency trading and fundamental trading
(particularly strong when past trading activity is the main information source of the high
frequency trader) that creates the strongest negative eﬀect on price informativeness. When this
interdependence does not exist, negative eﬀects caused by reduced information production may
be counterbalanced by the positive eﬀect of high frequency trading on price eﬃciency, possibly
leading to more informative prices. The explicit analysis of how diﬀerent types of information
sources used by high frequency traders impact the ability of prices to reﬂect produced and
producible information is new in the theoretical literature on this subject.
This paper contributes also to the literature on the eﬀects of high frequency trading on
informational eﬃciency of prices by developing a theory that is consistent with two seemingly
contradicting empirical ﬁndings. On the one hand, it is consistent with ﬁndings supporting
that high frequency traders trade on average in the direction of future price changes (Brogaard
(2014), Carrion (2013)). This is the case in the present model for any information type observed
by the high frequency trader. On the other hand, the theory developed in this paper is also
consistent with other empirical ﬁndings suggesting that the rise of high frequency trading has
led to prices that reﬂect less well long term information about asset values (Gider et al. (2016),
Weller (2016)). As a consequence, the ﬁndings in this paper call for caution in the interpretation
of empirical results about the eﬀect of high frequency trading on price informativeness: even if
prices are found to incorporate produced information at a higher speed, this does not necessarily
mean that the fundamental value of the asset is reﬂected better in prices compared to the
case without high frequency trading. Indeed, the changes in the equilibrium decisions of the
fundamental trader are crucial.
In a related paper, Yang and Zhu (2016) analyze the eﬀects of high frequency trading on
fundamental trading in a single market two-period setting. Both trader types trade at the same
frequency. The only diﬀerence between them is the ability of the fast trader to observe an exogenous signal on the previously submitted fundamental order ﬂow. The authors focus on the
properties of the Kyle (1985) model under these speciﬁc assumptions and show among other
that fast trading induces complex trading strategies by the fundamental trader (such as randomization strategies or market manipulation) and thereby less precise information collection. The
present paper complements their analysis in three aspects. First, it gives a micro-foundation to
order ﬂow information by introducing a multi-market setting, and emphasizes that distinguishing several types of high frequency trader information is crucial to understand the impact of fast
trading on fundamental traders. Second, this model considers diﬀerent trading frequencies and
shows that the ability to trade in periods in which the fundamental trader cannot access the
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

market determines to a large extent the trading strategy of the high frequency trader. Third,
it highlights the importance to distinguish produced information incorporated in prices which
is indeed enhanced through high frequency trading (similarly to Yang and Zhu (2016)) and the
ability of prices to reﬂect the asset value which can be impaired in the short and in the long run
by the initial decisions of the fundamental trader. Front-running, in turn, is an ingredient in Li
(2015) who also analyzes high frequency traders with order anticipation abilities, but focuses
the eﬀects of speed diﬀerentials between high frequency traders.
More broadly, this paper complements literature on high frequency trading and information.
Baldauf and Mollner (2015) study the consequences of high frequency trading in a setting
with multi-market trading and highlight negative eﬀects on information acquisition.
High
frequency trading in the context of fragmented markets is also analyzed in Biais et al. (2015).
These authors highlight the social cost related to high frequency trading that consists in overinvestment in trading speed. Foucault et al. (2016) study trading by high frequency traders
who can observe incoming public news faster than other traders. Budish et al. (2013) provide
evidence of the harmful eﬀects of mechanical arbitrage done by very fast traders and advocate
a change in the market structure away from continuous trading towards frequent auctions.
1
Model description
The economy has 4 periods. In periods 1 to 3, a risky asset can be traded. At the end of
the last period the payoﬀof the asset, v, is realized. It can take a high or a low value with
equal probabilities: vh and vl with vh > vl. This is common knowledge. In each trading round,
trading is intermediated by a competitive market maker. There are several types of traders:
liquidity traders, a fundamental trader and a high frequency trader. The fundamental trader
and the high frequency trader possess diﬀerent trading and information collection technologies.
All market participants are risk neutral. The asset can be traded on two exchanges labelled
main exchange and secondary exchange. The traders whose decisions are analyzed in this model
trade only on the main exchange. The secondary exchange is identical to the main one except
in liquidity trading and may serve as an information source for the high frequency trader.
Market maker. In each trading round, all traders submit their orders to a competitive
market maker.
Before he sets the price, his information set, It, is composed of the total
currently submitted order ﬂow, Xt, and the entire history of submitted order ﬂows on his own
exchange, {X1,...,Xt−1}. Similar to Kyle (1985), he cannot distinguish the orders submitted by
diﬀerent types of traders. Hence, he is uninformed about the order ﬂow composition.2 Bertrand
competition for the submitted order ﬂow implies that the transaction price in period t, pt (Xt),
is set such as to obtain an expected proﬁt of zero:
p∗
t (Xt) : Xt (Et [v | It] −p∗
t (Xt)) = 0
(1)
2In this setting, it would be equivalent to assume that the market maker observes each signle order but does
not know the identity of the traders who submitted orders.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

Hence:
p∗
t (Xt) = Et [v | It]
(2)
The market maker does not observe private information signals about the asset value, nor
trading outcomes on the secondary exchange. However, he might be able to infer from the total
order ﬂow submitted to the main exchange the information that the fundamental or the high
frequency traders have observed.
Liquidity traders. In each trading round, liquidity traders either sell a total quantity of 1
or do not participate in the market. Both events occur with probability 1
2:
xl
t =
(
−1 with Pr = 1
2
0 with Pr = 1
2
)
(3)
The realizations of liquidity trading are identically and independently distributed on both
exchanges.
Fundamental trader. The fundamental trader has a trading technology that allows him to
trade at a low frequency, i.e. every other period. However, he is the only trader in the game
who has the ability to produce a private signal, s, on the realization of the ﬁnal payoﬀof the
asset. This signal has precision qi ∈
1
2, 1

with:
Pr
 s = vh | v = vh
= Pr
 s = vl | v = vl
= qi
(4)
and generates a cost that is zero if it is uninformative (i.e. when qi = 1
2) and increasing and
convex in qi otherwise:
C
 qi
= c
2

qi −1
2
2
(5)
with c > 0. The signal is produced once at the beginning of the game before trading takes
place.
In each odd-numbered period, the fundamental trader determines whether and how much to
trade in order to maximize his expected proﬁt. Generally, if he decides to trade, a set of trading
strategies {xi
t(s)} is proﬁtable if it creates an inference problem for the market maker: for some
realizations of total order ﬂow Xt, the market maker should not be able to infer the signal
observed by the fundamental trader. However, despite an informative signal, the fundamental
trader might be better-oﬀif he does not trade in some period t, or if he randomizes between
trading and not trading. This might occur because he can exploit his information in two trading
rounds. Thus, at the beginning of each odd-numbered period, he also determines his probability
to trade, αt ∈[0, 1].
Moreover, the fundamental trader determines the precision of his signal at the outset of the
game, such as to maximize his expected total proﬁt:
E0

Πi
= E0

Gi
1

+ E0

Gi
3

−C
 qi
(6)
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

where Gi
t is the trading gain obtained in period t:
Gi
t = αtxi
t(s) (v −p∗
t (Xt))
(7)
The expectation in Equation 6 is taken over all possible asset values and signal realizations.
High frequency trader. The high frequency trader has the necessary technology to trade
in each trading round, but he is unable to generate and process fundamental information
directly. Therefore, he has always an information disadvantage relative to the fundamental
trader. However, the high frequency trader can observe a noisy signal that allows him to infer
imperfectly the direction of past fundamental order ﬂow (and hence fundamental information),
which allows predicting future fundamental order ﬂow. More speciﬁcally, his information can
be of two mutually exclusive types. The ﬁrst information type, labelled order ﬂow information,
stems from the ability of the high frequency trader to observe past transactions on both the main
and the secondary exchange (e.g. through privileged access to data on multiple exchanges).
The second information type consists in an exogenous noisy signal, sf, about the information
of the fundamental trader, s (e.g. through algorithms screening and treating hard information
from multiple sources at a very high speed).
Order ﬂow information. When the high frequency trader is co-located on both exchanges,
he observes the transactions realized in period t, between the end of period t and the beginning
of period t + 1. Since fundamental trading is unveiled in some states of the world on both
exchanges, but these states diﬀer among exchanges due to uncorrelated liquidity trading, the
high frequency trader learns the direction of past fundamental order ﬂow more often than the
local market maker on the main exchange. Hence, he can exploit this information by trading
in period t + 1 or in any subsequent trading round. Note that in this case, the high frequency
trader is an uninformed trader until fundamental trading took place, i.e. in period t = 1.
Consequently, he never trades in that period. Moreover, since no fundamental trading takes
place in t = 2, the high frequency trader cannot gather new information between t = 2 and
t = 3.
Signal on fundamental information. The high frequency trader can assess imperfectly private fundamental information by observing the following signal at the outset of the game (before
trading starts in t = 1): sf =

“s = vh”, “s = vl”
	
. The precision of this signal is then deﬁned
as follows:
Pr
 sf = “s = vh”| s = vh
= Pr
 sf = “s = vl”| s = vl
= qf ∈
1
2, 1

(8)
Diﬀerently to the previous case, the high frequency trader has already private information in
the ﬁrst period and can exploit it by trading in any trading round of the game.
The information observed by the high frequency trader is never observed by the market
maker, regardless of its type. Hence, whenever the market maker remains uninformed about
the fundamental signal s, the high frequency trader has an information advantage relative to
the market maker.
This advantage can be justiﬁed by the fact that many market making
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

ﬁrms have not invested in typical high frequency technologies that allow such an information
advantage with ultra-fast access to market data through colocation and sophisticated algorithms
that process public information. Baron et al. (2012) for instance identify 737 non-HFT market
making ﬁrms and only 51 HFT ﬁrms that use mixed or passive trading strategies on the S&P 500
Emini market. Moreover, a large fraction of HFT ﬁrms use predominantly aggressive trading
strategies (Hagströmern and Nordén (2013), Brogaard et al. (2015)). This model assumes
that the market maker does not possess such a sophisticated and fast information collection
technology. The high frequency trader can trade on his information immediately in the trading
round that is to start as well as in any further period. He does so if this is proﬁtable for him.
At the beginning of each trading round, he decides whether and how much to trade in order to
maximize his expected trading gain. Similarly to the fundamental trader, the high frequency
trader determines his trading strategies,
n
xf
t
 sfo
, so as to avoid full information revelation.
His trading gain if he trades in period t is:
Gi
t = xf
t (sf) (v −p∗
t (Xt))
(9)
The model is solved by backward induction to determine sub-game perfect Nash equilibria.
Throughout the analysis, we compare the results across three cases: the benchmark case,
denoted by the superscript A, in which high frequency trading does not exist, case B in which
the high frequency trader exists and observes past transactions on multiple exchanges, and case
C in which the high frequency trader exists and observes a signal about the realization of the
fundamental trader’s signal.
Figure 1 displays the time line of the game for each analyzed case.
2
Results
2.1
Benchmark: no high frequency trading
Without high frequency trading, the fundamental trader exploits his private information by
trading in all trading rounds accessible to him, i.e. in periods 1 and 3, as long as his signal has
not been revealed. Indeed, refraining from trading in period 1 is never optimal since it delays
the trading gain of the early period and prevents earning a potential additional trading gain in
the late period.
The signal-contingent orders submitted by the fundamental trader are determined by the
realization of the signal as well as by the size of liquidity trading. In order to generate a trading
gain, the fundamental trader tailors his orders such as to avoid full information revelation. In
the context of this model, this is the case when the market maker cannot infer the signal of
the fundamental trader in some states of nature. In addition, rational expectations prevent
manipulative orders - selling in case of a high signal or buying in case of a low signal - which
would in any case be loss bringing. Hence, the fundamental trader buys (or does not trade)
whenever he has observed a high signal, xi,A
t
 s = vh
≥0, and sells (or does not trade) in case
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

of a low signal, xi,A
t
 s = vl
≤0. For a given value of the asset and assuming that its value has
not been revealed in earlier periods, four states of nature can occur in any period t in which the
fundamental trader trades. These states depend on the realization of the signal and of liquidity
trading, and lead to the following total order ﬂow
• State 1: high signal and no liquidity trading: Xt = xi,A
t
 s = vh
• State 2: high signal and liquidity trading: Xt = xi,A
t
 s = vh
−1
• State 3: low signal and no liquidity trading: Xt = xi,A
t
 s = vl
• State 4: low signal and liquidity trading: Xt = xi,A
t
 s = vl
−1
Information revelation would be fully prevented if the total order ﬂow is identical in states 1
and 4, xi,A
t
 s = vh
= xi,A
t
 s = vl
−1, and in states 2 and 3, xi,A
t
 s = vh
−1 = xi,A
t
 s = vl
.
Both equalities cannot hold simultaneously, and the ﬁrst one can never be true with a proﬁtable
trading strategy. Hence, the state-contingent orders satisfy always the second equality. As a
consequence, the fundamental trader’s signal is never revealed in states 2 and 3, but always
revealed in states 1 and 4. These results are summarized in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 The fundamental trader trades whenever he can exploit his private information
about the asset value:
α∗,A
1
= 1
(10)
α∗,A
3
=
(
1 if X1 = xi∗,A
1
 s = vl
0 otherwise
)
(11)
The optimal signal-contingent orders have the following property:
xi∗,A
t
 s = vh
= 1 + xi∗,A
t
 s = vl
(12)
The fundamental trader’s trading gain is identical for any combination of xi∗,A
t
 s = vh
and
xi∗,A
t
 s = vl
that satisﬁes the property formulated in Proposition 1.
With the optimal trading strategy, the total trading gain of the slow trader is increasing
in the signal precision. Hence, the optimally chosen signal precision is limited only by high
information costs.
Proposition 2 The fundamental trader generates a perfectly informative signal if information
costs are small, and an imperfectly informative signal if they are high. His signal is never
uninformative.
qi∗,A =
(
1 if c < cA
1
2 +
3(vh−vl)
8c
< 1 if c > cA
)
(13)
with cA = 3
4
 vh −vl
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

2.2
With high frequency trading
As will be demonstrated later in the analysis, the only informed trader potentially participating
in the market in the ﬁrst trading round is the fundamental trader. The essence of the results
developed in the previous sub-section carry over to this one, in the sense that it is impossible
for the fundamental trader to remain unrecognized in every state of the world, if he trades.
If his signal is correctly inferred by the market maker in the early period, full information
revelation eliminates the scope for high frequency trading in subsequent periods. The following
paragraphs describe trading decisions in the case in which the signal of the fundamental trader
is not fully revealed in early trading.
The high frequency trader has an information disadvantage compared to the fundamental
trader with any type of information he observes in any period. The signal of the fundamental
trader is therefore only revealed partially through high frequency trading.
Although high
frequency trading lowers the fundamental trader’s expected trading gain in the last period, this
gain never vanishes. Consequently, the fundamental trader exploits his private information in
the last trading round, regardless of whether high frequency trading took place in an earlier
period and regardless of whether the high frequency trader participates in the last trading
round.
The high frequency trader, in turn, always trades in the second period when he can exploit
his private information, but he cannot design a proﬁtable trading strategy in the last period.
Indeed, in those states of the world in which his signal was inferred by the market maker in the
second period, trading in the subsequent period is unproﬁtable. In those states of the world
in which his signal was not recognized, trading together with the better informed fundamental
trader is always loss bringing. Hence, the high frequency trader exploits his information quickly
before additional fundamental trading takes place, but never trades simultaneously with the
fundamental trader. These results are summarized in the following propositions.
Proposition 3 In period 3, the fundamental trader trades if his signal has not been revealed
in the ﬁrst period:
α∗,j
3
=
(
1 if X1̸ = xi∗,j
1
 s = vl
−1
0 otherwise
)
(14)
with j = B, C, D. The signal-contingent orders satisfy the conditions indicated in Proposition
1.
Proposition 4 The high frequency trader never trades in period 3. He trades in period 2 only
if the signal of the fundamental trader was not revealed earlier. His signal-contingent orders
satisfy the conditions given in Proposition 1 (replacing s with sf).
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

These results highlight the importance of considering both diﬀerences in information acquisition and diﬀerences in trading speeds when the consequences of the coexistence of high
frequency and fundamental (low frequency) trading are analyzed.
While the trading decisions of the fundamental trader do not depend on high frequency
trading in the last trading round, in the ﬁrst one they are aﬀected by the presence of high
frequency trading and by the type of information the high frequency trader observes. Therefore,
the optimal trading strategies of the fundamental trader in period 1 are analyzed separately
per information type of the high frequency trader.
2.2.1
HFT information on past trading activity (case B)
When the signal of the fundamental trader was not fully revealed in the ﬁrst period, the high frequency trader can observe trading outcomes on the main and on the secondary exchange. Since
fundamental trading is identical on both exchanges, the diﬀerence in outcomes depends only on
liquidity trading. Whenever liquidity trading has impeded any inference on the main exchange,
the high frequency trader learns about fundamental trading by observing past transactions on
the secondary exchange with probability 1
2. In those cases, he places an order immediately in
the second period to exploit his information: he buys when the probability of past buy orders
from the fundamental trader is high (and hence the expected asset value given the information
is higher than the market maker’s estimate), and he sells in the opposite case.
As an illustration, assume that the fundamental trader plays the following strategies: xi
1
 s = vl
=
−1 and xi
1
 s = vh
= 0. If he has observed the low signal and if he decides to trade, he submits
a sell order of one unit in period 1. Hence the total order ﬂow on the main exchange is either
X1 = −2, in which case the low signal is revealed, or X1 = −1, in which case the signal s is
not revealed. In the latter case, the high frequency trader observes a total order ﬂow on the
secondary exchange of either −1, which is uninformative, or −2, which induces him to sell on
the main exchange.
With the ability of the high frequency trader to detect fundamental trading, the fundamental
trader faces now a new trade-oﬀ. If he decides to always trade in the ﬁrst period, the probability
that the direction of his order is detected in the next period is highest. This leads to price
adjustments in the direction of the true asset value both in period 2 and 3 and thus to a
lower trading gain in period 3. To avoid being detected, the fundamental trader might also
refrain from trading in period 1. If he always refrains from trading, his behavior is rationally
anticipated by the market maker and by the high frequency trader, so that the fundamental
trader’s period 1 trading gain is shifted to period 3. However, the fundamental trader could also
randomize between trading and not trading. In that case, his signal-contingent trading decisions
create additional confusion, since all other traders are less capable to infer his signal from X1.
By doing so, he forgoes some expected trading gains in period 1 but raises his trading gain in
period 3 compared to the case in which he would always trade. In equilibrium, the fundamental
trader always randomizes between trading and not trading in period 1.3 Moreover, the signal3From a technical point of view, the intertemporal expected trading gain earned by the fundamental tader
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

contingent orders that lead to best hiding mirror exactly liquidity trading: xi∗,B
1
 s = vl
= −1
and xi∗,B
1
 s = vh
= 0. Applying these mixed strategies in period 1 yields several gains to the
fundamental trader. First, the market maker cannot distinguish states where only liquidity
trading takes place from states where the fundamental trader also trades. With any other
combination of orders, the total order ﬂow would systematically diﬀer between those states and
the "hiding" strategy would be less eﬃcient. As a consequence, the transaction price when the
total order ﬂow is −1 is less eﬃcient than when the fundamental trader always trades, raising
its proﬁt in case he sells. This, however, cannot be the driving force behind the equilibrium
in mixed strategies since these are never played without high frequency trading although the
same argument would apply. More importantly, mixed strategies modify the behavior of the
high frequency trader. Indeed, he trades on average in the wrong direction in the state where
the fundamental trader observes a low signal but refrains from trading. By inducing the high
frequency trader in error, the fundamental trader raises his information rent in period 3. These
results are summarized in the following proposition.
Proposition 5 In period 1, the fundamental trader optimally randomizes between trading and
not trading:
α∗,B
1
= 3
4
(15)
When he trades, the signal-contingent orders are as follows:
xi∗,B
1
 s = vh
=
0
(16)
xi∗,B
1
 s = vl
=
−1
In every trading round, the gain obtained by the fundamental trader, if he trades, increases in
his signal precision. However, the existence of the high frequency trader and the implementation
of mixed strategies lower his overall gains. This results in a signal precision that starts declining
at lower costs than in the benchmark case (cB < cA) and is hence smaller up from the cost
threshold cB.
Proposition 6 The fundamental trader generates a perfectly informative signal if information
costs are small, and an imperfectly informative signal if they are high. His signal is never
uninformative:
qi∗,B =
(
1 if c < cB
= 1
2 +
11(vh−vl)
32c
if c > cB
)
(17)
with cB = 11
16
 vh −vl
conditional on trading in both periods diminishes in α1 since fundamental trading is on average recognized by
the high frequency trader. However, conditional on not trading in the ﬁrst period, his expected gain (which is
the period 3 gain) increases in α1 because the high frequency trader trades on average in the opposite direction
and pushes prieces away from the fundamental trader’s assessment of the asset value. At the equilibrium value
α∗,B
1
, the fundamental trader is indiﬀerent between trading and not trading in the ﬁrst period (i.e. both expected
trading gains are equal).
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

2.2.2
HFT signal on fundamental trader’s information (case C)
In the alternative case in which the high frequency trader can observe noisy information about
the signal observed by the fundamental trader, the high frequency trader has already private
information in the ﬁrst period and could submit an order to exploit it in t = 1. However, he
will never trade in equilibrium. Indeed, as his signal is a noisier version of the fundamental
trader’s signal, the high frequency trader can never expect a positive trading proﬁt. However,
the high frequency trader can design a proﬁtable strategy in the intermediate period, if the
signal of the fundamental trader was not recognized by the market maker. Therefore, the high
frequency trader never exploit his information simultaneously with the fundamental trader, but
rather delays trading to the period in which he is the only informed trader on the market.
Proposition 7 When the high frequency trader observes a signal about the fundamental trader’s
information before trading starts in the ﬁrst period, he refrains from trading in period 1. He
exploits this information in period 2, if the market maker did not infer fundamental information
in period 1 trading.
Diﬀerently to the previous case, this high frequency trader’s information does not depend on
the trading decision of the fundamental trader in the ﬁrst period. Even if the fundamental trader
plays mixed strategies, he cannot induce the high frequency trader to trade in the opposite
direction to the one implied by his signal. Indeed, in the state in which the fundamental trader
observes a low signal but decides not to trade, the high frequency trader trades in the “right”
direction on average, in contrast to the previous case in which he would trade in the “wrong”
direction. The seemingly small twist in the information structure of the high frequency trader
induces a substantial change in the behavior of the fundamental trader who always trades upon
his information in the ﬁrst period in equilibrium.
Proposition 8 The fundamental trader never refrains from trading in period 1: α∗,C
1
= 1. The
optimal signal contingent orders are determined by the conditions given in proposition 1.
The diﬀerence in optimal trading strategies between case B and case C imply a diﬀerent split
of the fundamental trader’s expected trading gains over time. In case B, the largest share of
the total expected trading gain tends to be pushed to the last period. Hence, the fundamental
trader exploits his private information mostly in late periods. In case C, the opposite takes
place. Not only is the share of the expected trading gain realized in period 1 always larger than
the one realized in period 3, it also increases with qf. The more accurately the high frequency
trader can observe the signal of the fundamental trader, the smaller is the period 3 trading gain
and consequently its share in the total expected trading gain.
When the high frequency trader has information about the fundamental trader’s signal,
the latter cannot "hide" eﬃciently by playing mixed strategies.
Consequently, he collects
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

information with a high enough precision to generate a large trading gain in the ﬁrst trading
round. The optimal signal precision is lower than in the benchmark case (due to high frequency
trading that always lowers the expected trading gain in the third period) but higher then in
case B.
Proposition 9 The fundamental trader generates a perfectly informative signal if information
costs are small, and an imperfectly informative signal if they are high. His signal is never
uninformative:
qi∗,C =
(
1 if c < cC
1
2 + (vh−vl)(5+4(1−qf)qf)
16c
if c > cC
)
(18)
with cC = (5+4(1−qf)qf)(vh−vl)
8
.
2.2.3
Comparison across cases A, B and C
Changes in the behavior of the fundamental trader depend crucially on the type of information
observed by the high frequency trader. Comparing his decision on the signal precision, it is
always the highest in the benchmark case. If the high frequency trader’s information precision
in case C is small enough (qf < 1
4
 2 +
√
2

), the fundamental trader collects more accurate
information than in case B (qi∗,C ≥qi∗,B and cB < cC). Otherwise, fundamental information
collection is reduced the most in case C (qi∗,C ≤qi∗,B and cB > cC).
Corollary 1 With high frequency trading, the fundamental trader collects equally or less precise
information than without high frequency trading:
qi∗,j
=
qi∗,A = 1 if c < cj
(19)
qi∗,j
<
qi∗,A = 1 if cj < c < cA
qi∗,j
<
qi∗,A < 1 if c > cA
with j = B, C .
Turning to the trading strategy in the early trading round, it is only altered in case B
relative to the benchmark, since the fundamental trader optimally plays mixed strategies.
Corollary 2 Comparison of trading probabilities in t = 1:
α∗,A
1
= α∗,C
1
= 1
(20)
α∗,B
1
< 1
(21)
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

Considering the comparisons in Corollaries 1 and 2, high frequency trading has no impact
on fundamental trading when the information of the high frequency trader is about the signal
observed by the fundamental trader (case C) and when information costs are suﬃciently small.
Indeed, in this case the fundamental trader collects always perfectly precise information and
trades always on this information in the ﬁrst trading round. Changes in fundamental trading
occur either in case C when information costs are high (the fundamental reduces the precision
of his signal more than in the benchmark case), or when the high frequency trader observes
past order ﬂow on multiple exchanges (case B), in which case the fundamental trader reduces
both his signal precision (with high costs) and his trading intensity.
2.2.4
Eﬀects on the informativeness and eﬃciency of prices
The analysis of optimal trading strategies and of fundamental information production suggests
that the eﬀects of high frequency trading on how well the prices reﬂect the asset value vary
depending on the information type observed by the high frequency trader and depending on
the information costs borne by the fundamental trader. To assess these eﬀects, I compute
two measures. The ﬁrst one measures how well prices reﬂect the fundamental value of the
asset (price informativeness or PI). It is calculated by computing the average pricing errors
(in absolute terms) per period, benchmarking these to the highest pricing errors possible in
this model (i.e. those that realize in the absence of any informed trading) and substracting the
resulting number from 1:
PIt ≡1 −E0
|v −pt|
|v −µ|

(22)
The expectation is taken over all asset values and signal realizations. If this measure is equal to
1, the average pricing error relative to the true value of the asset is zero, hence prices are fully
informative about the asset value. If this measure is equal to zero, prices are uninformative
since average pricing errors are the same as without any informed trading.
The second measure captures how much of the information produced by the fundamental
trader is incorporated in prices (price eﬃciency or PE). To compute it, a similar method as
for price informativeness is employed. However, pricing errors are computed relative to the
expected asset value conditional on the observed signal s. Indeed, if the fundamental trader
observes for instance the signal s = vh, the expected asset value, vhqi + vl(1 −qi), corresponds
to the produced fundamental information. A portion of this value is reﬂected in prices. This is
measured as follows:
PEt ≡1 −E0
|E [v | s] −pt|
|E [v | s] −µ|

(23)
If this measure is equal to 1, prices reﬂect fully the signal observed by the fundamental trader.
If it is equal to zero, the signal is not incorporated in prices.
As expected, both price informativeness and price eﬃciency increase in every period in
which informed trading takes place. In case of the benchmark:
PIA
1 = PIA
2 < PIA
3
and PEA
1 = PEA
2 < PEA
3
(24)
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

and with the existence of high frequency trading:
PIj
1 < PIj
2 < PIj
3 and PEj
1 < PEj
2 < PEj
3 for j = B, C
(25)
A comparison across cases yields the following results.
Proposition 10 When the high frequency trader observes a signal about the fundamental order
ﬂow (case B), both price informativeness and price eﬃciency are worse than without high
frequency trading (case A) in every period:
PIB
t < PIA
t ,
∀t
(26)
PEB
t < PEA
t ,
∀t
(27)
Case B illustrates the combination of two negative eﬀects created by the existence of high
frequency trading: the fundamental trader hides his trades more than in the benchmark case,
which lowers the portion of the produced fundamental information that is incorporated in the
price. As a consequence, his trading proﬁts diminish leading to less information generation
when costs are suﬃciently high. The additional hiding leads to lower price eﬃciency and this
combined with possibly less information production leads to lower price informativeness. Since
these results hold for any precision level (i.e. also when information costs are small enough
to allow a perfectly precise signal), their main driver is the reduced intensity of fundamental
trading in the ﬁrst period.
Interestingly, price eﬃciency and informativeness are also reduced relative to the benchmark
in the second period. In this period, no additional information would have been incorporated
in the price in the benchmark case, while some additional information is always incorporated
with high frequency trading. Hence, price eﬃciency and informativeness never improve in the
benchmark case, while they do in case B. However, despite this improvement, the mixed strategies played by the fundamental trader in the ﬁrst period lead to such an ineﬃcient (and hence
uninformative) price in that period, that the added information through high frequency trading
in the subsequent period does not make the price more eﬃcient and informative compared to
the benchmark.
This ﬁnding reconciles empirical evidence suggesting that high frequency traders tend to
trade in the direction of permanent price changes (Brogaard et al. (2014)) with other evidence
indicating that long term information is less well reﬂected by prices after the rise of high
frequency trading (Weller (2016), Gider et al. (2016)). Here, the high frequency trader trades
on average in the right direction and contributes to improve price informativeness over time
inside case B. However, compared to the benchmark, less information is eventually reﬂected
by the price and information is incorporated at a slower pace, supporting the second piece
of evidence mentioned earlier. Hence, this ﬁnding calls for caution in the interpretation of
empirical results about the eﬀect of high frequency trading on price eﬃciency: even if it is
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

found to incorporate information in prices at a higher frequency (thus raising price eﬃciency
at a high speed), this does not necessarily mean that the fundamental value of the asset is
reﬂected better in prices as compared to the case without high frequency trading. Indeed, the
equilibrium response of fundamental traders is crucial.
Turning to the case in which the high frequency trader observes information about the signal
of the fundamental trader (case C), the eﬀect on price eﬃciency is the opposite of case B: it
increases in every period relative to the benchmark. This illustrates the positive inﬂuence of high
frequency trading that leads to the incorporation of more produced fundamental information
in prices over time.
Proposition 11 When the high frequency trader observes a signal about the information of
the fundamental trader (case C), price eﬃciency is identical to the benchmark case in the ﬁrst
period, but increases always in the subsequent periods.
PEC
1 = PEA
1
(28)
PEC
2 > PEA
2
(29)
PEC
3 > PEA
3
(30)
The eﬀects of high frequency trading on the informativeness of prices are more nuanced.
Although in this case, the trading strategy of the fundamental trader never changes compared to
the benchmark (he does not hide his trades more than in the benchmark case), he produces less
information if information costs are high. Hence, the improvement in price eﬃciency thanks to
high frequency trading might be counter-balanced by less information production, resulting in
ultimately less informative price. This reduction in price informativeness happens speciﬁcally
in those periods in which the fundamental trader is active on the market, since he trades
upon a less informative signal. In the second period, in which only the high frequency trader
trades, price informativeness is always increased. Summarizing, prices are more informative on
average compared to the benchmark, when the information cost is small enough. Otherwise,
price informativeness is reduced on average.
Proposition 12 When the high frequency trader observes a signal about the information of the
fundamental trader (case C), price informativeness never improves in the ﬁrst trading period
but improves always in the second period. The eﬀect in the third period depends on c.
PIC
1
=
PIA
1 if c ≤cC
(31)
PIC
1
<
PIA
1 if c > cC
PIC
2 > PIA
2
(32)
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

PIC
3
>
PIA
3 if c ≤cT
(33)
PIC
3
<
PIA
3 if c > cT
(34)
with cC < cT < cA.
This case contrasts with case B regarding the dynamics of price eﬃciency and informativeness. While in case B price eﬃciency is lower than in the benchmark case at all dates, i.e.
a smaller portion of the fundamental signal is incorporated in prices at all dates, it is always
(weakly) higher in case C. However, when price informativeness is considered, this case features
a disconnect between the speed at which prices reﬂect (partially) the actual asset value and the
portion of that value that is ultimately incorporated in the price. Since price informativeness is
always higher in the second period, the price reﬂects a higher portion of the actual fundamental
value of the asset than in the benchmark case. However, when price informativeness is lower
in the third period, eventually the price reﬂects less well the asset value. Hence, with small
information costs, the price reﬂects better the asset value and this incorporation of information
occurs at a higher speed than in the benchmark. With high information costs, some information
is incorporated at a higher speed, but the price reﬂects less well the asset value eventually.
Place Figures 2 and 3 about here.
These results shed a new light upon the commonly expressed concern that high frequency
trading harms price discovery by lowering information rents and thereby inducing less informed
trading and less information production.
While high frequency trading lowers information
rents of the fundamental trader in all considered scenarii, the rent reduction per se has only
a negligible eﬀect on price informativeness. Rather it is the interdependence between high
frequency trading and fundamental trading (particularly strong when past trading activity is
the main information source of the high frequency trader - case B) that creates the strongest
negative eﬀect on price informativeness. When this interdependence does not exist (case C),
negative eﬀects caused by reduced information production may be counterbalanced by the
positive eﬀect of high frequency trading on price eﬃciency, possibly leading to more informative
prices.
3
Conclusion
I develop a multi-period trading model to analyze how a fundamental trader adjusts his trading strategies and information production decisions to the existence of high frequency trading
(HFT). I show that these decisions diﬀer strongly depending on the type of information that
the HFT can observe. Information correlated with past trading activity reduces fundamental
trading and information production, and leads to lower price informativeness, compared to a
benchmark without HFT. HFT information correlated with fundamental information does not
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

induce these eﬀects, and prices may become more informative on average. Moreover, I study
the ability of prices to reﬂect the asset value and produced information over time. My results
are consistent with empirical ﬁndings highlighting that HFT enhances price discovery in the
short run, and others suggesting that HFT reduces the ability of prices to reﬂect long-term
fundamental information.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

References
Baldauf, M. and Mollner, J., 2015. High-frequency trading and market performance.
Baron, M., Brogaard, J. and Kirilenko, A., 2012. The trading proﬁts of high frequency traders.
Biais, B., Foucault, T. and Moinas, S., 2015. Equilibrium fast trading. Journal of Financial
Economics, 116(2), pp.292-313.
Biais, B. and Woolley, P., 2011. High frequency trading. Manuscript, Toulouse University, IDEI.
Brogaard, J., Hagströmer, B., Nordén, L. and Riordan, R., 2015. Trading fast and slow: Colocation and liquidity. Review of Financial Studies, 28(12), pp.3407-3443.
Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T. and Riordan, R., 2014. High-frequency trading and price discovery. Review of Financial Studies, 27(8), pp.2267-2306.
Budish, E., Cramton, P. and Shim, J., 2015. The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent
batch auctions as a market design response. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4),
pp.1547-1621.
Carrion, A., 2013. Very fast money: High-frequency trading on the NASDAQ. Journal of
Financial Markets, 16(4), pp.680-711.
Clark-Joseph, A., 2014. Exploratory trading. Harvard University, Cambridge MA.
Foucault, T., Hombert, J. and Ro¸su, I., 2016. News trading and speed. The Journal of Finance,
71(1), pp.335-382.
Gider, J., Schmickler, S.N. and Westheide, C., High-Frequency Trading and Fundamental Price
Eﬃciency.
Gomber, P., Arndt, B., Lutat, M. and Uhle, T., 2011. High-frequency trading.
Hirschey, N., 2016. Do high-frequency traders anticipate buying and selling pressure?.
Hagströmer, B. and Norden, L., 2013. The diversity of high-frequency traders. Journal of Financial Markets, 16(4), pp.741-770.
Holden, C.W. and Subrahmanyam, A., 1992. Long-lived private information and imperfect
competition. The Journal of Finance, 47(1), pp.247-270.
Kyle, A.S., 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp.1315-1335.
Menkveld, A. J., 2016. The Economics of High-Frequency Trading: Taking Stock. Annual
Review of Financial Economics, Volume 8, Forthcoming.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

Stiglitz, J.E., 2014, April. Tapping the Brakes: Are Less Active Markets Safer and Better for
the Economy?. In Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2014 Financial Markets Conference Tuning
Financial Regulation for Stability and Eﬃciency, April (Vol. 15).
Weller, B.M., 2016. Eﬃcient prices at any cost: does algorithmic trading deter information
acquisition?.
Yang, L. and Zhu, H., 2016. Back-running: Seeking and hiding fundamental information in
order ﬂows.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

Appendix
Proof. Proposition 1
In a given period t, the structure of the trading game is as illustrated in this table:
Payoﬀ
vh, Pr
 vh
= 1
2
vl, Pr
 vl
= 1
2
Signal
of
the
fundamental
trader
s
=
vh,
Pr = qi
s
=
vl,
Pr = 1 −qi
s
=
vh,
Pr = 1 −qi
s
=
vl,
Pr = qi
No
liquidity
trading, Pr = 1
2
Xt
=
xi
t
 s = vh
Xt
=
xi
t
 s = vl
Xt
=
xi
t
 s = vh
Xt
=
xi
t
 s = vl
Liquidity
trading, Pr = 1
2
Xt
= −1 +
xi
t
 s = vh
Xt
= −1 +
xi
t
 s = vl
Xt
= −1 +
xi
t
 s = vh
Xt
= −1 +
xi
t
 s = vl
Starting from period 3, the game is solved by backward induction. The fundamental trader
trades in period 3 if and only if his signal was not fully revealed in period 1. In that case his
expected trading proﬁt at the beginning of the period is:
E3

Gi
3

= E3

xi
3 (s) α3
1
16
 2qi −1
  vh −vl
(A1)
which increases in α3, hence α∗
3 = 1. In period 1, the market maker is always uninformed. The
expected trading proﬁt of the fundamental trader is:
E1

Gi
1

= E1

xi
1 (s) α1
1
8
 2qi −1
  vh −vl
(A2)
which increases in α1, hence α∗
1 = 1. Signal contingent orders are determined such as to generate
positive trading gains. This implies xi
t
 s = vh  E

v | s = vh
−pt (Xt)

> 0 ⇔xi
t
 s = vh
>
0 and xi
t
 s = vl  pt (Xt) −E

v | s = vl
> 0 ⇔xi
t
 s = vl
< 0, as well as xi,A
t
 s = vh
−1 =
xi,A
t
 s = vl
.
Proof. Proposition 2
The total expected proﬁt of the fundamental trader in period 0 is:
E0

Πi
= 3
16
 2qi −1
  vh −vl
−C
 qi
(A3)
Maximizing this function over qi yields the following solution: 1
2 +
3(vh−vl)
8c
. This solution would
be larger than one for c < cA. Since precision is deﬁned inside the interval
1
2, 1

, the optimal
precision for c < cA is 1, and for c > cA it is 1
2 +
3(vh−vl)
8c
. The right term of this expression is
always strictly positive, hence qi,∗> 1
2.
Proof. Proposition 3
If the fundamental trader traded in the ﬁrst period and his signal was not fully revealed (see
the discussion of Proposition 1 for the conditions under which this is the case), his expected
trading gain is strictly positive and increasing in α3. The same is true if he did not trade in the
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

ﬁrst period but trades in t = 3. As a result: α∗,j
3
= 1 for j = B, C, D. Since the game is of the
same nature than in the benchmark case, the sign and the size of the optimal signal contingent
orders are determined as in proposition 1.
Proof. Proposition 4
The high frequency trader is the only informed trader active on the market in period 2, if
the signal of the fundamental trader was not (partially) revealed in t = 1 trading. His expected
trading gain is then always strictly positive. Hence, the high frequency trader always trades
in period 2. The trading game is similar to the one described in proposition 1. Therefore, the
computation of the optimal signal contingent orders can be derived from proposition 1.
If he trades simultaneously with the fundamental trader in period 3, however, he expects
a negative trading gain if the signal of the fundamental trader is revealed, and a zero trading
gain if the fundamental signal is not revealed. hence, the high frequency never trades in period
3.
Proof. Proposition 5
With order ﬂow information collected by the high frequency trader, the fundamental trader
can obtain a strictly positive expected trading gain in period 1 with any signal-contingent
order combination described in proposition 1. However, with any order combination that leads
to a total order ﬂow that reveals that the fundamental trader refrained from trading, hiding
becomes less eﬀective. Hence, the combination of signal-contingent orders that leads to the
highest period 1 proﬁt is the one indicated in this proposition.
The expected intertemporal trading gain of the fundamental trader if he trades in periods
1 and 3, is:
E0

Gi
1

+ E0

Gi
3

= E0

Gi
1

+ E0

Gi
3

= 11
64
 2qi −1
  vh −vl
(A7)
If he trades only in period 3, his trading gain is:
E0

Gi
3

=
 2qi −1
  vh −vl 16 −3αB
1
64(2 −αB
1 )
(A8)
To determine the probability with which the fundamental trader participates on the market
in period 1, both expected gains are equalized such as to make the trader indiﬀerent between
trading and not trading in that period.
The resulting optimal trading probability, α∗
1, is:
αB∗
1
= 3
4.
Proof. Proposition 6
The expected trading proﬁt of the fundamental trader resulting from the optimal trading
strategy is:
E0

Πi
= 11
64
 2qi −1
  vh −vl
−C
 qi
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

Solving for the optimal level of qi yields 1
2+
11(vh−vl)
32c
. For any cost level below cC, this expression
is higher than 1, hence the optimal precision is 1. For any cost level above cC, the optimal
precision level is given by the above mentioned expression.
Proof. Proposition 7
For any signal contingent orders of the high frequency trader, xf
t
 sf
, the dominant strategy
of the fundamental trader in period 1 is as described in Proposition 1. When the fundamental
trader plays its dominant strategy, there is no signal contingent order combination of the high
frequency trader that leads to a strictly positive trading gain in period 1. Hence, the high
frequency trader does not trade in the ﬁrst trading round.
Proof. Proposition 8
When the high frequency trader has information on the signal of the fundamental trader,
the fundamental traders expected intertemporal trading gain if he trades in periods 1 and 3 is:
E0

Gi
1

+ E0

Gi
3

=
 2qi −1
  vh −vl
 
1
8 + 1 −4qf  qf −1

32
!
(A12)
If the fundamental trader trades only in period 3, his expected trading gain is:
E0

Gi
3

=
 2qi −1
  vh −vl
 
6 −8qf  qf −1

+ α1
 4qf  qf −1

−1

32 (2 −α1)
!
(A13)
For any α1 ∈[0, 1], E0 [Gi
1] + E0 [Gi
3] > E0 [Gi
3]. Hence the optimal trading probability in this
case is α∗,C
1
= 1.
Proof. Proposition 9
The optimal signal precision results from the maximization of the fundamental traders
expected intertemporal proﬁt in period 0:
E0

Πi
= E0

Gi
1

+ E0

Gi
3

−C
 qi
(A14)
When c < cC the solution to this maximization problem is larger than one, hence qi∗,C = 1.
Otherwise qi∗,C = 1
2 + (vh−vl)(5+4(1−qf)qf
16c
.
Proof. Proposition 10
This is a straightforward application of equations 22 and 23.
Proof. Proposition 11
This is a straightforward application of equations 22 and 23.
Proof. Proposition 12
This is a straightforward application of equations 22 and 23.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

Figure1: Time line
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875

Figure 1: Figure 2: price eﬃciency
Figure 3: Price informativeness
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2980875
