An Introduction to Algorithmic Trading:
Opportunities & Challenges within the Systematic
Trading Industry
Nicholas Burgess
nburgessx@gmail.com
23rd September 2019
Abstract
In what follows we present systematic trading and discuss the beneﬁts. We evaluate contemporary trends, the opportunities arising from machine learning and the operational cost challenges
faced, leveraging on the history of the industry to demonstrate why maintaining a competitive
edge is paramount to its continued success.
Keywords: Algorithmic Trading, Systematic Trading, Efﬁcient Market Hypothesis, Trading
Systems, Fundamental Analysis, Technical Analysis, Machine Learning, Social Media, Alternative Reference Data, Operational Costs, Hedge Funds, Assets Under Management, High
Frequency Trading, Trade Execution, Market Prediction, Risk Management
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3466213

Introduction
In what follows we present systematic trading and discuss the beneﬁts. We evaluate contemporary trends, the opportunities arising from machine learning and the operational cost challenges
faced, leveraging on the history of the industry to demonstrate why maintaining a competitive
edge is paramount to its continued success.
1
What is Algorithmic Trading?
Systematic trading (or algorithmic trading) refers to the automation of the trading process,
through the creation of predeﬁned rules (the ‘trading system’) and their strict application when
executing ﬁnancial market transactions. The automated trading system beneﬁts from being
repeatable and testable, unlike discretionary trading, which potentially has different rules for
every transaction.
Classical ﬁnance theory such as the Efﬁcient Market Hypothesis [1], suggests it is impossible to
consistently beat the market without taking additional risk(s). Systematic traders attempt to do
just that, using fundamental and technical analysis, and suggest this is how the markets actually
become efﬁcient. Such trading systems are predominantly employed by Hedge Funds, currently
with USD 2.9 trillion of assets under management (AUM) [3], who create alternative investment
portfolios uncorrelated with the market using leverage and shorting techniques. Similarly High
Frequency Trading ﬁrms use this method to make markets, seek liquidity rebates, market inefﬁciencies and arbitrage from investor bias, such as gambler’s (mean reversion) and hot-hands
(momentum) fallacies.
Systematic trading potentially offers better market prediction, trade execution and risk management for investors. Furthermore, they remove human emotion, introduce discipline and rigour.
However they do not necessarily remove human bias from the implementation of the trading
rules themselves, as exempliﬁed in 1998 with the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management
(LTCM) with USD 500bn AUM when its unhedged investments in Russian Government Bonds
defaulted [2].
2
Machine Learning Opportunities
The world is changing with major and rapid advancement in new technologies such as machine
learning, artiﬁcial intelligence, big data, quantum and cloud computing, making the transfer of
information faster, seamless and efﬁcient.
Human behaviour is evolving with these new technologies and heavily inﬂuenced by social
media trends, which are rapidly accelerating the dissemination of information, fake news, propaganda and misinformation. Systems that can both process and cleanse the vast amounts of
ﬁnancial and alternative data from social media have a distinct edge over systems and discretionary traders that cannot and have the opportunity to generate superior returns.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3466213

3
Operational Cost Challenges
The Operational costs required to maintain a competitive edge are a signiﬁcant challenge for
the systematic trading industry. Systems need to evolve, be continually tested and optimised in
an increasingly transient and evolving market to ensure they remain proﬁtable.
Predatory systems seek to exploit inferior systems. Amaranth Investors epitomise this challenge, despite having a proﬁtable system 14 out of 15 years, in 2006 they made losses of USD
6 billion in a fortnight as natural gas futures prices plunged and they were unable to liquidate
their positions fast enough to meet their margin calls [4].
Increased competition, trading volumes and market sophistication with more informed counterparties is reducing bid-offer spreads and proﬁt margins from market-making. Whilst the
ﬁxed cost maintaining an agile technology stack to keep pace with evolving markets is a major
challenge.
4
Conclusion
In conclusion the systematic trading industry is faced with the opportunity to beneﬁt from machine learning and new technologies to generate superior returns. However increasing operational, research and development costs present a persistent challenge.
Strategies that fail to incorporate the latest trends and information are likely to become generators of market inefﬁciency rather than exploiters, which is why maintaining a competitive edge
is paramount to the systematic trading industry’s continued success.
References
[1] Fama, E. F. (1965) The behaviour of stock-market prices. The Journal of Business.
38(1):34-105.
[2] Rimkus,
R.
(2016)
Long-term
capital
management.
Available
from:
https://www.econcrises.org/2016/04/18/long-term-capital-management/
[3] Statista (2018) Value of assets managed by hedge funds worldwide. Available from:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/271771/assets-of-the-hedge-funds-worldwide/
[4] The Spectator (2006) Amaranth:
How to lose $6 billion in a fortnight. Available from:
https://www.spectator.co.uk/2006/10/amaranth-how-to-lose-and366-billionin-a-fortnight/
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3466213
