Rethinking Insider Trading Compliance Policies in Light 
of the SEC’s New “Shadow Trading” Theory of Insider 
Trading Liability 
John P. Anderson 
Welcome everyone. I'm very grateful to be here, very grateful to be invited, 
and very grateful to be part of the business law professor's blog. Working 
side by side with such distinguished professors from around the country 
has been a lot of fun for me, and I think it provides an excellent service to 
the business law community. So, I'm going to try to offer a little bit of 
education about insider trading law in the United States, and then address 
one quirky new theory of liability that is percolating – shadow trading. I 
would like to talk about how we might think about shadow trading, 
particularly how compliance departments and issuers might address it. So 
that will be our focus today: insider trading compliance and the problem 
of shadow trading.  
Now, a gentleman named Matthew Panuwat was the head of 
business development at Medivation, a mid-size biopharmaceutical 
company, and he learned that Pfizer would acquire Medivation.1 He also 
knew that the investment bankers had cited another company, Incyte, as 
comparable to Medivation. He then did some piecing together and analysis 
 
1 SEC v. Panuwat, No. 21-cv-06322-WHO, 2022 WL 633306, *1–2 (N.D. Cal. 2022). 

414          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
of his own.2 He anticipated that when the news of his company’s, 
Medivation’s, acquisition by Pfizer was announced, it would affect similar 
companies in their commercial sphere and boost those other companies’ 
value.3 He reasoned that if a significant control premium is paid for 
Medivation, then there is a good chance that other companies might also 
become targets, and that a premium might start getting priced into their 
stock shares as well.4 
So, based on this reasoning, Panuwat went out and bought Incyte.5 
His strategy paid off when the acquisition of Medivation by Pfizer was 
announced.6 The stock price of Incyte jumped 8%, and he made over a 
$100,000 in profits.7 The SEC then came knocking on his door and 
brought an enforcement action.8  
Now, before we get back to the story of Panuwat, let me give you 
a very brief introduction to the law of insider trading in the United States 
in broad brush strokes. There are lots and lots of tricky aspects and 
nuances of the law that we are not going to be able to get into in any depth. 
 
2 Id.  
3 Id. 
4 Id. 
5 Id. at 2. 
6 Id. 
7 Id.  
8 Id. 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
415 
 
However, we will do a quick introduction to see the lay of the land, and 
then I want to summarize the basic theory behind the Panuwat case.  
In the Panuwat case, the SEC uses the “shadow trading” theory of 
liability.9 What I'd like to do is talk about some risks for employers of 
shadow trading. What is at stake? Why would the SEC care about 
violations? Moreover, why would the issuers care about their employees 
engaging in this type of trading based on material, non-public information 
within the firm? And then finally, with this in place, this kind of weighing 
of the stakes, I want to talk a little bit about the problems compliance 
departments will be dealing with should the SEC continue to press this 
theory of liability in litigation. I will then close by proposing what some 
would regard as a controversial solution to these compliance problems. I 
know Tennessee Law’s own esteemed professor, Joan Heminway, does 
not agree with my proposed solution, but let’s have some fun with it in 
the discussion to follow. 
So, again, let us begin with a basic introduction to the law of 
insider trading here in the United States. After the stock market collapse 
of 1929, the federal government decided that it was time to step in and 
federalize the regulation of securities trading. Prior to that time, it had been 
relegated by state law for the most part. So, in the wake of the market 
 
9 Id. at 3. 

416          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
collapse, several federal statutory systems were embraced, including the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. 
Now, our topic is insider trading. The only provision that expressly 
pertains to insider trading in the 1934 Act is Section 16.10 And it only 
focuses on short swing trading, for example, buying or selling within six 
months of each other, and only for certain insiders defined by the statute.11 
It does not preclude insiders from trading on material non-public 
information outside the short swing period, and it cannot be enforced by 
the SEC.12 Thus, Section 16 is very limited in its scope. Other than Section 
16, we have no explicit federal statutory insider trading enforcement 
regime in the United States. Nevertheless, in 1961 (more than a quarter 
century after its adoption) SEC Commissioner, William Cary, made it a 
policy to use other broad catch-all provisions within the 1934 Act to try 
to cast a wider net in the context of insider trading.13 
The principal statutory provision that the SEC relied upon was 
Section 10(b) of the 1934 Act, which is a general anti-fraud provision that 
makes it unlawful to use any manipulative or deceptive device in 
connection with the purchase or sale of any security, in contravention of 
 
10 15 U.S.C. § 78p(b). 
11 Id. 
12 Id.  
13 See JOHN P. ANDERSON, INSIDER TRADING: LAW, ETHICS, AND REFORM 31–37 
(2018). 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
417 
 
the commission’s rules and regulations.14 In 1961, the SEC brought its first 
enforcement action pursuant to Section 10(b) in the Matter of Cady, Roberts, 
& Co.15  
The problem with using a general anti-fraud provision like Section 
10(b) to enforce insider trading is that 10(b) says nothing about insider 
trading.16 It's not an obvious fit because insiders typically do not 
affirmatively misrepresent to their counterparties when engaging in their 
transactions. It can happen, but typically insider trading is done over 
anonymous exchanges. Think about how you trade stocks today. You get 
on your e-trade account or whatnot, and you have no interaction with the 
counterparty to your trade. You make no representations about what you 
think of the stock that you're purchasing when you engage in the 
transaction. So, it's not an obvious fit. For there to be fraud in this 
transaction, it would have to be fraud by silence. Those of you who have 
taken contracts and torts know that fraud by silence is possible, but it's 
only triggered where there is a duty to disclose. So, remaining silent 
typically is not fraudulent unless you have a duty to disclose.  
The Supreme Court has recognized two theories under which a 
trader will have a duty to disclose in the context of insider trading.17 The 
 
14 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5 (2022); see U.S. v. O’Hagan, 521 U.S. 642, 651 (1997). 
15 Matter of Cady, Roberts & Co., 40 S.E.C. 907 (1961). 
16 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5 (2022). 
17 Chiarella v. U.S., 445 U.S. 222, 230(1980); O’Hagan, 521 U.S. at 651–52. 

418          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
classical theory was first recognized by the Supreme Court in the 1980 
case, Chiarella.18 Under this theory, the issuer, its employee, or someone 
otherwise affiliated with the issuer violates Section 10(b) when he seeks to 
benefit from trading that firm’s shares on the basis of the firm's material 
non-public information. In such instances, the insider violates a fiduciary 
or similar duty of trust and confidence to the shareholder (or prospective 
shareholder) who is the counterparty to the trade. So, think of it something 
like this: the idea here is that you as an insider of a firm—a CEO, board 
member, or officer—you have a fiduciary duty to the firm and also to the 
shareholders. When you receive material non-public information about 
the firm, there may be multiple owners of that information. The firm owns 
it, but the shareholders do also, in a loose sense. So, when you use their 
information against them, if you have a fiduciary relationship to them, 
that's a form of self-dealing. That's a breach of fiduciary duty. You're using 
something you hold in trust for them—or that you're taking care of for 
them—against them.  
In other words, in the classical context, the breach of fiduciary 
duty is to the counterparty to the trade. If you are an insider or firm and 
you buy your own firm's shares, the person selling those shares is your 
shareholder. You have a fiduciary duty to them, but you are using 
 
18 Chiarella, 445 U.S. at 230. 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
419 
 
information that they do not have access to in order to affect a trade that 
will profit you and not them—a trade that they would not make if they 
knew what you know. That's the basic idea behind the classical theory. 
The other theory of insider trading liability recognized by the 
Court is the misappropriation theory. This theory is triggered whether 
someone is an insider or not. Remember, the classical theory only applies 
to insiders. The misappropriation theory, however, applies to anyone who 
seeks to benefit by trading on the basis of material non-public information 
in violation of a fiduciary or similar duty of trust and confidence to the 
source of the information. The misappropriation theory says that the duty 
to disclose is owed to the source of the information, not to the 
counterparty, effectively covering the rest of the landscape that the 
classical theory leaves out.  
In United States v. O'Hagan, the Court first embraced the 
misappropriation theory of liability that was not raised by prosecutors in 
time in Chiarella.19  In Chiarella, an employee at a print shop learned from 
the prints he was handling that one company planned to acquire another. 
Before this information became available to the public, he bought shares 
in the company to be acquired and profited from the price increase upon 
subsequent disclosure. Now, you can see how under the classical theory 
 
19 O’Hagan, 521 U.S. at 651–52 (citing Chiarella, 445 U.S. at 228).   

420          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
of insider trading liability, on those facts, there would be no liability 
because if the person working in the print shop has any fiduciary duty, it's 
to his or her employer—not the counterparty to the trade. 
Sticking with this example, when the print shop worker trades on 
the information, he's buying shares of another company: not the acquirer, 
but the company being acquired. He's not, however, employed by the 
company being acquired.20  So, when there was an attempt to use a classical 
theory to impose liability on him in Chiarella, the court says, “you can't do 
that,”21 because there's no fiduciary duty to the counterparty. So the 
classical theory would not be able to swoop in and impose liability on that 
print shop worker.22 In O’Hagan, however, the Court recognized the 
misappropriation theory of insider trading liability. Under that theory, 
liability is triggered where anyone (insider or outsider) seeks to benefit by 
trading on the basis of material nonpublic information in violation of a 
fiduciary or similar duty of trust and confidence to the source of that 
information. The print shop worker would be liable for his failure to 
disclose his trading on the print shop’s confidential information under the 
misappropriation theory because he would thereby violate his fiduciary 
duty to his employer. In this way, the classical and misappropriation 
 
20 Id. 
21 See id. at 225. 
22 See id. at 232–33. 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
421 
 
theories are complimentary. The classical theory covers trading based on 
material nonpublic information in breach of a fiduciary duty by insiders, 
while the misappriation theory can cover such trading by outsiders as well.. 
So those are your two basic theories of insider trading liability. 
Now, what are the penalties? Well, the civil and criminal penalties can be 
quite significant. Insider trading under Section 10(b) can lead to civil 
enforcement by the SEC.23 The consequences can be a permanent or 
temporary injunction, and disgorgement of trading profits by the trader.24 
This can come with a statutory penalty of treble damages—up to three 
times the trading profit or loss avoided.25  Because the SEC can also bring 
an action for disgorgement, the statutory penalty can then equal four times 
the trading profits or losses avoided.26 Note that the treble damage fines 
can extend directly or indirectly to controlling persons.27 So firms may also 
be liable for the insider trading of their employees. Also, there is a possible 
whistleblower bounty of not less than 10% of the collected monetary 
sanctions.28 The SEC cannot bring a criminal action, but they can refer it 
to the Department of Justice, who can impose on an individual a fine of 
$5 million and up to 20 years in prison—and for a corporation, a fine up 
 
23 J. KELLY STRADER ET AL., WHITE COLLAR CRIME: CASES, MATERIALS, AND 
PROBLEMS 210 (4th ed. 2021). 
24 15 U.S.C.A. § 78u (West 2021); see 15 U.S.C.A. § 78u-1 (West) . 
25 15 U.S.C.A. § 78u-1(a)(2) (West). 
26 See 15 U.S.C.A. §78u(d)(3)(A) (West). 
27 15 U.S.C.A. § 78u-1(a)(3) (West). 
28 See 15 U.S.C.A § 78u-6(b)(1)(A) (West). 

422          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
to $25 million.29 These are quite significant penalties, so there is a lot at 
stake.  
Now, we have set the basic structure and lens through which to 
look at the Panuwat case.30 If Panuwat had purchased Medivation stock 
directly in advance of the announcement of its acquisition by Pfizer, I 
hope you can see it would be quite likely he would be liable for insider 
trading under the classical theory. This is because when Penuwat, who is 
employed by Medivation, buys shares of Medivation, he would be buying 
those shares from the Medivation shareholders in breach of a fiduciary 
duty to those shareholders.31 He would be using these shareholders’ own 
information against them. So, Penuwat would've been liable under the 
classical theory if he had profited by purchasing shares in Medivation. 
Now, if Penuwat alternatively had profited by purchasing shares 
of Pfizer in anticipation of its acquisition of Medivation—let us say that 
for some reason there was an expectation that this is such a good deal for 
Pfizer, that their stock price would go up as well—then, it's likely he would 
be liable under the misappropriation theory. I hope you can see why. Here 
the idea would be that Penuwat would be using Medivation’s material nonpublic information about the pending acquisition to profit from the 
 
29 15 U.S.C.A. § 78ff(a) (West ). 
30 SEC v. Panuwat, No. 21-cv-06322-WHO, 2022 WL 633306 (N.D. Cal. 2022). 
31 See id. at *2. 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
423 
 
purchase of Pfizer’s stock.  But Medivation does not want its employees 
disclosing its material non-public information about this acquisition 
because it might kill the deal. They're very careful about this—demanding 
that their employees keep the deal confidential. They do not want this 
happening. If he disclosed an intent to trade to the the board of directors, 
they would say, “absolutely not,” and they would probably terminate him 
if he wanted to persist in the trade. So here, in this scenario, his failure to 
disclose to Medivation before trading would likely incur liability under the 
misappropriation theory.  
Liability under the two two preceding hypothetical scenarios is 
clear, but, in fact, Panuwat did not trade in either Medivation or Pfizer. 
He went and bought totally unrelated shares in a totally unrelated 
company, Incyte, that was not part of this deal at all.32 So, on the facts of 
Panuwat, there are certainly no grounds for classical liability for Panuwat 
with the purchase of the shares of Incyte. He does not owe fiduciary duties 
to the shareholders of Incyte. 
 But would there be liability under the misappropriation theory? Well, the 
first question you might ask when considering liability under the 
misappropriation theory on these facts might be why would Medivation 
care about their employees trading in third-party shares? The second 
 
32 Id. 

424          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
question would be, had Medivation said something already about what 
they want their employees to do in these types of situations? Both those 
questions are relevant to answering the question of whether or not this 
was a misappropriation of Medivation’s information by Panuwat. The 
SEC's basic theory of liability here, if I understand it, is that Panuwat 
breached a fiduciary or similar duty of trust and confidence to Medivation 
under the misappropriation theory by using that company's material, nonpublic information to profit by trading in Incyte.33 As evidence of this, the 
SEC and the district court relied on some language found in Medivation’s 
insider trading compliance policy.34 Here's the language:  
 
“During the course of your employment . . . with the Company, you may 
receive important information that is not yet publicly disseminated . . . 
about the Company…. Because of your access to this information, you 
may be in a position to profit financially by buying or selling or in some 
other way dealing in the Company’s securities…or the securities of 
another publicly traded company, including all significant collaborators, 
customers, partners, suppliers, or competitors of the Company…. For 
anyone to use such information to gain personal benefit is illegal.”35  
 
33 See id. at 3, 5–6. 
34 Id. at 6. 
35 Id. 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
425 
 
 
Now, that's Medivation's insider trading compliance policy, and the SEC 
and the district court suggested that this policy, to which Panuwat did 
agree, is evidence of a duty on the part of Panuwat to Medivation to 
disclose or abstain from trading in any company's shares based on 
Medivation’s material, non-public information.36 Consequently, Panuwat’s 
trading in Incyte exposed him to insider trading liability under the 
misappropriation theory.37 
Now, when you look at the policy, if he agreed to this, it is fair to 
suggest that he breached a fiduciary (or at least contractual) duty to 
Medivation by trading in Incyte’s shares.38 In effect, Medivation told 
Panuwat in advance, before we give you any of this material non-public 
information, we want to make something clear: Here's what you can do 
with it. Here's what you cannot do with it. And if we are going to give it 
to you, we are only going to give it to you if you agree to these terms, 
right? Panuwat says, “I agree.” Okay, there it is, right? If Panuwat said he 
agreed while knowing that he would trade anyway, then he’s being 
deceptive, right? And that's the basic idea here. So, the idea here is that 
Panuwat is liable under the misappropriation theory. And such trading in 
 
36 Id. at 6. 
37 Id. 
38 Id. at 1. 

426          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
a third party’s shares, through economically linked firms, has been dubbed 
“shadow trading.”39 
Alright, so here are some things that I think are very interesting 
and a few things that strike me as odd about insider trading liability for 
shadow trading. Let me just run through them, and I know I'm about to 
run out of time, and maybe we will have some time during the question 
period to dig into it a little more deeply. Here are a few things that I want 
you all to think about.  When you look at the insider trading policy of 
Medivation, it imposes an extremely broad prohibition on its employees’ 
ability to trade. It's not limited to shares of Medivation or companies 
which Medivation is in privity with, but to any other publicly traded 
company. 
Also, it strikes me as interesting that you see in the policy the claim 
that any such trading in any other publicly trading company’s shares based 
on Medivation’s information “is illegal.” This is odd language because it is 
either absolutely false or it is very misleading. The Supreme Court has 
made it clear that, for example, some such trading may not breach a 
fiduciary or similar duty of trust and confidence if it is not material. The 
Court has also made it clear that such trading would not violate Section 
 
39 See, Mehta, Mihir N. and Reeb, David M. and Zhao, Wanli, Shadow Trading 
(September 6, 2020). The Accounting Review, July 2021, Available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3689154. 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
427 
 
10(b) insider trading laws if the intent to trade on it is disclosed to the firm 
in advance. In such cases,  even if the firm said “No,” then there would 
be no violation if the employee proceeded to trade because there would 
be no deception.40 So, I think the statement that all such trading is illegal 
is either false or misleading. At a minimum, it is an odd thing to put in a 
compliance policy, in my view, without giving more support for it. 
So those are a couple odd things here. Now, why would 
Medivation have created this policy? This is a very important question, 
because the SEC and the district court are leaning on this policy as the 
trigger for the misappropriation theory of liability in this shadow trading 
case.41 It is central to the theory of liability. Why would they have made it 
so broad? Well, one answer could be that due to the vagueness in the law 
of insider trading—we did not get into it too much, but there are lots of 
problems with the law of insider trading in terms of its scope, which is 
quite ambiguous—Medivation expanded the scope of its prohibition to 
make sure they stayed on the right side of the law. In other words, out of 
fear of the stiff penalties, and not quite understanding the law, they decide, 
okay, let us make it really broad. They may have thought—let’s play it safe 
and prohibit a broad swath of trading by our employees to be certain we 
are on the right side of the line, and to avoid liability for our employees 
 
40 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5 (2022); 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b5-1 (2022). 
41 Panuwat, 2022 WL 633306, at *3. 

428          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
and the firm. This way we can be pretty certain our employees will not be 
engaging in illegal stock trades. That might be one explanation. Another 
could be that they really contemplated genuine economic risks to the firm 
by this type of shadow trading. Maybe they were worried that their 
employees are going to worry too much about trading, rather than doing 
their jobs. Maybe they were worried that employees would be thinking too 
much about how they could use confidential information in Medivation 
to profit from trading in other companies. And that is wasteful. So, it could 
be one of those things.  
But what are the risks of making your entire trading compliance 
policy so broad? Well, one risk is that the broad policy could really expose 
Medivation and its employees to a lot of unnecessary liability to the extent 
that policies are going to be looked at to trigger shadow trading liability. 
Recall that, under the misappropriation theory (which, as noted above, is 
the only theory under which Panuwat could be held liable here), trading is 
only illegal if it is unauthorized by the source. If Medivation had not used 
the broad language to preclude Panuwat’s trading in any other security in 
its compliance policy, then there would be no basis for liability on these 
facts. The irony here is palpable because one of the possible reasons for 
adopting the broad “play-it-safe” policy in the first place was to protect 
employees and the firm from liability. The risks go beyond the facts 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
429 
 
surrounding Panuwat where there was an attempt to profit from 
confidential information. 
Think about it. You are an employee at a firm and you just want 
to buy shares in some other company.  You are a high-level employee at 
Microsoft, and you want to buy shares of Apple to diversify your portfolio. 
Well, is there going to be any day of the week, or of the year, when you 
might not, as an employee of Microsoft, have some information that is 
not public and might be related to Apple? After all—you are in the same 
industry. Well, if you have a broad trading policy like Medivation’s, then 
any such trade (even if it is to just diversify your portfolio) might be 
exposing yourself and the firm to liability.42 Also, there is a problem of 
materiality. You might think, well, whatever nonpublic information I have 
about Microsoft company  is not material to my purchase of shares in 
Apple, but the definition of materiality is quite vague, and a jury might 
decide differently in hindsight. Professor Joan Heminway has written 
some really good articles on that problem.43  
  What if, instead of the broad compliance policy that Medivation 
had (that the court and the SEC were focusing on to trigger this 
 
42 Under the SEC’s Rule 10b5-1, persons can be liable for trading while “aware” of 
material nonpublic information—even if that information does not cause the trade. 
43 See, e.g., Joan MacLeod Heminway, Just Do It! Specific Rulemaking on Materiality 
Guidance in Insider Trading, 72 La. L. Rev. 999 (2012); Joan MacLeod Heminway, 
Materiality Guidance in the Context of Insider Trading: A Call for Action, 52 Am. U.L. 
Rev. 1131 (2003). 

430          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
misappropriation liability), Medivation instead adopted a policy that 
looked something like the following –“Because of your access to this 
information, you may be in a position to profit financially by trading in the 
company’s securities or the securities of its customers and suppliers. Such 
trading is strictly prohibited. Nothing in this policy should, however, be 
read as prohibiting your trading or dealing in any other issuers’ securities, 
unless expressly restricted by the company (for example, where such 
trading would jeopardize pending M&A activity, or relates to a tender 
offer in violation of SEC Rule 14(e)3).”44  Now, I think that had that 
language been in Medivation’s compliance policy, there's no way the SEC 
could have brought this case, right? And I think that would certainly be a 
good thing for Panuwat, but probably good for Medivation as well. So, my 
time is up and thank you very much.  
Professor Anderson: 
In many circumstances, with respect to compliance policies, you 
do want to try to have broader language and adopt a more safe approach. 
I guess what I am trying to tease out here is that I think it is a really 
interesting situation—specifically in the context of insider training—
tbecause in the attempt to protect the firm and its employees by making 
the scope of the limitation on trading broader, ironically, the firm arguably 
 
44 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b5-1 (2022); see 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5 (2022). 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
431 
 
exposes itself to more liability because the firm controls the liability in the 
misappropriation context. All the firm has to do is say—and the Supreme 
Court has agreed with this—you are authorized to make these trades, as 
long as it is not trading in your own company's shares (which would incur 
classical liability). Under the misappropriation theory, all the source of the 
information has to do is say that you are authorized in making this trade; 
such authorization alone avoids Section 10(b) liablity. If the employee says, 
I am going to do it, then it is not deceptive, And it does not breach a 
fiduciary duty. It is okay. So, if you control the scope of insider trading 
liability under the misappropriation theory, then by broadening your 
restrictions, you are actually exposing yourself to more liability as a firm—
not less. And that is just the interesting thing I want to bring out here, 
because it does not show up in a lot of other compliance contexts, but in 
this one, it is kind of unique. I know that I sometimes have a way of kind 
of being controversial to generate discussion. So, I know that probably no 
firm is ever going to adopt this compliance policy. But regardless, I think 
firms should take the risks I have identified here seriously and at least be 
mindful of the fact that by adopting these play-it-safe policies, they may 
ironically be exposing their shareholders to greater liability. 
Professor Anderson: 

432          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
Yeah, no, I mean, absolutely. I guess I was kind of getting to that. 
As I pointed out, there are lots of elements in the law of insider trading 
that are quite vague. One kind of problem in the context of shadow trading 
is materiality, right? What information about Medivation is material to a 
trade in Incyte’s shares? I pointed out how Professor Heminway has done 
a lot of really good work in this area about how the materiality standard is 
problematic. And I think this might be one area where the vagueness could 
expose, again, a lot of people who are just engaging in quite innocent 
conduct to insider trading liability.  
One thing I did not get into earlier is that the SEC has adopted a 
rule whereby one’s trading simply while aware of material non-public 
information, even if that information does not cause the trade, (i.e., you 
did not trade because of the information, but you trade for completely 
unrelated reason) can be enough to generate insider trading liability. In 
other words, under this rule (SEC Rule 10b5-1), if you are simply aware 
of the material non-public information when trading, then they are saying 
you traded on the basis of it. Now, imagine the application of this rule in 
the context of shadow trading. So, you're trading in shares of another 
company for a totally different reason (e.g., portfolio diversification), and 
yet a jury or fact finder could later discover that you were aware of 
information that was material to that trade. So you're liable. I mean, this 
could really balloon into a problem. I'm just curious about how much of 

2023]  
           RETHINKING INSIDER TRADING COMPLIANCE POLICIES   
433 
 
this case turns on the existence of a insider trading policy at Medivation—
and whether it could have been avoided by a more narrow policy. I guess 
what I want to say is, if there was no policy at all (or the policy was 
narrower), what is wrong with Panuwat’s simple trading strategy? How 
does it harm Medivation? Why do they need a policy to cover it? Maybe it 
is just that you are an employee, generally speaking, you are an agent. You 
owe a fiduciary duty to your employer. You should not be using the 
employer's property for personal reasons. Yes. Information is property. 
But then the  SEC seems to have cared a lot about the policy, and I agree 
the policy supports the SEC's petition—though there is more to it. Even 
with the policy, Panuwat may not be liable. I think Professor Hemminway 
may have some interesting things to say about this, right? She and I have 
had discussions about this. I do not think the policy is required. I agree 
with you, right? That is, I mean the real argument is, was there a breach of 
fiduciary, similar duty of trust and confidence—and the policy is more 
contractual, right? 
And there's a big debate as to whether a breach of contract is a 
breach of fiduciary duty in this context. All I am trying to do is sidestep 
that altogether because even without the policy, arguably this would have 
been a breach of fiduciary duty because it's arguably self-dealing using 
property of the companies for your own personal gain. Totally fair. But 
if—as we all know, right—the company says that you can do it, then you 

434          TRANSACTIONS: THE TENNESSEE JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LAW          [Vol. 24  
 
can do it. So, I guess what I'm saying is the policy can matter to cover the 
company right here. The company’s policy is just one piece of evidence to 
prove the separate point that there was a breach of fiduciary duty, and the 
district court bought the argument. Some would argue that that is not 
right. But what I am saying is if the company explicitly says you can do it 
in its policy, then I think they (and Panuwat) are covered. In sum, what is 
clear (at least in my view) is that there would be no liablity for Panuwat if 
Medivation had adopted my proposed, narrower policy—and that result 
would have been better for Panuwat, and probably the company. 
 
