Finance Working Paper N° 1029/2025
January 2025
Marc Goergen
IE Business School and ECGI
Luc Renneboog
Tilburg University, CentER and ECGI
Yang Zhao
University of Liverpool 
© Marc Goergen, Luc Renneboog and Yang Zhao 
2025. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not 
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without 
explicit permission provided that full credit, includ­
ing © notice, is given to the source.
This paper can be downloaded without charge from:
http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=5847268
www.ecgi.global/content/working-papers
Insider Trading in Connected 
Firms during Trading Bans

ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance
Working Paper N° 1029/2025
January 2025 
Marc Goergen
Luc Renneboog 
Yang Zhao
Insider Trading in Connected Firms during 
Trading Bans
We are grateful for the comments and suggestions received from participants at the 2023 annual conference 
of the International Corporate Governance Society at IE University in Madrid, the Welsh Quarterly Finance 
Seminar on 8 March 2024, the 2024 Finance Forum of the Spanish Finance Association, the 2024 Accounting 
and Business Analytics Conference at the University of Macau, and seminars and workshops at the Universities 
of Essex, Liverpool, and Sussex as well as VinUniversity. The research reported in this paper was partially 
funded by the Spanish State Research Agency (AEI) (/10.13039/501100011033) – Grant No. PID2020115982RB-C22 and Grant No. PID2023-148086NB-C22. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of 
interest. 
© Marc Goergen, Luc Renneboog and Yang Zhao 2025. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, 
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, 
including © notice, is given to the source.

Abstract
Insiders are subjected to trading bans or close periods before earnings announce­
ments. Directors with multiple board seats can still trade in their other firms not 
subject to close periods. When a close period restricts insider trading, directors 
leverage insider information about that firm to trade in their other firms. This is 
supported by positive correlations between stock market reactions in close and 
traded firms, which are moderated by the type of firm relationships and institu­
tional investor presence. This newly documented informational advantage, may 
encourage policymakers to apply the close period to all firms where a director 
holds board seats.
Keywords: insider trading, connected directors, director networks, trading bans, close 
periods
JEL Classifications: G14, G34
Marc Goergen*
Professor of Finance
IE Business School, Department of Finance
María de Molina 11
28006 Madrid, Spain
phone: +34 917 875 182
e-mail: marc.goergen@ie.edu
Luc Renneboog
Professor of Corporate Finance
Tilburg University, School of Economics and Management, Department of 
Finance
Warandelaan 2
5037 AB Tilburg, The Netherlands
phone: +31 134 668 210
e-mail: luc.renneboog@tilburguniversity.edu
Yang Zhao
Senior Lecturer in Financial Data Analysis
University of Liverpool
Foundation Building Brownlow Hill
Liverpool L69 7ZX, United Kingdom
e-mail: Yang.Zhao3@liverpool.ac.uk
*Corresponding Author

 
 
 
Insider Trading in Connected Firms during Trading Bans 
 
Marc Goergen1 
IE Business School, IE University, and the European Corporate Governance Institute 
Luc Renneboog2 
Tilburg University and the European Corporate Governance Institute 
Yang Zhao3 
University of Liverpool Management School 
Abstract 
Insiders are subjected to trading bans or close periods before earnings announcements. Directors 
with multiple board seats can still trade in their other firms not subject to close periods. When a 
close period restricts insider trading, directors leverage insider information about that firm to trade 
in their other firms. This is supported by positive correlations between stock market reactions in 
close and traded firms, which are moderated by the type of firm relationships and institutional 
investor presence. This newly documented informational advantage, may encourage policymakers 
to apply the close period to all firms where a director holds board seats. 
 
Keywords: insider trading, connected directors, director networks, trading bans, close periods 
JEL codes: G14, G34 
Acknowledgments: We are grateful for the comments and suggestions received from participants 
at the 2023 annual conference of the International Corporate Governance Society at IE University 
in Madrid, the Welsh Quarterly Finance Seminar on 8 March 2024, the 2024 Finance Forum of 
the Spanish Finance Association, the 2024 Accounting and Business Analytics Conference at the 
University of Macau, and seminars and workshops at the Universities of Essex, Liverpool, and 
Sussex as well as VinUniversity. The research reported in this paper was partially funded by the 
Spanish State Research Agency (AEI) (/10.13039/501100011033) – Grant No. PID2020115982RB-C22 and Grant No. PID2023-148086NB-C22. The authors declare that there are no 
conflicts of interest.  
 
 
 
1 Department of Finance, IE Business School, IE University, Calle María de Molina 12, 4th floor, Madrid 28006; 
email: Marc.Goergen@ie.edu; tel.: +34 915 689 600. 
2 Department of Finance, Tilburg University, PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands; email: 
Luc.Renneboog@TiburgUniversity.edu; tel.: +31 13 466 8210.  
3 Accounting and Finance Group, University of Liverpool Management School, University of Liverpool, Liverpool  
L69 3BX; email: yang.zhao3@liverpool.ac.uk; tel.: +44 151 795 1447.  

2 
 
 
Insider Trading in Connected Firms during Trading Bans 
 
1. Introduction 
It has been amply documented that corporate insiders with access to insider information earn 
abnormal returns by trading their firms’ shares (for a survey of the literature, see Bhattacharya, 
2014). As insiders have a significant informational advantage, especially prior to major 
information releases, such as earnings announcements (Goldie et al., 2023), trading bans prior to 
information releases restrict insiders from exploiting their insider information (Jagolinzer et al., 
2011). Insiders violating insider trading regulations can face severe consequences. For instance, in 
2016, two investment bankers were convicted of insider trading in the United Kingdom and 
sentenced to 3.5 and 4.5 years of imprisonment, along with confiscation of their assets (valued at 
£1.7 million), as part of Operation Tabernula led by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). 
While insiders are prohibited from trading the shares of their firms during such trading bans, they 
can still trade the shares of other firms. Importantly, insiders may be motivated to do so when their 
insider information is material and potentially affects other firms’ share prices. Since insiders are 
not obliged to disclose share transactions in other firms in which they are not insiders, observing 
their overall trading while they are facing a trading ban in their firm is impossible.4 However, there 
is one exception, as the trades of so-called “connected directors,” who serve as executive or 
nonexecutive directors5 in multiple firms, can be observed. In other words, when connected 
 
4 One exception is a recent study by Berkman et al. (2020) in which a dataset of share trades by Finnish company 
directors is used. The authors examine directors’ transactions in the firms in which the directors hold a board seat (the 
focal firms) as well as their transactions in all other firms. They report that insiders realize positive abnormal returns 
when they trade the shares of other firms that have common directors with the focal firm. 
5 In this study, we use the UK definition of “director,” which encompasses both executives or officers and 
nonexecutives or independent directors. 

3 
 
 
directors are prohibited from trading before an earnings announcement in one firm, their 
transactions in other connected firms can still be observed. Studying insider trades in connected 
firms is interesting for at least two reasons. First, directors subject to a trading ban in one of their 
firms may still be able to exploit the insider information they hold about that firm in their other 
firms. Hence, the results of this study have the potential to generate important insights for 
regulators and investors. Indeed, in April 2024, in the United States, Matthew Panuwat was found 
liable for purchasing stock in a competing firm based on nonpublic information about his firm’s 
upcoming acquisition.6 This is the Securities Exchange Commission’s (SEC’s) first instance of its 
“shadow trading” enforcement action. It is likely that regulators from other countries will follow 
suit in the near future. Second, studying insider trading in connected firms should further our 
understanding of how stock prices are correlated. 
Our analysis is based on the London Stock Exchange (LSE), where the 30-day trading ban prior 
to the earnings announcement7 is formally referred to as a “close period.” Before 2016, close 
periods before semiannual and annual earnings announcements were longer (60 days). While in 
the United States, trading bans (also known as “blackout periods”) vary across firms, in the United 
Kingdom, the close period is stipulated by regulation. We investigate the following three research 
questions: 1) Are directors more likely to trade in their connected firms when they are prohibited 
from trading during a close period in one of their firms? 2) Are such transactions influenced by 
information that emerges during the close period? 3) Do investors effectively utilize the 
information from insider transactions in connected firms to trade in close firms? 
 
6 https://www.sec.gov/enforcement-litigation/litigation-releases/lr-25970 
7 The majority of the UK firms only disclose their earnings annually. 

4 
 
 
What do we find? First, we observe that of the total 86,258 insider transactions during the period 
between 1999 and 2019, 40.7% (i.e., 35,109) were made by connected directors. Moreover, 21.0% 
(i.e., 7,384) of the latter transactions were made when one of the firms of the director who was 
trading was subject to a close period. Importantly, we find that when their trading is restricted by 
a close period, directors tend to trade more frequently in their connected firms. Second, the 
direction of trading in the connected firms (i.e., purchases or sales) is determined by whether the 
insider information about the firm subject to a close period is positive or negative (as measured by 
the earnings surprise and the market reaction to the earnings announcement). Third, we assess 
market reactions to insider transactions via the cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) around the 
announcement dates of the insider transactions. For firms subject to close periods, we also compute 
the CARs over the same event window used for the firms for which insider transactions took place. 
We find that the CARs in connected firms are positively correlated with CARs in close period 
firms. This positive correlation is observed across various event windows and samples and when 
controlling for concurrent events, such as mergers and acquisitions (M&A) and CEO turnover 
announcements. Nevertheless, it could still be the case that a positive correlation is brought about 
by broader market trends that cause synchronized movements in share prices. In other words, the 
observed correlation between the CARs may be driven by a momentum effect that applies to all 
stocks. Hence, we perform a placebo test for pairs of unconnected firms. Following this test, we 
do not observe correlated CARs over the same event window. We conclude that the correlated 
market reactions stem from connected directors’ transactions rather than from market momentum. 
To understand the mechanisms that underlie the positively correlated market reactions, we conduct 
two further analyses of the types of relationships that exist between the connected firms and the 
effects of institutional ownership. First, we find that the aforementioned positive correlation is 

5 
 
 
strengthened by friendly relationships 8 between the connected firms, suggesting that insider 
information is more valuable when the connected firms are closely related. This finding is in line 
with those of Alldredge and Cicero (2015), Ben-David et al. (2019), and Berkman et al. (2020), 
who report that insiders have an informational advantage when trading shares of firms with which 
they are familiar, such as firms within the same industry. Second, the positive correlation is more 
pronounced when the connected firms have a high level of institutional ownership. This suggests 
that institutional investors closely monitor the trading activities of connected directors, especially 
during close periods. When connected directors trade shares in their other connected firms, 
institutional investors seize the opportunity to trade in related firms that are subject to close periods, 
thereby inducing a correlation in the CARs. Further analysis reveals that the stock market reactions 
in the connected firms do not occur synchronously, as the CARs in the firms subject to a close 
period appear shortly after the CARs in the traded connected firm. Hence, the CARs are 
synchronized, but not synchronous. We also examine whether the correlations between the market 
reactions of the traded and close firms result from macroeconomic events inducing industry- or 
market-wide shocks (e.g., a change in monetary policy) that simultaneously affect the returns of 
the traded and close firms. Our placebo test, which randomly pairs traded firms with unconnected 
firms, suggests that this explanation does not hold ground. 
This paper makes the following two major contributions to the literature: First, existing studies 
have concluded that, while trading bans effectively stop directors from trading prior to earnings 
announcements, such bans have a limited impact on trading profitability as measured by abnormal 
 
8 A friendly relationship is defined as follows: a) the traded and close firms are identified as “Partner” in FactSet or b) 
the two firms are in a sector with a Herfindahl–Hirschman index (HHI) in the top tercile among all sectors in the given 
year. Friendly relationships apply to 8.2% of pairs of traded and close firms in our sample, among which 4.8% are 
identified using the FactSet data and the remaining 3.4% are identified using the HHI.  

6 
 
 
returns (Hillier and Marshall, 2002). Importantly, the literature has primarily focused on the 
relationship between insider information and the timing and profitability of insider transactions 
within a firm (Seyhun, 1986; Fidrmuc et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2012; Akbas et al., 2020; Cziraki 
and Gider, 2023). By contrast, we focus on how insiders exploit informational advantages across 
connected firms when they face a trading ban in the firm for which they have insider information. 
Using a unique dataset on connected directors, we demonstrate that connected directors can 
partially evade trading bans by taking advantage of their insider information and trading in 
connected firms. This result potentially has major implications for how regulators should define 
insider trading. Our finding is related to that of Mehta et al. (2021), who report that when the focal 
firm is subject to trading restrictions, informed trading activity (“shadow trading”) by institutional 
investors increases in business partners and competitors due to information leakage by focal firm 
employees. In contrast to Mehta et al. (2021), we focus on transactions made by executive and 
nonexecutive directors who sit on multiple boards. Another important difference between our 
study and that of Mehta et al. (2021) is that most connected firms in our sample are not competitors, 
given the substantial compliance risks that such connections create. We demonstrate that trading 
by these connected directors serves as an alternative channel for information dissemination. 
Furthermore, by focusing on connected directors rather than informed traders in general, we 
observe that synchronized market reactions emerge during connected directors’ transactions in the 
traded firm as well as in the close firm, which has not been previously documented in the literature. 
Finally, to better understand the correlated market reactions, we examine the impact of the type of 
relationship between pairs of connected firms on the stock market reactions to insider trading. We 
find that the correlation between market reactions in the close and traded firms is stronger when 
the connected firms are in a friendly relationship. Our second contribution consists of investigating 

7 
 
 
two potential channels to explain the correlated market reactions: information leakage and 
institutional investors. Our analysis of the moderation effect and timing of market reactions 
supports the institutional investor channel (Akbas et al., 2016). More specifically, institutional 
investors can capture information from close period transactions and utilize it to trade in close 
firms. Again, this result has important implications for how insider trading is defined. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the literature on restrictions 
on insider transactions before earnings announcements as well as the literature on insider trading, 
corporate networks, and trading bans. Section 3 presents four conjectures and discusses the study’s 
methodology. In Section 4, we explain the data collection process. The empirical analysis and 
results are presented in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions. 
2. Restrictions on Insider Trading and Literature Review 
2.1 Close Periods 
Close periods vary across countries. In the United States, the SEC prohibits insiders from trading 
based on information that is not publicly available. Therefore, via their articles of association, 
firms impose “blackout periods”—starting two to three weeks prior to the end of each fiscal 
quarter—which are a common component of the insider trading compliance programs of most 
publicly listed firms (Bettis et al., 2000). Still, firms with better governance are more likely to 
adopt voluntary insider trading restrictions, including blackout periods (Dai et al., 2016). 
Regarding the effectiveness of blackout periods, Garfinkel (1997) reports that insiders in the 
United States respond to the Insider Trading and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act by altering the 
timing of their trades. For example, insiders are now more likely to postpone liquidity-induced 

8 
 
 
sales until after negative earnings surprises. Bettis et al. (2000) argue that blackout periods in the 
United States have successfully suppressed trading by insiders. 
In the United Kingdom, the close period—the trading ban period imposed on insiders—was first 
introduced in 2005 by the Model Code as part of the Listing Rules published by the then Financial 
Services Authority, now the FCA.9 Persons discharging managerial responsibilities (PDMRs)10 in 
a listed company are prohibited from trading in the company’s securities during close periods. The 
close period is defined as the period of 60 days immediately preceding the announcement of the 
company’s annual and semiannual results.11 The rules about close periods have been updated over 
time: Article 19 (11) of the UK Market Abuse Regulation (MAR), which replaced the Model Code 
on 3 July 2016, reduced the length of the close period to 30 days before the announcement of the 
interim or year-end results.12 
2.2 Profitability of Insider Trading 
Early studies, such as those of Lorie and Niederhoffer (1968) and Jaffe (1974), document how 
insider transactions tend to have a significant influence on share prices compared to transactions 
by other market participants. Market participants believe that insiders are better at timing their 
transactions according to future cash flow realizations (Ke et al., 2003; Piotroski and Roulstone, 
2005). These findings are confirmed by later studies. For example, Fidrmuc et al. (2006), 
 
9 The Model Code can be consulted at https://www.handbook.fca.org.uk/handbook/glossary/G724.html?date=200603-06&page=4&starts-with=M&timeline=True. 
10 According to the UK Market Abuse Regulation, PDMRs include 1) members of the administrative, management, 
or supervisory bodies of that entity (i.e., an executive or nonexecutive director) and 2) senior executives who are not 
members of the bodies referred to above but who have regular access to insider information relating directly or 
indirectly to that entity and have the power to make managerial decisions affecting the future development and 
business prospects of that entity. In this paper, we consider executive directors and nonexecutive directors insiders. 
Throughout the paper, we use UK terminology (i.e., executive and nonexecutive directors, which are the equivalents 
of officers and directors, respectively, in the United States). 
11 The close period before quarterly or semiannual results was 30 days.  
12 When using the adoption of MAR in 2016 as an exogenous shock, our results are upheld. 

9 
 
 
emphasize the important impacts of blockholders, including institutional investors, on the market 
reactions to insider trades. This study also reports anecdotal evidence that institutional investors 
mimic insider trades, buying shares of firms in which there are insider purchases and selling shares 
of firms in which there are insider sales. 
More generally, Lakonishok and Lee (2001), Friederich et al. (2002), and Cohen et al. (2012) 
report that the informational value of an insider transaction is determined by the trade’s 
characteristics. More specifically, sale and routine transactions typically have lower informational 
value than purchase and opportunistic transactions. Recent literature has identified additional 
factors that influence insider trading behavior and performance, including media coverage (Dai et 
al., 2015), accounting scandals (Agrawal and Cooper, 2015), corporate culture (Liu, 2016), and 
director networks (Ahern, 2017; Goergen et al., 2019). Finally, Gao et al. (2022) report that to 
avoid litigation risk, insiders refrain from any share trading when they anticipate impactful 
corporate news releases, such as M&A announcements. 
Given the sensitivity of share prices to insider trading immediately before earnings announcements, 
most countries impose trading bans during the period preceding such announcements. Regarding 
the effectiveness of such trading bans, Jagolinzer et al. (2011) find that blackout periods and the 
firms’ general counsel (chief legal officer) effectively limit the profitability and ability of insider 
trades to predict future operating performance. By contrast, Lee et al. (2014) report that voluntary 
corporate restrictions, including blackout periods, have had limited success in preventing insiders 
from exploiting positive private information. 
In the United Kingdom, Hillier and Marshall (2002) report that although close periods affect the 
timing of director trades, they do not affect the profitability of such trades. Budsaratragoon et al. 

10 
 
 
(2012) and Zhu and Wang (2015) report similar evidence for the Thai and Chinese markets, 
respectively. Although close periods have effectively restricted insiders from trading before an 
earnings announcement, insiders are still able to exploit their informational advantage by trading 
immediately before or after close periods. 
3. Conjectures and Methodology 
3.1 Trading Propensity 
During close periods, when directors are prohibited from trading shares of their firms, they can 
still trade shares of other firms. For instance, suppose that Director A sits on the board of a firm 
that will soon announce its earnings for the latest fiscal year. As there has been much uncertainty 
regarding the firm’s performance, the announcement is likely to impact not only the share price of 
the firm in question but also the share prices of other firms with related operations. Although 
Director A cannot trade the shares of their firm because of the close period preceding the 
announcement, they can still trade the shares of other affected firms. Director A is not required to 
disclose such transactions unless they also hold an executive or nonexecutive directorship in these 
firms. The director networks literature refers to such directors as connected directors and to firms 
with such directors as connected firms. Connected directors are required to disclose their 
transactions in all firms in which they are insiders. 
Figure 1 places the above example within its broader context. Director A is a connected director 
because they are on the boards of two firms (i.e., Firms 1 and 2), which makes them connected 
firms. In other words, Firms 1 and 2 are connected via Director A. Assume that Firm 1 is the firm 
that is about to announce its earnings for the latest fiscal year. Hence, this firm is subject to a close 
period, preventing Director A from trading in that firm. This means that, for Director A, Firm 1 is 

11 
 
 
a close firm. However, Director A can freely trade shares in connected Firm 2, assuming that this 
firm is not concurrently subject to a close period. Thus, Firm 2 is a potentially traded firm. If 
Director A does indeed trade in Firm 2, Firm 2 is a traded firm.13 Such a transaction is then referred 
to as a close period transaction.14 
[Insert Figure 1 about here] 
Given the potential uncertainty regarding Firm 1’s performance over the last fiscal year, the 
earnings announcement is likely to have informational content. If the operations of Firms 1 and 2 
are related, the director has an incentive to trade shares in the second firm before the announcement 
of the information by Firm 1 to exploit their informational advantage, provided that Firm 2 is not 
subject to a close period. This leads to our first conjecture: 
C1: When trading is banned in one firm, connected directors are more likely to trade in their other 
connected firms. 
We conduct two analyses to test the validity of C1. First, we investigate whether connected 
directors are more likely to trade in their connected firms when they are subject to a close period 
in another firm. Hence, we compare the probability that a transaction occurs during a close period 
to the benchmark probability that a transaction occurs randomly during a close period. Figure 1 
presents two pairs of connected firms involving Director B—Firm 1 (close firm) and Firm 3 
(potentially traded firm) as well as Firm 1 (close firm) and Firm 4 (potentially traded firm). For 
 
13 The above categorization also applies to cases where a connected director has more than one external directorship 
(e.g., Director A), which entails multiple connected and potentially traded firms. Moreover, the categorization of the 
traded and close firms is dynamic. When Director A trades in Firm 1 while Firm 2 is subject to a close period, Firm 1 
becomes the traded firm and Firm 2 is then categorized as the close firm. 
14 Close periods are clustered in months before July because many firms release their earnings reports in March and 
June. However, the clustering of close periods does not necessarily result in clustered close period transactions, as 
directors are also more likely to encounter close periods in connected firms. 

12 
 
 
the pair of Firms 1 and 3, we first determine the actual propensity of close period transactions, 
defined as the number of Director B’s close period transactions in Firm 3 divided by the total 
number of transactions they have made in Firm 3. This actual propensity is then compared to the 
benchmark probability, which is the probability that a transaction falls within the 30-day close 
period at random. The benchmark probability is calculated as 30 / (365 − 30), assuming the close 
period is 30 days long and a transaction can occur on any of the 365 days in the year (except during 
the 30-day close period).15 The comparison between these two numbers then reveals whether 
Director B trades more in a connected firm when insider trading is banned in the close firm. We 
also evaluate the close period transaction propensity for Firm 1 while Firm 3 is the close firm. We 
then proceed by analyzing the other pair of connected firms (i.e., Firms 1 and 4) before moving on 
to the next connected director (i.e., Director A). 
Second, we estimate the following equation via a logistic regression to explain the daily likelihood 
of trading for connected directors: 
𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒_𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑑_(𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟) 𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑁𝑢𝑚_𝑜𝑓_𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑠𝑖,𝑡, + 𝛽3 ∗
𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚_𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜇𝑖+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                        
 
                               (1) 
Note that the above equation is at the director (i), firm (j), and day (t) level. Using Figure 1 as an 
example, we create the indicator variable Trading_day, which equals 1 if Director B trades shares 
of Firm 3 on the day under consideration. We generate another indicator variable, 
Close_period_(other), which equals 1 if Firm 1 is subject to a close period on that day. 
 
15 This is the case for the period after the enforcement of the Market Abuse Regulation (MAR) in 2016. Before the 
introduction of the MAR, the benchmark probability was 60 / (365 − 60). 

13 
 
 
These two variables describe the trading behavior of Director B in Firm 3 with and without close 
periods in connected Firm 1 as long as Director B is associated with both firms. Next, we analyze 
Director B’s trading in Firm 1 while accounting for Firm 3’s close period before moving onto the 
next pair of connected firms for the same director (i.e., Firms 1 and 4). We then move on to the 
next connected director (i.e., Director A). Besides Close_period_other, another important variable 
that may explain trading propensity is the number of directorships the connected director has 
(Num_of_directorships). For example, Director B holds three directorships (i.e., in Firms 1, 3, and 
4) while Director A holds two (i.e., in Firms 1 and 2). When prevented from trading due to a close 
period in Firm 1, Director B has more options to trade elsewhere than Director A. Therefore, we 
expect Num_directorships to have a negative effect on the likelihood of the connected director 
trading in a given connected firm. Moreover, inspired by Korczak et al. (2010), we control for 
lagged traded firm characteristics, including board size, return on assets (ROA), leverage (total 
debt over total assets), institutional ownership, and firm size (the natural logarithm of total assets). 
CEO duality (i.e., when the roles of CEO and chairman are assumed by the same person) is 
included as a corporate governance measure, proxying for agency problems (Hillier et al., 2015). 
Finally, we control for industry fixed effects ( 𝜇𝑖) based on the two-digit Standard Industry 
Classification (SIC) code and year fixed effects ( 𝜇𝑦). 
3.2 Trading Direction 
Biggerstaff et al. (2020) report that insiders trade on their informational advantage and that their 
decisions about whether to purchase or sell shares are determined by their insider information. 
Given the context of the present study, we expect that the direction of a close period transaction 
(i.e., a purchase or sale) in the traded firm is determined by insider information that arises during 
the close period in the close firm. The question arises as to how insider information about the close 

14 
 
 
firm may affect the stock price of the traded firm. The answer to this question depends on the type 
of relationship between the two firms. If both firms are in a competitive relationship, then positive 
(negative) insider information about the close firm is likely to negatively (positively) affect the 
stock price of the traded firm. Nevertheless, in practice, traded and close firms connected by a 
common director are typically not in a competitive relationship. Indeed, in 2011, the Competition 
and Markets Authority (CMA), formerly the Office of Fair Trading (OFT), published guidelines 
(OFT, 2011) that emphasize that all executive and nonexecutive directors must comply with 
competition laws. More precisely, directors should actively avoid conflicts of interest, sharing 
competitively sensitive information, and discussing the business’s future with its competitors. 
Consequently, directors who sit on the board of a competing firm are exposed to substantial 
compliance risks. Importantly, the CMA has the authority to disqualify directors and ban them 
from holding any directorships for up to 15 years. 
Similar regulatory requirements also apply to other markets. For example, in the United States, 
Section 8 of the Clayton Act prohibits individuals from sitting on the boards of two competing 
firms. In 2022, the Department of Justice Antitrust Division announced the resignation of seven 
directors from their board positions in competing firms due to antitrust concerns (Office of Public 
Affairs, 2022). 
As we focus on pairs of traded and close firms connected by common directors, competitive 
relationships among them are rare due to the compliance risk discussed above. In fact, many 
connected firms maintain friendly, partnership-based relationships. As demonstrated by Borgatti 
and Li (2009) in their study on firms that are connected via common directors and supply-chain 
relationships, director connections are typically found among firms with friendly relations. In such 
a context, insider information emerging from the close firm is likely to be more valuable for trading 

15 
 
 
shares in the connected firm. More importantly, whether the insider information on a close firm is 
positive or negative will affect the direction of the trade. If the information is positive, we expect 
connected directors to purchase shares in the traded firm, whereas we expect them to sell shares if 
the converse is the case. Thus, we propose the following conjecture: 
C2: Connected directors are more likely to purchase (sell) shares in the traded firm if the insider 
information in the close firm is positive (negative). 
To assess whether insider information is positive or negative news for the traded firm, we first use 
the positive (negative) earnings surprise (i.e., the percentage difference between the reported 
earnings and the average forecasted earnings) (Wang et al., 2012). Following Ball and Kothari 
(1991), we then use the abnormal returns at the earnings announcement as an alternative way of 
assessing whether the insider information is positive or negative. We take a conservative approach: 
if the market reaction is in the top tercile, we conclude that the announced earnings significantly 
exceed market expectations. It is then likely that the insider information during the close period is 
positive. Likewise, a very bad market reaction (i.e., one in the bottom tercile) is likely associated 
with negative insider information. More specifically, we estimate the following equation via a 
logistic regression: 
𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟_𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒_𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑗,𝑡+ 𝛽2 ∗ 𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡, + 𝛽3 ∗
𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚_𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜇𝑖+ 𝜇𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡                       
 
 
 
 
       (2) 
where the dependent variable equals 1 if the connected director buys shares in traded firm i and 0 
if they sell shares. Positive Information is an indicator variable set to 1 if the insider information 
in close firm j is positive and 0 otherwise. In some regressions, this variable is replaced by Negative 
Information. The latter is an indicator variable set to 1 if the insider information in close firm j is 

16 
 
 
negative and 0 otherwise. More specifically, positive (negative) insider information is captured 
when the earnings surprise or the market reaction (CARs [-1,1]) to the earnings announcement in 
the close firm is in the top (bottom) tercile and 0 otherwise. As a robustness test, we employ an 
alternative classification based on the top and bottom quartiles, and the results remain consistent. 
In Eq. (2), we include connected director traits and lagged traded firm characteristics as control 
variables (see Section 3.3). Finally, we control for industry fixed effects ( 𝜇𝑖) and year fixed effects 
( 𝜇𝑦). To account for the connected director’s decision not to trade, we apply a multinomial logistic 
regression whose dependent variable indicates whether only sales (-1), no transactions (0), or only 
purchases (1) took place in the traded firm during the close period in the close firm. We ignore 
cases in which a connected director makes both purchases and sales. In an alternative specification, 
we focus on the net transaction value, and then set the dependent variable to -1 when the connected 
director buys more shares than (s)he sells, +1 when (s)he sells more shares, and 0 when there is no 
transaction. This approach allows us to consider cases in which the connected director engages in 
both purchase and sale transactions within the same close period. 
3.3 Correlated Market Reactions 
As stated in Section 2.2, many studies document a significant market reaction (measured by CARs) 
to insider trades. Due to the informational value of insider trades, some investors mimic insider 
trades, thereby earning steady profits (Rozeff and Zaman, 1988; Fidrmuc et al., 2006). In the 
context of close periods, trading by connected directors in other (connected) firms may convey 
informational value. Thus, in response to insider trading in connected firms, sophisticated investors 
may trade in the close firm, as they do not face any trading restrictions given that they are not 
PDMRs. Hence, we expect the CARs in both firms to be positively correlated. Therefore, we 
propose the following conjecture: 

17 
 
 
C3: The stock market reaction following an insider transaction in a firm not subject to a close 
period is positively correlated with the market reaction in the connected close firm. 
To test the validity of C3, we estimate ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions using the following 
equation: 
𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠_𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑗,𝑡+ 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽3 ∗
 𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽4 ∗𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚_𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜇𝑖+ 𝜇𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡.  
                               (3) 
The dependent variable (𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖,𝑡) captures the market reaction to the insider transaction 
in traded firm i, and the main independent variable is the share price reaction in close firm j 
(𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠_𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑗,𝑡). When a connected director trades shares in the traded firm, we calculate the 
CARs in the traded and close firms over the same window. 
We go through the following four steps to calculate CARs_close: First, we account for all close 
periods, including those relating to annual, semiannual, and quarterly earnings announcements. 
The vast majority of the sample firms (67.4%) only disclose their earnings annually, whereas 31.9% 
(0.7%) of firms disclose their earnings semiannually (quarterly). Second, abnormal returns are 
defined as the difference between the actual and expected returns, which are calculated by means 
of the market model, with the beta’s estimation window spanning from day 200 to day 20 prior to 
the transaction’s announcement date. The abnormal returns are then aggregated over the event 
window to calculate the CARs, which serve as measures of the risk-adjusted market reaction. Third, 
because some transactions in the traded firm are near the end of the close period,16 the CAR event 
windows of the transactions might include the earnings announcement date. To avoid potential 
 
16 In 2.6% and 19.1% of cases, the transaction takes place one and within ten days before the earnings announcement, 
respectively. 

18 
 
 
informational contamination, we exclude such transactions and retain only those for which the 
event period ends before the earnings announcement. The baseline model uses a 21-day event 
window (i.e., [-10,10]), where day zero (i.e., the event day) is the day when the insider transaction 
is reported.17 We consider various alternative event windows (i.e., [0,1], [0,5], [0,10], [-1,1], and 
[-5,5]) in robustness tests. We also include a pre-event window (i.e., [-20,-1]) to account for a 
potential price runup. Finally, 32.7% of connected directors hold board positions in more than one 
firm. We assess their transactions and market reactions separately for each pair comprising a traded 
firm and the respective close firm. As a robustness test (not tabulated), we also examine the 
aggregate market reactions across multiple close firms associated with a given transaction (doing 
so does not change our findings qualitatively). 
We control for the following transaction characteristics: transaction value, whether the transaction 
is clustered with other transactions, and whether the transaction is a routine or opportunistic 
transaction (Cohen et al., 2012). As for director traits, we control for directors’ gender, age, and 
position in the firm (CEO, other executive director, chairman, nonexecutive director, etc.) as well 
as CEO duality. The following lagged financial control variables are included: ROA, leverage, and 
tangibility (fixed assets over total assets). We measure financial soundness based on the interest 
coverage ratio (earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) divided by interest expenses). Dividend 
payout is calculated by dividing dividends per share by earnings per share and then multiplying 
the ratio by 100. If earnings per share is negative, then the dividend payout is set to 0. We also 
include analyst coverage and institutional ownership and control for industry and year fixed effects 
( 𝜇𝑖 and  𝜇𝑦). 
 
17 In 88.7% of cases, the insider transaction is announced on either the day of the transaction or the following business 
day. 

19 
 
 
Note that the estimation of Eq. (2) may suffer from sample selection bias, as we can only study the 
market reactions to insider trades if directors trade during the close period. This calls for a 
Heckman selection model, which controls for the likelihood of an insider trade. Therefore, the 
dependent variable in the selection equation equals 1 if the director trades during a close period 
and 0 otherwise; the CARs are then examined in the regression equation. In addition to the control 
variables used in Eq. (1), the selection equation considers whether the traded and close firms are 
from the same industry and of a comparable firm size (i.e., they are in the same size decile for the 
given year). 
Selection equation:  
𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑖,𝑡  =  𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+ 𝛽1 ∗𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽3 ∗
𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡, + 𝛽4 ∗𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚_𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜇𝑖+ 𝜇𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡                                                            (4) 
where the dependent variable equals 1 if the connected director has made at least one purchase 
transaction in traded firm i during a close period and 0 if there are no transactions or only sales 
transactions. The independent variables indicate whether the traded and close firms belong to the 
same sector and are of a comparable size. The director traits, lagged traded firm characteristics, 
and fixed effects are defined above in Eq. (3).   
Regression equation: 
𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑗,𝑡+ 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽3 ∗
 𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽4 ∗𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽5 ∗𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑒𝑀𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜+ 𝜇𝑖+ 𝜇𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡     (5) 

20 
 
 
The dependent and independent variables are defined as in Eq. (3) above. 
3.4 Friendly Relationships 
As stated above, due to antitrust concerns, it is unlikely that connected traded and close firms are 
in a competitive relationship. Nevertheless, it is interesting to investigate whether the correlation 
between the market reactions in the traded and close firms changes with the type of relationship 
between the traded and close firms. Specifically, we expect a stronger positive correlation if both 
firms have a friendly rather than a neutral relationship. This leads us to our final conjecture: 
C4: The stock market reactions of two connected firms induced by an insider trade in the traded 
firm are more positively correlated if they have a friendly relationship. 
We estimate the following equation to test the validity of C4: 
𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠_𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑗,𝑡+ 𝛽2 ∗𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑗,𝑡+ 𝛽3 ∗𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑗,𝑡∗
𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑠_𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑗,𝑡+ 𝛽4 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽5 ∗ 𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡+ 𝛽6 ∗
𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚_𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜇𝑖+ 𝜇𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖,𝑡                         
 
 
                               (6) 
𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑗,𝑡 is an indicator variable set to 1 when there is a friendly relationship between the 
traded and close firms and 0 otherwise. 
4. Data 
We collect insider trading data from smartinsider.com. Our data include all disclosed share 
transactions by executive and nonexecutive directors in publicly listed UK companies, including 
those listed on the FTSE Alternative Investment Market, for the period between 1999 and 2019. It 
is worth noting that insider trading on the LSE differs from that in the United States in terms of 
timing, profitability, and share price reactions (Lakonishok and Lee, 2001; Fidrmuc et al., 2006). 

21 
 
 
More specifically, the United Kingdom imposes stricter regulations on insider trading than the 
United States does, as it features more precisely defined trading bans and faster reporting 
requirements. As a result, insider trading in the United Kingdom occurs less frequently during the 
period in question; however, when it occurs, it tends to be more informative and consequently 
triggers a stronger market reaction. To obtain data on close periods, earnings announcements, and 
earnings forecasts, we consult the IBES database. Next, we identify connected directors and firms 
based on information on directors provided by BoardEx, which also provides data on other board 
characteristics and director traits. We collect share price data and financial characteristics from 
Datastream and business relationship data from FactSet. 
Panel A of Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the insider transactions, specifically focusing 
on close period transactions. We compare transactions made by unconnected directors (Column 
1), connected directors outside the close period (Column 2), and connected directors during the 
close period—i.e., so-called close period transactions (Column 3). There are 86,258 insider 
transactions between 1999 and 2019, 40.7% of which are made by connected directors. In turn, 
21.0% of the latter transactions are made when one of the directors’ firms is subject to a close 
period.   
The average transaction value18 of connected directors tends to be smaller than that of unconnected 
directors (Panel A). This pattern could be due to the backgrounds of the trading directors, who are 
more likely to hold positions such as nonexecutive director or chairman. Such directors do not 
 
18 The insider trading reporting threshold depends on the regulator. In the European Union, an insider only needs to 
report his transactions if the cumulative traded value exceeds €5,000 per calendar year. In the United Kingdom, this 
limit is included in Article 19 of the MAR passed in 2016 (note that Article 19 specifies the limit to be €5,000 rather 
than its equivalent in GBP; see https://www.fca.org.uk/markets/market-abuse/regulation#section-disclosures). In 
addition, smartinsider.com has a daily reporting threshold of £1,000; an insider’s daily aggregate trading value below 
this threshold is not recorded. 

22 
 
 
receive equity-based compensation, which reduces their selling potential. We note that a high 
percentage (26.1%) of close period transactions is conducted by chairmen. Furthermore, compared 
to unconnected directors, connected directors engage more in routine trading, which is defined as 
trading that occurs at about the same time every year (Cohen et al., 2012). Routine transactions 
are more likely to be driven by directors’ liquidity needs and may therefore have less informational 
or signaling value than nonroutine (also called opportunistic) transactions. Furthermore, clustered 
transactions, defined as multiple transactions made on the same day by different directors, may be 
due to either insider information or the granting of equity-based compensation. We find a 
significant difference in clustered trades between connected and unconnected directors, with the 
latter being more likely to engage in clustered trades (t = 9.059).19 Finally, among insider traders, 
female directors are more likely to make connected trades. 
Columns 4 and 5 present descriptive statistics for the breakdown of close period transactions into 
purchases and sales, respectively. Connected directors tend to engage less frequently in sale 
transactions, which on average have a greater trade value than purchases, and this pattern is 
confirmed for all insider transactions (Fidrmuc et al., 2006; Goergen et al., 2019). Sale transactions 
are more likely to be nonroutine (or opportunistic) than purchases. We also find a significant 
difference in transaction clustering between purchases and sales, with the former being more likely 
to be clustered (t = 3.573). Moreover, the proportion of females and average age are significantly 
higher among directors involved in close period purchases compared to sales (t = 7.709 and t = 
8.355, respectively). We observe that CEOs and other executives are more likely to be involved in 
 
19 The lower likelihood of clustered transactions among connected directors suggests that, compared to their 
unconnected peers, connected directors are more likely to trade on information than to mimic the transactions of other 
directors. This aligns with their information advantage from their networks (Goergen et al., 2019). To rule out the 
possibility of connected directors mimicking transactions of other directors, we test all hypotheses using a subsample 
of nonclustered transactions. The results remain consistent. 

23 
 
 
sales. This makes sense, as such directors receive equity-based compensation. By contrast, we find 
that nonexecutive directors and chairmen tend to purchase more often than they sell. 
[Insert Table 1 about here] 
Panel B of Table 1 reports share price reactions to close period transactions. We consider a variety 
of event windows (Jagolinzer et al., 2020), including [-20,-1], [0,1], [0,5], [0,10], [-1,1], [-5,5], 
and [-10,10]. We report market reactions around the announcement of insider transactions in both 
traded and close firms. For the purchase transactions, we report significantly positive market 
reactions for all event windows for the traded firms, except for the pre-event window [-20,-1], for 
which the market reaction is significantly negative for traded firms. Regarding sale transactions, 
CARs following transaction announcements are negative (but not always significant) for the traded 
firms. Similar to purchases, we observe that CARs preceding transaction announcements are 
significantly different from 0 for the traded firms but of the opposite sign. When comparing the 
market reaction in the traded firm to that in the close firm around the announcement of the 
transaction in the traded firm, we find that the market reactions in the close firms are slightly 
weaker and tend to occur after those in the traded firms (an issue which we will analyze in more 
depth in Table 11 below). Finally, we calculate the abnormal profit as the transaction value in GBP 
multiplied by CARs [0,20] for purchases and by -CARs [0,20] for sales (Cziraki and Gider, 2021). 
The average abnormal profit of close period transactions is £3,001.41, equivalent to $4,797.98 
(based on the average exchange rate during the sample period). This profit is somewhat larger than 
that in the United States (i.e., $4,000 as per Cziraki and Gider, 2021). Note that this abnormal 
profit over the 20-day window is a hypothetical one (as it assumes an inverse trade at the end of 
the 20-day window) and that the actual profit may be different. Due to the presence of large 
transaction values, particularly for sales, the abnormal profit distribution is highly skewed. 

24 
 
 
Furthermore, opportunistic transactions yield a higher average abnormal profit amounting to 
£4,032.55. In addition, connected directors make on average 1.3 close period transactions per close 
period such that the average aggregated abnormal profit during close periods is £3,617.17. 
Panel C of Table 1 focuses on earnings surprises and share price reactions to earnings 
announcements. Both measures are used to assess whether insider information is positive or 
negative. First, earnings surprises are measured as the percentage difference between the actual 
earnings per share and the average forecasted value. We then define extremely positive and 
negative earnings surprises as the top and bottom terciles, respectively, of earnings surprises within 
an industry year. Second, close periods end with an earnings announcement—when the directors’ 
insider information becomes public knowledge. At the announcement, the market is likely to react 
to earnings surprises. Following Ball and Kothari (1991), we use CARs [-1,1] around the 
announcement as a proxy for whether the insider information is positive or negative. If the CARs 
[-1,1] are in the top (bottom) tercile of their industry and year, we categorize such cases as 
extremely positive (negative) market reactions, which implies that they potentially reflect positive 
(negative) insider information. 
Panel D reports descriptive statistics for the control variables. Most firms separate the positions of 
CEO and chairman (represented by the CEO duality variable being equal to 0). We measure firm 
performance using the ROA, whose average (median) over the entire sample period amounts to 
4.3% (6.0%). The debt-to-total-assets ratio averages 21.0%, which implies that the average firm is 
not heavily leveraged. Although the average fixed assets-to-equity ratio amounts to 65.5%, it 
varies substantially across industries (not tabulated). We use the interest coverage ratio (Interest 
Coverage)—i.e., the EBIT-to-interest expense ratio—as a measure of financial soundness. The 
average interest coverage ratio of 34.8 indicates that the average firm is distant from financial 

25 
 
 
distress. Dividend payout is measured as dividends per share divided by earnings per share. The 
mean (median) payout ratio amounts to 35.9% (38.0%). The natural logarithm of total assets, 
which measures firm size, averages 14.2 (equivalent to £4.6 billion). The average firm is followed 
by roughly 12 analysts. Total institutional ownership averages 14.0%.20 
The last row of Panel D focuses on the types of relationships between traded and close firms. We 
classify “Partner” relationships from FactSet as friendly relationships. Among these partner 
relationships (not tabulated), the most common ones are “Partner (Investor)”, “Partner (Joint 
Venture)” and “Partner (Research Collaboration)”. FactSet provides information for only a subset 
of firms in our sample. For the firms that are not covered by FactSet, we evaluate their mutual 
relationship by examining their Herfindahl–Hirschman industry concentration index (HHI) 
(Rahman et al., 2021) if they belong to the same industry (based on the two-digit SIC codes). More 
specifically, following Fosi (2013), we use the terciles of the HHI, whereby firms in industries 
with an index in the top tercile are considered to be in a friendly relationship, whereas those in the 
bottom tercile are considered to be in a neutral or even competitive relationship. In the analysis 
that follows, we consider there to be a friendly relationship if a) the traded and close firms are 
identified as partners in FactSet or b) the two firms are in a sector with an HHI in the top tercile 
among all sectors in the given year. Among the 8.2% of friendly relationships in our sample, 4.8% 
are identified through FactSet, and the remaining 3.4% are classified based on the HHI. 
Finally, we report the correlations between the above control variables in Panel E, which suggests 
that multicollinearity is not an issue given that there are no strong pairwise correlations (with the 
exception of the correlation between firm size and the number of analysts, which is 0.76). 
 
20 Note that we only consider stakes of 5% or above. 

26 
 
 
5. Results 
5.1 Trading Propensity 
According to C1, directors trade more frequently in their connected firms when they are banned 
from trading in one of their other firms (i.e., a close firm). To test the validity of this conjecture, 
we examine connected directors’ daily trading propensity via a logistic regression based on Eq. 1. 
The dependent variable Trading Day (Purchase Day, Sale Day) equals 1 if the connected directors 
trade (purchase, sell) shares on a day during the sample period and 0 otherwise. Column 1 of Table 
2 suggests that a director’s likelihood of trading on any day within our sample period increases 
when she or he is restricted from trading in the close firms. While directors who are restricted in 
trading in a close firm, trade in a connected firm, the probability to trade in a given connected firm 
decreases if they have multiple directorships. In such cases, they have multiple opportunities to 
trade, which reduces the trading probability in any individual connected firm and thus explains the 
negative effect of the number of directorships on trading propensity. We arrive at the same 
conclusion for the subsamples of purchases and sales (Columns 2 and 3) and when controlling for 
firm characteristics as well as industry and year fixed effects (Column 4). Column 4 reveals that 
directors are more likely to trade in larger firms, those with CEO duality, larger boards, poor 
performance, and less institutional ownership, with CEO duality and the last variable potentially 
reflecting weaker corporate governance.  
Moreover, as an alternative to controlling for the effect of the number of directorships on the 
trading propensity, we analyze the daily trading likelihood across subsamples of directors holding 
the same number of directorships (Column 5, 6, and 7). Note that most connected directors have 
two or three directorships. Their trading propensity increases when they are restricted by a close 

27 
 
 
period in another firm (Columns 5 and 6). This finding remains robust for directors with more than 
three directorships (Column 7), confirming C1 that directors trade more frequently in their 
connected firms when they are restricted by close periods. In addition, the number of directorships 
may depend on the director’s role. More specifically, directors with more than three directorships 
are likely to be nonexecutive directors rather than executive directors. In an untabulated analysis, 
we repeat the above analysis separately for executive and nonexecutive directors. In some 
specifications, the positive effect of close periods is found to be stronger in the nonexecutive 
directors’ subsample. 
[Insert Table 2 about here] 
5.2 Trading Direction 
The next step is to validate or reject C2. We investigate whether the direction of the connected 
directors’ transactions (i.e., a sale or a purchase) is determined by whether the insider information 
about the firm subject to a close period is positive or negative. First, we focus on the top and 
bottom terciles of earnings surprises as a proxy for the positive or negative nature of the insider 
information. The logistic regression in Column 2 of Table 3 suggests that negative insider 
information about a close firm reduces the purchase propensity in connected firms. However, 
positive insider information does not increase the purchase propensity significantly (Column 1). 
This asymmetric result suggests that connected directors are more sensitive to negative insider 
information than positive insider information.  In Column 3, after removing the 39 cases with an 
earnings surprise of exactly zero, the earnings surprises in the close firm generally increase the 
likelihood of a connected director making a purchase in a connected firm.  

28 
 
 
Second, we consider extreme market reactions (i.e., (CARs [-1,1]) in the top and bottom terciles) 
at the time of the earnings announcement as another proxy for positive or negative insider 
information. Columns 4 and 5 suggest that purchase transactions in connected firms are more (less) 
likely to occur when the insider information for the close firm is extremely positive (negative). 
Importantly, the effect of insider information is also economically significant. More specifically, 
in the presence of positive (negative) insider information, a purchase transaction is 23.9% more 
(15.0% less) likely to occur. In Column 6, we focus on the subsample of extremely positive or 
negative earnings surprises within the top and bottom terciles. In this subsample, the abnormal 
returns are more likely driven by insider information rather than by market noise. We find that 
CARs [-1,1], as a proxy for insider information in close firms, are positively correlated with the 
propensity of connected directors’ purchases in the traded firm. Finally, although the occurrence 
of sale transactions is associated with negative earnings surprises, the effect is small and becomes 
insignificant when we control for extremely positive or negative insider information via indicator 
variables (not tabulated). 
In Table 4, we utilize a multinomial logistic regression to explicitly consider the cases in which 
directors do not engage in any trades. In Column 1, we ignore any cases in which a connected 
director both purchases and sells shares. Hence, we assign a value of -1 to the dependent variable 
if the connected director engages in sales but not purchases and a value of 1 if the connected 
director engages only in purchases. The base case is represented by a value of 0, and it corresponds 
to the connected director not making any transactions during the close period. In Column 2, we 
include all cases. Hence, the dependent variable equals -1 if all the director’s transactions result in 

29 
 
 
net sales during the close period, 0 for no transactions, and 1 for net purchases.21 Using the same 
set of control variables and fixed effects as in Table 3, we find that earnings surprises are 
significantly and positively related to the likelihood of purchase transactions. However, we do not 
find any such effect for the sale transactions. These results partially support C2, as the likelihood 
of a purchase is greater when the insider information is positive. However, we find no indication 
that the likelihood of a sale is greater when the insider information is negative. Again, this could 
be due to the relatively low number of observations we have for insider sales. To sum up, the 
trading decisions of connected directors are closely associated with insider information within the 
close firm. Paired with the evidence of increased propensity for trading (Section 5.1), our findings 
suggest that when constrained by trading bans, connected directors may exploit insider information 
and trade in their connected firms.22 
[Insert Tables 3 and 4 about here] 
5.3 Market Reactions for Traded and Close Firms 
We show the results of the OLS regressions that test the validity of C3 (in Table 5. We report a 
positive and significant correlation between the market reaction (CARs [-10,10]) to a trade in the 
traded firm (for which event day 0 is the day of the transaction announcement in the traded firm) 
and the CARs over the same period for the close firms (ditto) across various regression 
specifications. This pattern applies to all the regressions—i.e., those without (Column 1) and with 
the control variables (Column 2) as well as those with both the control variables and fixed effects 
 
21 In only three cases, the connected directors engaged in purchase and sale transactions of the same amount, resulting 
in a net transaction value of zero. We have omitted these cases. 
22 In addition to trading propensity and direction, we examine the timing of the trading measured as the number of 
days between a trade and the end of the close period. We find that the timing of close period transactions does not 
depend on the nature of the insider information in the close firm (untabulated). 

30 
 
 
(Column 3). The standard errors are again clustered at the firm level. We find similar evidence for 
insider sales. In line with other studies on insider trading (e.g., Brochet, 2010; Hillier et al., 2015; 
Goergen et al., 2019), for purchase transactions, we find that the magnitude of the CARs is 
explained by the relative size of the insider transaction, which is proxied by the transaction value 
expressed as a percentage of the traded firm’s market capitalization. 
Our results further imply that when insider trading is prohibited during the close period, a positive 
(negative) market reaction is observed in the close firm if the connected director acquires (sells) 
shares in the traded (connected) firm (see Panel B of Table 1 and Table 12 below).23 While the 
CARs in Table 5 are based on the window of [-10,10], Table 6 reruns the regressions for alternative 
windows, including all the control variables and the industry and year fixed effects. The table 
confirms that for purchases, the positive and significant correlation between the traded and close 
market reactions is not sensitive to the length of the event window. For sales, we find a similar 
positive relationship, except for the [-20,-1] window for which the correlation is not significant. 
[Insert Tables 5 and 6 about here] 
As we only observe a market reaction if there is an insider trade, we address a possible sample 
selection bias by controlling for the likelihood to trade via a Heckman (1976) selection model. The 
selection equation includes indicators stating whether the traded and close firms are comparable 
in terms of industry and size. If so, the insider information becomes more relevant to the connected 
firms, which increases the probability of trading. The results from estimating the selection equation 
are reported in Column 1 of Table 7 for purchases and Column 3 for sales. While controlling for a 
 
23 When the traded firm is connected to more than one close firm, we analyze the correlation of the CARs for each 
close firm. In an untabulated robustness test, we evaluate the average market reactions across multiple close firms and 
obtain qualitatively similar results. 

31 
 
 
potential selection bias, the regression equations of Columns 2 and 4 report very similar results to 
those in Table 5, which implies that our results are not sensitive to sample selection bias. Moreover, 
note that the inverse Mills ratio is not significant. 
In Table 8, we control for the potential effects of concurrent events that could affect the CARs of 
the insider trades, namely M&A and CEO turnover announcements. As both types of events can 
create opportunities for insider trading, we include indicator variables to capture whether the 
insider transactions occur within 30 days before concurrent events that could contaminate the 
results. The results imply that these concurrent events, which are rare, do not impact our earlier 
results. 
[Insert Tables 7 and 8 about here] 
An alternative explanation for our results may be that the correlation between the CARs in the 
traded and close firms is triggered by macroeconomic news and hence is not unique to the 
connected firms. For instance, a change in monetary policy by the Bank of England may trigger 
market selloffs, which may in turn lead to concurrent negative returns for most equities. However, 
it is unlikely that such events would explain the observed correlation between the CARs. First, our 
sample covers a long time series spanning 20 years. It is therefore unlikely that rare market events 
would dominate our sample period and drive the positive correlation. Second, to test the validity 
of this alternative explanation, we develop a falsification test whereby a traded firm is paired with 
a randomly selected unconnected firm. This sample, consisting of pairs of traded firms and 
unconnected firms, is the placebo group. If the alternative explanation of a market-wide shock 
simultaneously affecting the returns of the traded and close firms were true, we would also observe 
such a positive correlation for the placebo group. While for the traded firms paired with their truly 

32 
 
 
connected firms, we observe a positive correlation between their CARs (Column 1 of Table 9), the 
regression based on the placebo group (Column 2) shows that the CARs of the traded firms are not 
significantly correlated with the CARs of the paired unconnected firms. 
Next, in Column 3, we merge the actual subsample of traded firms and their connected firms used 
in Column 1 and the placebo group used in Column 2 into a single sample. We include an indicator 
variable equal to 1 if the traded firm is paired with an actual connected firm and 0 if it is paired 
with a random, unconnected firm. Again, the correlation between the traded and “connected” firms 
is only observed if both firms are genuinely connected. These results imply that the positive 
correlations between CARs are not driven by macroeconomic or market-wide news. 
However, as reported by Ben-David et al. (2019), firms within the same industry may experience 
correlated share price movements due to being influenced by the same news. Note that such firms 
are also more likely to form connections, as a director’s talent and experience are often highly 
valued across firms from the same industry. However, in Column 4, we demonstrate that merely 
being in the same industry does not result in correlated market reactions. In an untabulated analysis, 
we also find that industry familiarity does not enhance the correlation between CARs in the 
placebo sample. In Column 5, we investigate whether industrial familiarity enhances the 
correlation between the CARs for the truly connected pairs, but do not find supporting evidence. 
Using the subsample of sale transactions, we repeat the above tests and confirm our earlier findings 
(see Columns 6 to 8 of Table 9). Therefore, the traded and close firms have correlated market 
reactions during the close periods if and only if they are truly connected. 
[Insert Table 9 about here] 

33 
 
 
5.4 Relationship between Traded and Close Firms 
The above analysis focuses on the relationship between traded and close firms that are connected 
to one another. Borgatti and Li (2009) study the mutual embeddedness of director connections and 
supply-chain relationships. They conclude that director connections are more likely among firms 
with supply-chain relationships. Conversely, when two firms are rivals, potential conflicts of 
interest make it risky for directors to serve on both boards (again, in the United Kingdom, the 
CMA discourages directors from sitting on the boards of competing firms). We therefore expect 
that virtually all of the traded and close firms have friendly or neutral relationships (rather than 
relations based on rivalry). In the analysis that follows, we investigate whether the correlation of 
the market reactions becomes stronger if the traded and close firms are in a friendly relationship. 
We identify 352 pairs of traded and close firms that are in a friendly relationship according to 
FactSet. For the pairs of traded and close firms not covered by FactSet but operating in the same 
industry, we assess their mutual relationship based on their industry’s HHI. This results in an 
additional 153 pairs of traded and close firms. Table 10 focuses on the possible moderation effect 
of a friendly relationship between traded and close firms. Column 1 suggests that the correlation 
between the CARs of the traded firm and those of the close firm is stronger if the two firms are in 
a friendly relationship—as captured by the interaction terms in Columns 1 and 2. Compared to 
firms in a neutral or rival relationship, the correlation of the stock market reactions for firms in a 
friendly relationship is nearly twice as strong. This result confirms the validity of C4. By contrast, 
for a much smaller number of sale transactions, we do not observe such evidence (Columns 5 and 
6). Finally, we compare friendly relationships as measured by Factset’s partnership data with those 
based on the industry’s HHI (Columns 3 and 4). Both types of friendly relationships positively and 
significantly moderate the correlation between the market reactions of the traded and close firms. 

34 
 
 
[Insert Table 10 about here] 
5.5 Channel Analysis 
In this section, we investigate potential channels that may be responsible for the observed positive 
correlation between the CARs of traded and close firms. One such channel may be institutional 
investors. Such investors may possess superior knowledge, experience, and sophistication 
compared to retail investors. Gu et al. (2021) report that institutional investors closely monitor 
insider transactions and actively exploit trading opportunities. Compared to retail investors, 
institutional investors are more likely to be aware of the connections between firms. 
When institutional investors observe close period transactions, they may identify a trading 
opportunity in the close firm. As a result, institutional investors might trade in both the close firm 
and the traded firm, which could explain the correlated CARs. Furthermore, we expect investors’ 
trades and subsequent market reactions in the close firm to happen shortly after those in the traded 
firm. In Table 11, we explain the subsequent market reaction in the close firm once the purchase 
(and the market reaction) has been observed in the traded firm. In support of our argument, 
Columns 1 to 4 suggest that the market reaction in the close firm over an event window shortly 
after the announcement of the transaction in the traded firm, i.e., [1,2] or [1,5], is explained by the 
immediate market reaction in the traded firm over the window of [0,1]. By contrast, we do not find 
evidence that the market reaction in the traded firm occurs after that in the close firm (Columns 5 
and 6).  
To account for potential information leakage in the close firm, we examine the market reaction 
immediately before the transaction in the close firm (Columns 7 and 8), and do not find evidence 
to support such leakage. The above results imply that the market reaction in the traded firm 

35 
 
 
precedes that in the close firm; the presence of institutional investors in the traded or close firms 
may then explain the positively correlated CARs between the traded and close firms. 
Furthermore, if institutional investors were driving the correlated market reactions to insider 
transactions between connected firms, we would expect traded and close firms with high 
institutional ownership to exhibit a more positive correlation. Table 12 suggests that high 
institutional ownership, defined as the sum of institutional ownership in both the traded and close 
firms being in the 50th (or 75th) percentile, increases the positive correlation between the CARs of 
the traded and close firms. We also conduct a split sample analysis24 (untabulated) based on 
institutional ownership and find that the correlation between the CARs is more significant in the 
high institutional ownership subsample. 
Finally, we consider the possibility that the positive correlation between the CARs may be 
attributed to information leakage (Berkman et al., 2023). If insider information is leaked during 
the close period, investors may act upon it by trading and generating a positive stock market 
reaction in the close firm. This positive market reaction in the close firm resonates with the positive 
market reaction observed in the traded firm, leading to positively correlated CARs. However, we 
believe that this explanation is unlikely to be valid. First, information leakage is rare,25 and large 
investors are exposed to significant litigation risks when attempting to exploit it. Second, in an 
untabulated analysis, we control for the quality of corporate governance (captured by CEO duality 
and the percentage of independent directors on the board), as information leakage is more likely 
to occur when corporate governance is weak. However, we do not find a significant moderating 
effect for corporate governance quality. Third, following information leakage, the market reaction 
 
24 We split the sample at the median and alternatively at the 75th percentile. 
25 A cross-country study conducted by Aitken et al. (2015) reports that the average (median) number of cases of 
suspected information leaks per month is only 3.42 (0.17) per one million transactions per stock exchange. 

36 
 
 
in the close firm would precede the transaction and the subsequent market reaction in the traded 
firm. However, this is not the case (Table 11, Columns 5 to 8). Therefore, information leakage is 
unlikely to be the underlying cause of the observed correlation between CARs. 
[Insert Tables 11 and 12 about here] 
6. Conclusion 
We demonstrated that when facing trading bans in the form of a close period prior to an earnings 
announcement, executive and nonexecutive directors actively trade in their connected firms (the 
so-called traded firms) to capitalize on their insider information. Furthermore, directors’ trading 
decisions (i.e., whether they make purchases or sales) in the traded firm are determined by whether 
the insider information in the close firm is positive or negative, provided that the two firms are 
connected. More specifically, a connected director is 23.9% more likely to purchase shares given 
positive insider information in the close firm (in which a director is not allowed to trade because 
of the trading ban) and 15.0% less likely to do so given negative insider information. Subsequently, 
we observed a market reaction in the close firm, which suggests that investors observe directors’ 
trades in the traded firm during the close period. Importantly, the market reaction in the close firm 
exhibits a positive correlation with that in the traded firm, suggesting that both market reactions 
are driven by the same insider information. 
We further examined the positive correlation between the CARs while controlling for potential 
sample selection bias and concurrent events (i.e., M&A and CEO turnover announcements), and 
the results are consistent. The positive correlation is further strengthened if the traded and close 
firms are in a friendly relationship. This makes intuitive sense because when the operations of such 

37 
 
 
firms are closely intertwined (e.g., through their supply chain), insider information in one firm is 
also likely to be relevant to the other one. 
We considered two mechanisms that may drive the positive correlation between market reactions: 
institutional investors and information leakage. First, we argued that close period transactions are 
monitored by institutional investors, who adjust their trading strategies accordingly in close firms 
(in which they can trade contrary to the directors), resulting in correlated market reactions. We 
found that the correlation of market reactions is stronger if institutional ownership is high in both 
connected firms. The fact that the market reaction in the close firm occurs shortly after that in the 
traded firm supports this explanation. Second, in the event of insider information leakage in a close 
firm, investors might engage in trading during the close period, leading to positively correlated 
market reactions. However, this alternative explanation is not plausible for the following three 
reasons: 1) trading on leaked information creates a legal risk; 2) such trading counters the 
aforementioned evidence that abnormal market returns occur earlier in the traded firm than in the 
close firm; and 3) when using corporate governance quality as a proxy for the likelihood of 
information leakage, we do not find support for the argument that close firms with worse 
governance—and hence a higher likelihood of information leakage—are associated with greater 
market reactions to close period transactions. 
Our study contributes to the existing literature by providing evidence that insider information 
generates value beyond the firm to which it relates. Insiders may circumvent traditional trading 
restrictions by engaging in transactions involving shares of economically linked firms, a practice 
known as ‘shadow trading.’ This strategy allows them to exploit their privileged information while 
still adhering to firm-specific trading bans. Nevertheless, such behavior violates the fundamental 
principle of market fairness and equal access to information that underpins securities regulations. 

38 
 
 
While regulation on insider trading is based on the principle that all market participants must have 
equal access to information, shadow trading creates an unfair advantage, potentially leading to 
market distortions and the erosion of investor confidence. 
Furthermore, this practice contravenes the ‘disclose or abstain’ principle, which requires insiders 
either to disclose material non-public information before trading or to refrain from trading. By 
trading in connected firms, insiders effectively circumvent this obligation. This loophole highlights 
the need for a more comprehensive approach to insider trading regulations that considers the 
broader economic environment in which insiders operate. 
Hence, regulatory bodies ought to revisit their regulations. A first such step was recently 
undertaken by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the United States. The SEC 
acknowledges the interconnected nature of capital markets and the potential for information 
spillovers across firms. To maintain the market’s integrity and protect investor interests, insider 
trading regulations should be amended to cover insider trading not just in individual firms but also 
in their economically connected counterparts. Such amendments would better align regulations 
with the underlying principles of information parity and market fairness that form the cornerstone 
of efficient and trustworthy capital markets.  
Last but not least, investors may find it beneficial to track insider transactions across connected 
firms. Our evidence suggests that institutional investors may already follow insider trades across 
connected firms and formulate strategies based on directors’ trades in all their firms.

39 
 
 
References 
AGRAWAL, A. & COOPER, T. 2015. Insider trading before accounting scandals. Journal of Corporate 
Finance, 34, 169-190. 
AHERN, K. R. 2017. Information networks: Evidence from illegal insider trading tips. Journal of 
Financial Economics, 125, 26-47. 
AITKEN, M., CUMMING, D. & ZHAN, F. 2015. Exchange trading rules, surveillance and suspected 
insider trading. Journal of Corporate Finance, 34, 311-330. 
AKBAS, F., JIANG, C. & KOCH, P. D. 2020. Insider investment horizon. The Journal of Finance, 75, 
1579-1627. 
AKBAS, F., MESCHKE, F. & WINTOKI, M. B. 2016. Director networks and informed traders. Journal 
of Accounting and Economics, 62, 1-23. 
ALLDREDGE, D. M. & CICERO, D. C. 2015. Attentive insider trading. Journal of Financial Economics, 
115, 84-101. 
BALL, R. & KOTHARI, S. P. 1991. Security returns around earnings announcements. Accounting 
Review, 66, 718-738. 
BEINER, S., SCHMID, M. M. & WANZENRIED, G. 2011. Product market competition, managerial 
incentives and firm valuation. European Financial Management, 17, 331-366. 
BERKMAN, H., KOCH, P. & WESTERHOLM, P. J. 2020. Inside the director network: When directors 
trade or hold inside, interlock, and unconnected stocks. Journal of Banking & Finance, 118, 105892. 
BERKMAN, H., KOCH, P. & WESTERHOLM, P. J. 2023. The other insiders: Personal trading by 
brokers, analysts, and fund managers. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 13, 481-522. 
BEN-DAVID, I., BIRRU, J. & ROSSI, A. 2019. Industry familiarity and trading: Evidence from the 
personal portfolios of industry insiders. Journal of Financial Economics, 132, 49-75. 
BETTIS, J. C., COLES, J. L. & LEMMON, M. L. 2000. Corporate policies restricting trading by insiders. 
Journal of financial economics, 57, 191-220. 
BETZER, A. & THEISSEN, E. 2009. Insider trading and corporate governance: The case of Germany. 
European Financial Management, 15, 402-429. 
BIGGERSTAFF, L., CICERO, D. & WINTOKI, M. B. 2020. Insider trading patterns. Journal of 
Corporate Finance, 64, 101654. 
BORGATTI, S. P. & LI, X. 2009. On social network analysis in a supply chain context. Journal of Supply 
Chain Management, 45, 5-22. 
BROCHET, F. 2010. Information content of insider trades before and after the Sarbanes‐Oxley Act. The 
Accounting Review, 85, 419-446. 
BUDSARATRAGOON, P., HILLIER, D. & LHAOPADCHAN, S. 2012. Applying developed‐country 
regulation in emerging markets: an analysis of Thai insider trading. Accounting & Finance, 52, 
1013-1039. 
CHAKRAVARTY, S. & MCCONNELL, J. J. 1999. Does insider trading really move stock prices? 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 34, 191-209. 
COHEN, L., MALLOY, C. & POMORSKI, L. 2012. Decoding inside information. The Journal of 
Finance, 67, 1009-1043. 
CZIRAKI, P. & GIDER, J. 2021. The dollar profits to insider trading. Review of Finance, 25, 1547-1580. 
DAI, L., FU, R., KANG, J.-K. & LEE, I. 2016. Corporate governance and the profitability of insider 
trading. Journal of Corporate Finance, 40, 235-253. 
DAI, L., PARWADA, J. T. & ZHANG, B. 2015. The governance effect of the media's news 
dissemination role: Evidence from insider trading. Journal of Accounting Research, 53, 331-366. 
DYMKE, B. M. & WALTER, A. 2008. Insider trading in Germany – Do corporate insiders exploit inside 
information? Business Research, 1, 188-205. 
FIDRMUC, J. P., GOERGEN, M. & RENNEBOOG, L. 2006. Insider trading, news releases, and 
ownership concentration. The Journal of Finance, 61, 2931-2973. 

40 
 
 
FRIEDERICH, S., GREGORY, A., MATATKO, J. & TONKS, I. 2002. Short‐run returns around the 
trades of corporate insiders on the London Stock Exchange. European Financial Management, 8, 730. 
GAO, G. P., MA, Q., NG, D. T. & WU, Y. 2022. The sound of silence: What do we know when insiders 
do not trade? Management Science, 68, 4835-4857. 
GARFINKEL, J. A. 1997. New evidence on the effects of federal regulations on insider trading: The 
Insider Trading and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act (ITSFEA). Journal of Corporate Finance, 3, 
89-111. 
GOERGEN, M., RENNEBOOG, L. & ZHAO, Y. 2019. Insider trading and networked directors. Journal 
of Corporate Finance, 56, 152-175. 
GOLDIE, B., JIANG, C., KOCH, P. & WINTOKI, M. B. 2023. Indirect insider trading. Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 58, 2327-2364. 
GU, D., LIU, X., SUN, H. & ZHAO, H. 2021. Strategic insider trading: Disguising order flows to escape 
trading competition. Journal of Corporate Finance, 67, 101891. 
HILLIER, D., KORCZAK, A. & KORCZAK, P. 2015. The impact of personal attributes on corporate 
insider trading. Journal of Corporate Finance, 30, 150-167. 
HILLIER, D. & MARSHALL, A. P. 2002. Are trading bans effective? Exchange regulation and corporate 
insider transactions around earnings announcements. Journal of Corporate Finance, 8, 393-410. 
JAFFE, J. F. 1974. Special information and insider trading. The Journal of Business, 47, 410-428. 
JAGOLINZER, A. D., LARCKER, D. F., ORMAZABAL, G. & TAYLOR, D. J. 2020. Political 
connections and the informativeness of insider trades. The Journal of Finance, 75, 1833-1876. 
JAGOLINZER, A. D., LARCKER, D. F. & TAYLOR, D. J. 2011. Corporate governance and the 
information content of insider trades. Journal of Accounting Research, 49, 1249-1274. 
LAKONISHOK, J. & LEE, I. 2001. Are insider trades informative? The Review of Financial Studies, 14, 
79-111. 
LEE, I., LEMMON, M., LI, Y. & SEQUEIRA, J. M. 2014. Do voluntary corporate restrictions on insider 
trading eliminate informed insider trading? Journal of Corporate Finance, 29, 158-178. 
LIU, X. 2016. Corruption culture and corporate misconduct. Journal of Financial Economics, 122, 307327. 
LORIE, J. H. & NIEDERHOFFER, V. 1968. Predictive and statistical properties of insider trading. The 
Journal of Law and Economics, 11, 35-53. 
MEHTA, M. N., REEB, D. M. & ZHAO, W. 2021. Shadow trading. The Accounting Review, 96, 367404. 
OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS 2022, Directors resign from the boards of five companies in response to 
Justice Department concerns about potentially illegal interlocking directorates, Press Release 
Number: 22-1222, Washington D.C.: US Department of Justice. 
OFT 2011, Company directors and competition law – OFT Guidance 2011, London: Office of Fair 
Trading. 
PIOTROSKI, J. D. & ROULSTONE, D. T. 2005. Do insider trades reflect both contrarian beliefs and 
superior knowledge about future cash flow realizations? Journal of Accounting and Economics, 39, 
55-81. 
RAHMAN, D., KABIR, M. & OLIVER, B. 2021. Does exposure to product market competition influence 
insider trading profitability? Journal of Corporate Finance, 66, 101792. 
ROZEFF, M. S. & ZAMAN, M. A. 1988. Market efficiency and insider trading: New evidence. Journal 
of Business, 25-44. 
SEYHUN, H. N. 1988. The information content of aggregate insider trading. Journal of Business, 1-24. 
WANG, W., SHIN, Y.-C. & FRANCIS, B. B. 2012. Are CFOs’ trades more informative than CEOs’ 
trades? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 47, 743-762. 
ZHU, C. & WANG, L. 2015. Insider trading under trading ban regulation in China’s A-share market. 
China Journal of Accounting Research, 8, 169-191. 
 
 

41 
 
 
Appendix. Variable Definitions 
Variable 
Definition 
Original Source 
Trading Activity 
 
 
Trading Day 
=1 if the director trades shares on a day 
smartinsider.com 
Purchase Day 
=1 if the director purchases shares on a day 
smartinsider.com 
Sale Day 
=1 if the director sells shares on a day 
smartinsider.com 
Insider Information 
Earnings Surprise 
(actual Earnings Per Share – forecasted EPS) / forecasted EPS 
IBES 
Positive Information 
(Earnings Surprise) 
= 1 if Earnings Surprise is in the top terciles within an industry-year, = 0 
otherwise 
IBES 
Negative Information 
(Earnings Surprise) 
= 1 if Earnings Surprise is in the bottom terciles within an industry-year, = 0 
otherwise 
IBES 
Positive Information 
(CARs [-1,1]) 
= 1 if market reaction (CARs [-1,1]) at the earnings announcement is in the 
top tercile within an industry-year, = 0 otherwise 
Datastream 
Negative Information 
(CARs [-1,1]) 
= 1 if market reaction (CARs [-1,1]) at the earnings announcement is in the 
bottom tercile within an industry-year, = 0 otherwise 
Datastream 
Share Price Reactions 
CARs_traded 
Cumulative abnormal returns of connected director’s transactions in the 
traded firm 
Datastream 
CARs_close 
Cumulative abnormal returns of connected director’s transactions in the close 
firm 
Datastream 
Transaction Characteristics 
Trade Value (% Market Cap) 
Transaction value scaled by the market capitalization of the traded firm at the 
time of the transaction 
smartinsider.com 
Routine 
= 1 if a transaction of the same direction occurs at a similar time (within 30 
days) as in previous years, = 0 otherwise 
smartinsider.com 
Clustered 
= 1 if the transaction occurs on the same day as (an)other transaction(s), = 0 
otherwise 
smartinsider.com 
M&A Event Traded as 
Acquirer 
= 1 if the traded firm is involved in an M&A as an acquirer within 30 days 
after the trade 
EIKON 
M&A Event Traded as Target 
= 1 if the traded firm is involved in an M&A as a target within 30 days after 
the trade 
EIKON 
CEO Turnover Traded 
= 1 if the traded firm announces CEO turnover within 30 days after the trade 
BoardEx 
 
Trading Director Characteristics 
Close Period (Other) 
= 1 if the director faces a close period of another of his firms, = 0 otherwise 
IBES 
Number of Directorships 
Number of directorships of a director 
BoardEx 
Female 
= 1 if the trading director is female, = 0 otherwise 
BoardEx 
Age 
Age of the trading director 
BoardEx 
CEO 
= 1 if the trading director is the CEO, = 0 otherwise 
BoardEx 
Chairman 
= 1 if the trading director is the chairman, = 0 otherwise 
BoardEx 
Executive Director 
= 1 if the trading director is an executive director, = 0 otherwise 
BoardEx 
Mutual Relationships 
Same Industry 
= 1 if the traded firm and close firm are in the same industry based on twodigit SIC codes, = 0 otherwise 
Datastream 
Similar Size 
= 1 if the traded firm and close firm are of the same size decile for a given 
year, = 0 otherwise 
Datastream 
Friendly Relationship 
= 1 if the traded firm and close firm are in a friendly relationship, = 0 
otherwise (Friendly Relationship is defined as follows: a) the traded and close 
firms are identified as partners in FactSet or 2) the two firms are in a sector 
with a Herfindahl–Hirschman index in the top tercile among all sectors in a 
year) 
FactSet 
Control Variables 

42 
 
 
Variable 
Definition 
Original Source 
Trading Activity 
 
 
Trading Day 
=1 if the director trades shares on a day 
smartinsider.com 
Purchase Day 
=1 if the director purchases shares on a day 
smartinsider.com 
Sale Day 
=1 if the director sells shares on a day 
smartinsider.com 
Board Size 
Number of directors on the board 
BoardEx 
% Nonexecutive 
Number of nonexecutive directors / Board Size 
BoardEx 
% Female 
Number of female directors / Board Size 
BoardEx 
CEO–Chair Duality 
= 1 if the CEO and chairman is the same person, = 0 otherwise 
BoardEx 
ROA 
Return on assets 
Datastream 
Debt/Total Assets 
Total debt / total assets 
Datastream 
Fixed/Total Equity 
Fixed assets / value of equity 
Datastream 
Interest Coverage 
EBIT / total interest expense 
Datastream 
Dividend Payout 
Dividends per share / earnings per share * 100 
Datastream 
Ln (Total Assets) 
Natural logarithm of total assets in thousands of GBP 
Datastream 
Number of Analysts 
Number of analysts following the traded firm 
IBES 
Institutional Ownership 
Percentage of shares held by institutions including pension funds, investment 
companies, insurance companies, other companies, and governments 
Datastream 
High Institutional Ownership 
= 1 if Institutional Ownership is in the top terciles within an industry year, = 0 
otherwise 
Datastream 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Connected Directors and Connected Firms 
Director A sits on the boards of both firms 1 and 2. Director B sits on the boards of firms 1, 3, and 4. Firm 1 is 
subject to a close period. 
 

44 
 
 
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics 
Panel A. Transaction characteristics 
Panel A presents insider transaction characteristics. The first column reports transactions made by unconnected 
directors. The second (third) column reports transactions made by connected directors outside (during) close periods. 
Thus, a close period transaction is one carried out by a connected director in a firm in which the director holds a board 
seat and that does not face a close period while the director is not allowed to trade in a connected firm subject to a 
close period. The fourth and fifth columns dissect the close period transactions of the third column into purchase and 
sale transactions separately. The number of transactions of each type is reported in Row 1. The trade value of the 
transaction is calculated by multiplying the number of shares traded with the share price (in GBP). An alternative 
value is the trade value, which is scaled by the market capitalization of the traded firm at the time of the transaction. 
Purchase stands for purchase transactions as a percentage of all transactions. Routine equals 1 if a transaction occurs 
at a similar time as in previous years. Clustered equals 1 if the transaction occurs on the same day as (an)other insider 
transaction(s). Female equals 1 if the trader is a female director. The CEO, chair, executive, and nonexecutive director 
give the percentage of transactions executed by this type of director in the traded firm. Detailed variable definitions 
are provided in the Appendix. 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Unconnected 
directors’ 
transactions 
Connected 
transactions 
outside close 
periods 
Close period 
transactions 
Close period 
transactions: 
purchases 
Close period 
transactions: 
sales 
Number of Transactions 
51,149 
27,725 
7,384 
6,125 
1,259 
Trade Value (GBP) 
279,730 
259,384 
197,304 
119,598 
678,238 
Trade Value (% Market Cap) 
0.2% 
0.1% 
0.1% 
0.1% 
0.2% 
Purchase 
75.2% 
82.2% 
83.0% 
100% 
0% 
Routine 
12.8% 
17.7% 
18.9% 
20.0% 
12.7% 
Clustered 
59.0% 
56.8% 
54.5% 
55.1% 
51.3% 
Female 
4.9% 
8.6% 
8.9% 
9.7% 
4.5% 
Age 
62.6 
64.8 
66.8 
67.1 
65.1 
CEO 
20.2% 
17.8% 
11.0% 
9.1% 
22.2% 
Nonexecutive Chairman 
9.5% 
18.2% 
26.1% 
27.3% 
19.4% 
Executive Director 
42.2% 
22.8% 
15.0% 
12.2% 
31.9% 
Nonexecutive Director 
28.1% 
41.3% 
47.8% 
51.5% 
26.5% 
 
 

45 
 
 
Panel B. CARs of insider transactions in traded and close firms 
This panel reports the cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) of purchase and sale transactions in the traded firm and 
the close firm. The insider transaction is announced on day 0. The interval of the event window is denoted by the 
numbers in brackets. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
Purchase 
Sale 
CARs in traded firms 
CARs in close firms 
CARs in traded firms 
CARs in close firms 
CARs [-20,-1] 
-0.013*** 
-0.002 
0.008*** 
-0.001 
CARs [0,1] 
0.008*** 
0.001 
-0.001 
0.000 
CARs [0,5] 
0.014*** 
0.001** 
-0.003** 
0.001 
CARs [0,10] 
0.015*** 
0.003*** 
-0.006*** 
0.005** 
CARs [-1,1] 
0.007*** 
0.001 
0.000 
0.000 
CARs [-5,5] 
0.010*** 
0.001 
0.001 
0.001 
CARs [-10,10] 
0.006*** 
0.002 
0.000 
0.003 
 
Panel C. Positive or negative insider information 
This panel reports whether insider information is positive or negative for connected transactions during the close 
period. The underlying earnings surprise statistics are reported in Row 1. Earnings surprise is calculated as (actual 
EPS − forecasted EPS) / forecasted EPS. Positive insider information is indicated by either earnings surprise being in 
the top tercile within an industry year (Row 2) or the market reaction (CARs [-1,1]) at the earnings announcement 
being in the top tercile (Row 4). Negative insider information is indicated by earnings surprises or share price reactions 
in the bottom tercile (Rows 3 and 5). Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. 
Mean 
SD 
P5 
P50 
P75 
P95 
Earnings Surprise (%) 
-3.069 
65.071 
-52.542 
1.857 
6.984 
45.532 
Positive Information (Earnings Surprise) 
0.340 
0.473 
0 
0 
1 
1 
Negative Information (Earnings Surprise) 
0.329 
0.470 
0 
0 
1 
1 
Positive Information (CARs [-1,1]) 
0.259 
0.438 
0 
0 
1 
1 
Negative Information (CARs [-1,1) 
0.257 
0.437 
0 
0 
1 
1 
 
 

46 
 
 
Panel D. Descriptive statistics for the control variables 
This panel represents statistics for the control variables. The variable CEO–Chair Duality is equal to 1 if the CEO 
and chairman positions are occupied by the same person and 0 otherwise. ROA is net income plus interest expense 
divided by total assets. Firm leverage is measured as total debt divided by total assets. The ratio of fixed assets is 
calculated as the book value of fixed assets divided by the total equity. Interest coverage is measured as the ratio of 
earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) to interest expenses. Dividend payout is measured as the ratio of dividends 
per share divided by earnings per share. Firm size is the total assets (in billions of GBP) and the natural logarithm 
of total assets (in thousands of GBP). Number of Analysts is the number of analysts following the traded firm. 
Institutional ownership represents the percentage of shares owned by institutional investors. The last row describes 
the relationship between the traded and close firms. Friendly relationships are identified using the FactSet data and 
the Herfindahl–Hirschman Index of the traded and close firms’ sector. Detailed variable definitions are provided in 
the Appendix. 
N 
Mean 
SD 
P5 
P50 
P75 
P95 
CEO–Chair Duality 
2,479 
0.046 
0.209 
0 
0 
0 
0 
ROA 
2,479 
0.043 
0.143 
-0.211 
0.060 
0.101 
0.181 
Debt/Total Assets 
2,479 
0.210 
0.166 
0 
0.2001 
0.3136 
0.5198 
Fixed/Total Equity 
2,479 
0.655 
0.936 
0.006 
0.323 
0.955 
2.514 
Interest Coverage 
2,479 
34.8 
171.8 
-21.0 
7.2 
18.7 
179.0 
Dividend Payout 
2,479 
0.359 
0.270 
0 
0.380 
0.551 
0.811 
Total Assets 
(Billions of GBP) 
2,479 
46.300 
187.000 
0.019 
1.376 
7.161 
321.000 
Ln (Total Assets) 
2,479 
14.2 
2.7 
9.8 
14.1 
15.8 
19.6 
Number of Analysts 
2,479 
11.7 
8.303 
1 
11 
19 
25 
Institutional Ownership 
2,479 
0.140 
0.132 
0 
0.11 
0.20 
0.41 
Friendly Relationship 
2,479 
0.048 
0.215 
0 
0 
0 
1 
 
Panel E. Correlation matrix 
This panel reports the pairwise Pearson correlations for the control variables. Correlations that are significant at the 
1% level are highlighted in bold. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
1 
CEO–Chair Duality 
1 
2 
ROA 
-0.021 
1 
3 
Debt/Total Assets 
0.137 
0.029 
1 
4 
Fixed/Total Equity 
0.141 
0.048 
0.477 
1 
5 
Interest Coverage 
-0.063 
0.380 
-0.205 
-0.090 
1 
6 
Dividend Payout 
0.100 
0.307 
0.000 
0.014 
0.182 
1 
7 
Ln (Total Assets) 
0.021 
0.262 
0.110 
0.078 
0.009 
0.293 
1 
8 
Number of Analysts 
0.021 
0.248 
0.081 
0.102 
0.110 
0.316 
0.760 
1 
9 
Institution Ownership 
-0.063 
-0.018 
-0.036 
-0.038 
-0.039 
-0.172 
-0.137 
-0.132 
1 
 
 

47 
 
 
Table 2. Insider Trading Propensity (logit) 
This table reports logistic regressions explaining insider trading propensity. In Columns 1, 4, and 5, the dependent variable 
Trading Day equals 1 if the connected director has made at least one transaction on the day. Columns 2 and 3 focus on 
purchase and sale transactions, respectively. Close Period (Other) equals 1 if the connected director is restricted by a close 
period in another firm on the day of trading. Number of Directorships is the total number of directorships the connected 
director has. We control for firm characteristics as well as industry and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the 
firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. Significance at the 1%, 
5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
Trading 
Day 
Purchase 
Day 
Sale Day 
Trading 
Day 
Trading Day,  
2 
Directorships 
Trading Day,  
3 
Directorships 
Trading Day,  
>3 
Directorships 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Close Period (Other) 
0.041*** 
(0.015) 
0.036** 
(0.016) 
0.084** 
(0.042) 
0.056*** 
(0.016) 
0.044** 
(0.022) 
0.078*** 
(0.030) 
0.111*** 
(0.033) 
Number of 
Directorships 
-0.163*** 
(0.007) 
-0.143*** 
(0.007) 
-0.333*** 
(0.022) 
-0.127*** 
(0.007) 
 
 
 
 
CEO–Chair Duality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.249*** 
(0.033) 
0.148*** 
(0.043) 
0.354*** 
(0.069) 
0.543*** 
(0.069) 
Board Size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.012*** 
(0.003) 
0.030*** 
(0.004) 
0.030*** 
(0.006) 
0.030*** 
(0.008) 
ROA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.153*** 
(0.041) 
-0.121** 
(0.052) 
-0.526*** 
(0.075) 
-0.294*** 
(0.092) 
Debt/Total Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.119*** 
(0.043) 
-0.247*** 
(0.048) 
-0.165** 
(0.079) 
0.313*** 
(0.100) 
Institutional 
Ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.613*** 
(0.047) 
-0.559*** 
(0.057) 
-0.761*** 
(0.102) 
-0.415*** 
(0.110) 
Ln (Total Assets) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.123*** 
(0.005) 
0.125*** 
(0.006) 
0.118*** 
(0.009) 
0.094*** 
(0.012) 
Constant 
-6.101*** 
(0.018) 
-6.287*** 
(0.019) 
-7.757*** 
(0.056) 
-7.379*** 
(0.072) 
-7.977*** 
(0.056) 
-8.221*** 
(0.094) 
-8.151*** 
(0.193) 
Industry 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
17,312,391 
17,312,391 
17,312,391 
12,627,811 
6,655,150 
3,331,678 
2,830,300 
Pseudo R2 
0.002 
0.001 
0.005 
0.013 
0.014 
0.014 
0.015 
 
 

48 
 
 
Table 3. Insider Trading Direction and Positive or Negative Close Firm Insider Information (logit) 
This table reports logistic regressions that explain whether the insider trading direction (purchase vs. sale) is determined by 
positive or negative insider information about the close firm. In Columns 1 to 6, the dependent variable equals 1 if the 
connected director has made net purchases in the traded firm when they are prohibited from trading in the close firm because 
of a close period and 0 if the connect director has made net sales. In Columns 1 and 2, we capture positive (negative) insider 
information as earnings surprises falling in the top (bottom) tercile at the earnings announcement (binary). In Column 3, 
positive or negative insider information is captured by the earnings surprise (continuous). In Columns 4 and 5, positive 
(negative) insider information is captured by extremely positive (negative) market reactions around earnings 
announcements (CARs [-1,1]) in the top (bottom) tercile (binary). In Column 6, insider information is proxied by the market 
reaction (CARs [-1,1] (continuous) and we exclude observations with earnings surprises close to zero. We control for 
connected director traits, traded firm characteristics, and industry and time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at 
the firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. Significance at the 
1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Purchase = 1 
Purchase = 1 
Purchase = 1 
Purchase = 1 
Purchase = 1 
Purchase = 1 
Positive Information 
(Earnings Surprise) 
0.011 
(0.062) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Negative Information 
(Earnings Surprise) 
 
 
-0.171*** 
(0.049) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earnings Surprise 
 
 
 
 
0.001** 
(0.000) 
 
 
 
Positive Information 
(CARs [-1,1]) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.091** 
(0.042) 
 
 
 
 
Negative Information 
(CARs [-1,1]) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.071* 
(0.043) 
 
 
CARs [-1,1] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.159** 
(0.572) 
Board Size 
0.008 
(0.016) 
0.059*** 
(0.017) 
0.059*** 
(0.017) 
0.009 
(0.015) 
0.009 
(0.010) 
0.009 
(0.015) 
CEO–Chair Duality 
0.078 
(0.218) 
0.061 
(0.369) 
0.058 
(0.369) 
-0.076 
(0.154) 
-0.077 
(0.119) 
-0.076 
(0.154) 
ROA 
0.002 
(0.003) 
0.004** 
(0.002) 
0.004** 
(0.002) 
-0.004*** 
(0.002) 
-0.004*** 
(0.001) 
-0.004*** 
(0.002) 
Debt/Total Assets 
0.003* 
(0.002) 
-0.000 
(0.002) 
-0.000 
(0.002) 
-0.001 
(0.001) 
-0.001 
(0.001) 
-0.001 
(0.001) 
Ln (Total Assets) 
0.010 
(0.024) 
-0.144*** 
(0.021) 
-0.147*** 
(0.021) 
-0.079*** 
(0.019) 
-0.079*** 
(0.013) 
-0.079*** 
(0.019) 
Institutional Ownership 
-0.004* 
(0.002) 
-0.007*** 
(0.002) 
-0.008*** 
(0.002) 
-0.001 
(0.002) 
-0.001 
(0.001) 
-0.001 
(0.002) 
Constant 
-3.976*** 
(0.352) 
-3.238*** 
(0.498) 
-3.140*** 
(0.482) 
-1.401*** 
(0.302) 
-1.348*** 
(0.196) 
-1.372*** 
(0.302) 
Industry 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
62578 
62578 
62578 
43526 
43526 
10544 
Pseudo R2 
0.018 
0.018 
0.035 
0.200 
0.200 
0.022 
 
 
 

49 
 
 
Table 4. Insider Trading Direction and Close Firm Insider Information (Multinomial logit) 
This table reports multinomial logistic regressions that explain whether insider trading in the traded firm occurs 
because the insider information about the close firm is positive or negative (proxied by the earnings surprise). The 
multinomial logit 1 ignores cases in which a connected director both purchases and sells shares in the traded firm (the 
subsample is labeled “specific transactions only”). For this multinomial logit, the dependent variable equals -1 if the 
connected director sells shares but does not buy shares in the traded firm when the close firm is subject to a close 
period, 0 if the connected director does not trade (the base case), and 1 if the connected director only purchases shares. 
For multinomial logit 2, we consider all cases; the dependent variable equals -1 if all of the connected director’s 
transactions result in net sales during the close period in the close firm, 0 for no transactions, and 1 for net purchases. 
For both multinomial logits, the base case is 0 (i.e., no trades). We control for the characteristics of the connected 
director and the traded firm as well as industry and time fixed effects (FE). Standard errors are clustered at the firm 
level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. Significance at the 1%, 
5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
(1) 
Specific transactions only 
(2) 
Net transaction value 
Dependent 
variable 
-1 
(Sale) 
0 
(No 
transaction, 
the base case) 
1 
(Purchase) 
-1 
(Net sales) 
0 
(No 
transaction, 
the base case) 
1 
(Net 
Purchases) 
Earnings 
surprise 
-0.001 
(0.001) 
 
0.001** 
(0.000) 
-0.001 
(0.000) 
 
0.001** 
(0.000) 
Controls 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Industry FE 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Yes 
 
Yes 
N 
56,716 
56,945 
Pseudo R2 
0.044 
0.046 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
 
Table 5. Market Reactions to Connected Directors’ Transactions in Traded and Close Firms 
This table presents OLS regressions that explain the correlation between market reactions in the traded and close firms 
around connected directors’ transactions during close periods. The dependent variable is the CARs of the traded firm 
over the period of -10 days to +10 days around the announcement of the transaction. The primary independent variable 
is the CARs of the close firm over the same event window. We control for transaction value and timing, connected 
director traits, traded firm characteristics, and industry and time fixed effects (FE). Standard errors are clustered at the 
firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. Significance at the 
1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
 
Purchases 
 
 
Sales 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_close 
[-10,10] 
0.122*** 
(0.028) 
0.188*** 
(0.044) 
0.184*** 
(0.045) 
0.173*** 
(0.040) 
0.144*** 
(0.053) 
0.135*** 
(0.052) 
Trade Value (% Market cap) 
 
 
5.986*** 
(1.939) 
6.153*** 
(1.976) 
 
 
0.616 
(1.143) 
0.374 
(1.164) 
Routine 
 
 
-0.004 
(0.011) 
-0.007 
(0.011) 
 
 
-0.004 
(0.010) 
0.002 
(0.010) 
Clustered 
 
 
-0.003 
(0.010) 
-0.002 
(0.010) 
 
 
-0.013 
(0.009) 
-0.014 
(0.010) 
Female 
 
 
0.008 
(0.012) 
0.009 
(0.012) 
 
 
-0.000 
(0.016) 
0.001 
(0.016) 
Age 
 
 
0.019 
(0.041) 
-0.005 
(0.041) 
 
 
0.048 
(0.049) 
0.044 
(0.060) 
CEO 
 
 
0.010 
(0.014) 
0.012 
(0.014) 
 
 
0.044* 
(0.026) 
0.037* 
(0.022) 
Chairman 
 
 
0.009 
(0.009) 
0.011 
(0.009) 
 
 
0.002 
(0.025) 
0.005 
(0.024) 
Executive Director 
 
 
0.001 
(0.012) 
-0.003 
(0.012) 
 
 
0.028 
(0.023) 
0.025 
(0.019) 
CEO–Chair Duality 
 
 
0.013 
(0.021) 
0.019 
(0.025) 
 
 
0.215* 
(0.118) 
0.194* 
(0.109) 
ROA 
 
 
0.067* 
(0.040) 
0.096** 
(0.044) 
 
 
0.215 
(0.162) 
0.155 
(0.142) 
Debt/Total Assets 
 
 
-0.075** 
(0.033) 
-0.073** 
(0.033) 
 
 
-0.074* 
(0.045) 
-0.041 
(0.040) 
Fixed/Total Equity 
 
 
-0.001 
(0.005) 
-0.001 
(0.005) 
 
 
0.010** 
(0.004) 
0.007 
(0.006) 
Interest Coverage 
 
 
-0.005* 
(0.003) 
-0.004 
(0.003) 
 
 
-0.001 
(0.003) 
-0.001 
(0.003) 
Dividend Payout 
 
 
-0.013 
(0.019) 
-0.011 
(0.019) 
 
 
-0.026 
(0.022) 
-0.022 
(0.030) 
Ln (Total Assets) 
 
 
-0.002 
(0.004) 
-0.004 
(0.004) 
 
 
-0.002 
(0.005) 
-0.006 
(0.007) 
Number of Analysts 
 
 
0.001 
(0.001) 
0.001 
(0.001) 
 
 
-0.001 
(0.001) 
-0.000 
(0.001) 
Institutional Ownership 
 
 
0.000 
(0.041) 
0.003 
(0.043) 
 
 
-0.046 
(0.042) 
-0.029 
(0.044) 
Constant 
0.008*** 
(0.003) 
-0.052 
(0.181) 
0.048 
(0.185) 
-0.001 
(0.004) 
-0.178 
(0.206) 
-0.048 
(0.255) 
Industry FE 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Year FE 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
N 
5,988 
1,559 
1,559 
982 
386 
386 
Adjusted R2 
0.010 
0.042 
0.051 
0.028 
0.207 
0.220 

51 
 
 
Table 6. Market Reactions to Connected Directors’ Transactions in Traded and Close Firms (by Event Window) 
This table presents OLS regressions that display the relations between the market reactions in the traded and close firms around connected directors’ transactions in the 
traded firm. The dependent variable is the CARs of the traded firm over different event windows around the announcement day of the transaction. The primary 
independent variable is the CARs of the close firm over the same event window. We control for transaction value and timing, connected director traits, traded firm 
characteristics, and industry and time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions are provided 
in the Appendix. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
 
 
Purchases 
 
 
 
 
Sales 
 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
 
CARs 
traded 
[-20,-1] 
CARs 
traded 
[0,1] 
CARs 
traded 
[0,5] 
CARs 
traded 
[0,10] 
CARs 
traded 
[-1,1] 
CARs 
traded 
[-5,5] 
CARs 
traded 
[-20,-1] 
CARs 
traded 
[0,1] 
CARs 
traded 
[0,5] 
CARs 
traded 
[0,10] 
CARs 
traded 
[-1,1] 
CARs 
traded 
[-5,5] 
CARs_close  
[-20,-1] 
0.268*** 
(0.049) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.288 
(0.179) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CARs_close 
[0,1] 
 
 
0.100* 
(0.056) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.066 
(0.046) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CARs_close 
[0,5] 
 
 
 
 
0.141*** 
(0.046) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.116*** 
(0.044) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CARs_close 
[0,10] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.048 
(0.051) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.082** 
(0.039) 
 
 
 
 
CARs_close 
[-1,1] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.197*** 
(0.057) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.069* 
(0.036) 
 
 
CARs_close 
[-5,5] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.300*** 
(0.071) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.204* 
(0.105) 
Controls 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Industry FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year FE 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
1,699 
1,643 
1,552 
1,382 
1,649 
1,552 
428 
413 
381 
341 
417 
381 
Adjusted R2 
0.081 
0.033 
0.039 
0.017 
0.040 
0.078 
0.227 
0.108 
0.121 
0.089 
0.072 
0.134 

52 
 
 
Table 7. Heckman Sample Selection Model 
This table displays the results of the Heckman sample selection models. Columns 1 and 3 contain the selection equation. 
In Column 1 (Column 3), the dependent variable is equal to 1 if there is at least one purchase (sale) by a connected director 
during the close period and 0 otherwise. The independent variables indicate whether the traded and close firms belong to 
the same sector and are of a comparable size. Columns 2 and 4 contain the regression equation with the CARs of the 
traded firm from day -10 to day +10 around the announcement day for the transaction as the dependent variable. The main 
independent variable is the CARs of the close firm over the same event window. We control for transaction value and 
timing, the characteristics of the connected director, traded firm characteristics, and industry and time fixed effects. 
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions are provided in 
the Appendix. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Purchases = 1 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
Sales = 1 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
Same Industry 
-0.047 
(0.056) 
 
-0.039 
(0.099) 
 
Similar Size 
0.001*** 
(0.000) 
 
-0.000 
(0.001) 
 
CARs_close 
[-10,10] 
 
0.211*** 
(0.077) 
 
0.111*** 
(0.041) 
Trade Value (% Market 
cap) 
 
4.498* 
(2.372) 
 
-2.251** 
(0.989) 
Routine 
 
-0.001 
(0.010) 
 
-0.011 
(0.008) 
Clustered 
 
-0.002 
(0.009) 
 
-0.013 
(0.009) 
Female 
-0.083 
(0.063) 
0.022 
(0.015) 
-0.274* 
(0.147) 
0.015 
(0.014) 
Age 
-0.415** 
(0.193) 
0.050 
(0.045) 
-0.852*** 
(0.241) 
0.079 
(0.048) 
CEO 
0.313*** 
(0.081) 
0.004 
(0.013) 
1.040*** 
(0.083) 
0.017 
(0.028) 
Chairman 
0.191*** 
(0.050) 
0.006 
(0.012) 
0.100 
(0.089) 
-0.021 
(0.019) 
Executive Director 
0.233*** 
(0.062) 
0.003 
(0.013) 
1.010*** 
(0.087) 
0.016 
(0.029) 
CEO–Chair Duality 
0.143 
(0.171) 
-0.032 
(0.021) 
-0.336 
(0.222) 
-0.054*** 
(0.018) 
ROA 
0.002*** 
(0.001) 
0.074* 
(0.040) 
0.001 
(0.001) 
0.006 
(0.090) 
Debt/Total Assets 
-0.000 
(0.000) 
-0.055* 
(0.032) 
0.000* 
(0.000) 
0.018 
(0.035) 
Fixed/Total Equity 
0.000 
(0.000) 
0.002 
(0.004) 
-0.000 
(0.000) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
Interest Coverage 
-0.000 
(0.000) 
-0.002 
(0.002) 
0.000** 
(0.000) 
0.005*** 
(0.002) 
 
 

53 
 
 
Table 7 continued  
 
 
 
 
 
Purchases = 1 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
Sales = 1 
CARs 
traded 
[-10,10] 
 
 
 
 
 
Dividend Payout 
0.002*** 
(0.001) 
0.029 
(0.018) 
0.001 
(0.001) 
-0.009 
(0.023) 
Ln (Total Assets) 
0.000 
(0.000) 
0.001 
(0.004) 
-0.000 
(0.000) 
0.002 
(0.004) 
Number of Analysts 
0.013*** 
(0.003) 
-0.000 
(0.001) 
0.015*** 
(0.004) 
-0.001 
(0.001) 
Institutional Ownership 
0.001 
(0.001) 
0.046 
(0.041) 
-0.000 
(0.002) 
-0.004 
(0.035) 
Constant 
-4.869** 
(2.001) 
-0.140 
(0.207) 
0.299 
(1.003) 
-0.332* 
(0.180) 
Inverse Mills Ratio 
 
-0.024 
(0.026) 
 
0.020 
(0.029) 
Industry 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
100,624 
100,624 
102,825 
102,825 
 
 

54 
 
 
Table 8. Concurrent Events of M&As and CEO Turnover 
This table shows regressions analyzing the market reactions to connected transactions in both the traded and close 
firms, with additional controls, including indicator variables for concurrent corporate events, such as M&A 
announcements and CEO turnover. In Column 1, we introduce two binary variables, M&A Event Traded as 
Acquirer (or M&A Acquirer) and M&A Event Traded as Target (or M&A Target), which equals 1 if the traded 
firm is involved in an M&A as an acquirer or a target shortly after the insider transaction. In Column 2, the binary 
variable CEO Turnover Traded equals 1 if CEO turnover in the traded firm is announced shortly after the insider 
transaction. Columns 1 and 2 are based on the sample of purchase transactions. Columns 3 and 4 focus on the sales 
subsample. We control for transaction value and timing, connected director traits, traded firm characteristics, and 
industry and time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed 
variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗
∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
Purchases 
Sales 
 
(1)  
(2)  
(3)  
(4)  
 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_close [-10,10] 
0.178*** 
(0.046) 
0.181*** 
(0.046) 
0.131** 
(0.053) 
0.133** 
(0.051) 
M&A Event Traded as Acquirer 
-0.008 
(0.010) 
 
 
-0.002 
(0.016) 
 
 
M&A Event Traded as Target 
0.097 
(0.091) 
 
 
-0.008 
(0.025) 
 
 
CARs_close [-10,10] x M&A Acquirer 
0.231 
(0.154) 
 
0.401 
(0.258) 
 
CARs_close [-10,10] x M&A Target 
-0.254 
(0.268) 
 
-0.173 
(0.426) 
 
CEO Turnover Traded 
 
 
-0.006 
(0.013) 
 
 
0.035 
(0.033) 
CARs_close [-10,10] x CEO Turnover 
Traded 
 
 
0.164 
(0.152) 
 
 
0.968 
(0.560) 
Controls 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Industry 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
1,559 
1,559 
386 
386 
Adjusted R2 
0.057 
0.050 
0.214 
0.222 
 

55 
 
 
Table 9. Falsification Test with Unconnected Firms 
This table presents regressions based on a constructed sample that examines market reactions following connected directors’ transactions (truly connected) 
and market reactions in unconnected firms (Placebo). In Column 1, the correlation between the CARs of the traded and close firms is shown for a sample of 
pairs of (truly connected) traded and close firms. In Column 2, the dependent variable remains the CARs of the traded firm, while the independent variable 
is the CARs for the same event window taken from a randomly selected firm that is not connected to the traded firm. In Column 3, the sample includes both 
truly connected and placebo observations for close firms. The indicator variable Truly Connected equals 1 if the firms are truly connected and 0 if they are 
placebo firms. In Column 5, we use the indicator variable Same Industry, which equals 1 if the traded firm and the paired “close” firm belong to the same 
industry (same 2-digit SIC code); and 0 otherwise. Column 6 is based on the sample of truly connected traded and close firms. Columns 6 to 8 replicate the 
analysis of the sale transactions. We control for transaction value and timing, the characteristics of the connected director, traded firm characteristics, and 
industry and time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the 
Appendix. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
 
Purchases 
 
 
 
 
Sales 
 
 
(1)  
(2) 
(3)  
(4)  
(5) 
(6)  
(7) 
(8) 
 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
For close firms: 
Truly 
Connected  
Placebo 
Truly 
Connected and 
Placebo 
Truly 
Connected 
and Placebo 
Truly 
Connected 
Truly 
Connected  
Placebo 
Truly 
Connected and 
Placebo 
CARs_“close” 
[-10,10] 
0.204*** 
(0.066) 
0.019 
(0.016) 
0.019 
(0.016) 
0.020 
(0.017) 
0.189** 
(0.077) 
0.193*** 
(0.058) 
0.011 
(0.008) 
0.011 
(0.008) 
Truly 
Connected 
 
 
0.001 
(0.005) 
 
 
 
 
-0.002 
(0.005) 
Truly 
Connected x 
CARs_“close”  
 
 
0.177*** 
(0.064) 
 
 
 
 
0.143** 
(0.057) 
Same Industry 
 
 
 
-0.012 
(0.006) 
-0.013 
(0.014) 
 
 
 
Same Industry x 
CARs_“close” 
 
 
 
0.051 
(0.044) 
0.079 
(0.115) 
 
 
 
Controls 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Industry 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
1,049 
13,579 
14,628 
14,628 
1,049 
292 
3,906 
4,198 
Adjusted R2 
0.035 
0.042 
0.042 
0.044 
0.078 
0.148 
0.062 
0.059 
 

56 
 
 
Table 10. Relationship between Traded and Close Firms 
This table shows regressions analyzing the market reactions for both traded and close firms, taking 
into account the relationship between the traded and close firms. The indicator variable Friendly 
Relationship equals 1 if a) the traded and close firms are identified as partners in FactSet (Columns 1, 
2, 5, and 6) the two firms are in a sector with a Herfindahl–Hirschman index in the top tercile among 
all sectors in the given year and 0 otherwise (Columns 3 and 4). We control for transaction value and 
timing, connected director traits, traded firm characteristics, and industry and time fixed effects. 
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions 
are provided in the Appendix. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and 
∗, respectively. 
 
Purchases 
Sales 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_close [-10,10] 
0.112*** 
(0.015) 
0.093** 
(0.040) 
0.119*** 
(0.043) 
0.094** 
(0.043) 
0.145*** 
(0.029) 
0.079** 
(0.036) 
Friendly Relationship 
0.001 
(0.007) 
0.016 
(0.016) 
 
 
0.003 
(0.011) 
-0.020 
(0.016) 
Friendly Relationship x 
CARs_close [-10,10] 
0.108*** 
(0.041) 
0.159* 
(0.089) 
 
 
-0.045 
(0.097) 
0.009 
(0.142) 
Friendly (Partner) 
 
 
-0.020* 
(0.011) 
 
 
 
Friendly (Partner) x 
CARs_close [-10,10] 
 
 
0.279* 
(0.149) 
 
 
 
Friendly (HHI) 
 
 
 
0.021 
(0.024) 
 
 
Friendly (HHI) x 
CARs_close [-10,10] 
 
 
 
0.172** 
(0.085) 
 
 
Controls 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Industry 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Year 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
N 
7,391 
2,142 
2142 
2142 
1,227 
508 
Adjusted R2 
0.011 
0.052 
0.050 
0.052 
0.019 
0.159 
 
 

57 
 
 
Table 11. Timing of the Market Reaction in the Trade and Close Firms 
Columns 1 to 4 of this table report the regressions explaining the stock market reactions for the close firms by the market 
reactions for the traded firms following a connected insider transaction. The close firm event windows (i.e., [1,2] and 
[1,5]) are timed after the traded firm event windows (i.e., [0,1]). In Columns 5 to 8, the market reactions of the traded 
firms are explained by market reactions of the close firms, in event windows timed shortly before ([0,1] and [-1,0]). We 
control for transaction value and timing, the characteristics of the connected director, close firm characteristics, and 
industry and time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable 
definitions are provided in the Appendix. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, 
respectively. 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
 
CARs_ 
close 
[1,2] 
CARs_ 
close 
[1,5] 
CARs_ 
close 
[1,2] 
CARs_ 
close 
[1,5] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[1,2] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[1,5] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[1,2] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[1,5] 
CARs_traded [0,1] 
0.032*** 
(0.008) 
0.041*** 
(0.011) 
0.050* 
(0.026) 
0.048* 
(0.027) 
 
 
 
 
CARs_close [0,1] 
 
 
 
 
0.037 
(0.039) 
0.029 
(0.046) 
 
 
CARs_close [-1,0] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.015 
(0.023) 
-0.015 
(0.023) 
Controls 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Industry 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
5,017 
6,367 
2,010 
2,549 
2,099 
2,655 
2070 
2626 
Adjusted R2 
0.003 
0.002 
0.006 
0.006 
0.016 
0.007 
0.018 
0.007 
 
 

58 
 
 
Table 12. Institutional Ownership 
This table shows regressions that explain the stock market reactions for the close firms by the market reactions for the 
traded firm around a connected insider transaction, controlling for the ownership of institutional investors. Institutional 
Ownership is the combined shareholding percentage of both the traded and close firm by institutional investors. The 
binary variable High Institution Ownership equals 1 if the institutional ownership of both the traded and close firms 
is above the industry median or the 75th percentile in the year of the transaction. We control for transaction value and 
timing, connected directors’ traits, traded firm characteristics, and industry and time fixed effects. Standard errors are 
clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. 
Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively. 
 
 
Purchases 
 
 
Sales 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_ 
traded 
[-10,10] 
CARs_close [-10,10] 
0.104*** 
(0.033) 
0.144*** 
(0.044) 
0.182*** 
(0.046) 
0.019 
(0.018) 
0.106* 
(0.061) 
0.155** 
(0.072) 
CARs_close [-10,10] x 
Institutional Ownership  
0.980*** 
(0.036) 
 
 
 
 
0.936*** 
(0.019) 
 
 
Institutional Ownership 
0.010 
(0.007) 
 
 
 
 
0.005 
(0.006) 
 
 
CARs_close [-10,10] x 
High Institutional Ownership 
(50th) 
 
0.951*** 
(0.023) 
 
 
 
 
1.009*** 
(0.065) 
 
High Institutional Ownership 
(50th) 
 
0.007 
(0.008) 
 
 
 
 
-0.004 
(0.010) 
 
CARs_close [-10,10] x 
High Institutional Ownership 
(75th) 
 
 
0.941*** 
(0.051) 
 
 
 
 
0.953*** 
(0.119) 
High Institutional Ownership 
(75th) 
 
 
-0.004 
(0.012) 
 
 
 
 
-0.016 
(0.016) 
Controls 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Industry 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Year 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
N 
1,426 
1,559 
1,559 
364 
386 
386 
Adjusted R2 
0.638 
0.197 
0.078 
0.835 
0.337 
0.254 
 

about ECGI
The European Corporate Governance Institute has been established to improve corpo­
rate governance through fostering independent scientific research and related activities.
The ECGI will produce and disseminate high quality research while remaining close to 
the concerns and interests of corporate, financial and public policy makers. It will draw on 
the expertise of scholars from numerous countries and bring together a critical mass of 
expertise and interest to bear on this important subject.
The views expressed in this working paper are those of the authors, not those of the ECGI 
or its members. 
www.ecgi.global

ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance
Editorial Board
Editor  
Nadya Malenko, Professor of Finance, Boston College               	
 
Consulting Editors 
Renée Adams, Professor of Finance, University of Oxford
 
Franklin Allen, Nippon Life Professor of Finance, Professor of 	
 
Economics, The Wharton School of the University of 	 	
 
Pennsylvania
 
Julian Franks, Professor of Finance, London Business School
 
Mireia Giné, Associate Professor, IESE Business School	
 
Marco Pagano, Professor of Economics, Facoltà di Economia
 
Università di Napoli Federico II
 Editorial Assistant 
Asif Malik, Working Paper Series Manager 
 
www.ecgi.global/content/working-papers

Electronic Access to the Working Paper Series
The full set of ECGI working papers can be accessed through the Institute’s Web-site 
(www.ecgi.global/content/working-papers) or SSRN:
Finance Paper Series  
http://www.ssrn.com/link/ECGI-Fin.html 
Law Paper Series  
http://www.ssrn.com/link/ECGI-Law.html 
www.ecgi.global/content/working-papers
