Tracking noise trading through numbers: Is noise
trading systematic?
Yongdong Shi, Haomiao Wang, Bohui Zhang, Hongxian Zhen∗
Current version: March 2026
Abstract
We examine the impact of noise trading on stock market returns by exploiting Chinese numerological superstition, where certain numbers in asset prices are perceived as
being lucky or unlucky by uninformed traders. The noise trading (NT) measure, measured by the difference between the frequencies of lucky and unlucky numbers in stock
prices directly captures noise trading activity and negatively predicts China’s stock
market returns. The results also hold out of sample and are stronger when arbitrage
costs are high and information availability is low than in other situations. Collectively,
our findings support the notion that noise trading contributes to systematic mispricing
in the stock market.
∗Shi (email: ydshi@263.net) is at the School of FinTech, Research Center of Applied Finance and School
of Finance, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics. Wang (email: harrywang117@qq.com) is at the
School of FinTech, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics. Zhang (email: bohuizhang@cuhk.edu.cn)
is at the School of Management and Economics and Shenzhen Finance Institute, the Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen). Zhen (email: zhx223@163.com) is at the School of Accounting
and China Internal Control Research Center, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics. We are grateful for the helpful comments from Fuwei Jiang, Fengyu Li, Buhui Qiu, Liyan Yang and Shaojun Zhang.
Haomiao acknowledges financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project
No. 72403033). Hongxian acknowledges financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Project No. 72172029).

JEL Codes: G12
Keywords: Noise trading, Numerological superstition, Market return prediction, Systematic mispricing.

Tracking noise trading through numbers: Is noise
trading systematic?
Abstract
We examine the impact of noise trading on stock market returns by exploiting Chinese numerological superstition, where certain numbers in asset prices are perceived as
being lucky or unlucky by uninformed traders. The noise trading (NT) measure, measured by the difference between the frequencies of lucky and unlucky numbers in stock
prices directly captures noise trading activity and negatively predicts China’s stock
market returns. The results also hold out of sample and are stronger when arbitrage
costs are high and information availability is low than in other situations. Collectively,
our findings support the notion that noise trading contributes to systematic mispricing
in the stock market.
JEL Codes: G12
Keywords: Noise trading, Numerological superstition, Market return prediction, Systematic mispricing.

1
Introduction
Noise traders or uninformed traders are investors who lack access to information and
trade on noise as if it were genuine information (Black, 1986). A large body of theoretical
literature has concluded that the consequence of noise trading is pushing asset prices away
from their fundamental values and creating nonfundamental stock movements or mispricing.1 As summarized by Fisher Black, “Noise causes markets to be somewhat ineﬀicient.”2
Empirically, this prediction is supported at the stock level by rich evidence showing that
noise trading can have a significant effect on cross-sectional stock returns.3 However, direct
evidence of the effect of noise trading on market-wide stock returns or whether it leads to
systematic mispricing remains unclear.
This study aims to explore the impact of noise trading on market-wide stock returns,
given the central role of market return predictability in many fundamental aspects of finance
(Cochrane, 2008). Although how noise trading affects asset prices is theoretically clear, identifying these effects remains an empirical challenge (Wardlaw, 2020). The primary diﬀiculty
in this research lies in measuring noise traders and tracking their activity because noise
traders cannot be directly observed.
The literature has attempted to use two main approaches to construct measures for
proxying noise trading.4 One strand of literature focuses on defining specific traders as noise
traders and relies on their trading as a proxy for noise trading (we refer to this approach
as the trader-based approach).
For example, many researchers categorize retail investors
as noise traders and consider their trading noise trading.5
Another strand of literature
1See, e.g., Kyle (1985), Black (1986), De Long et al. (1989), De Long et al. (1990), De Long and Shleifer
(1991), Shleifer and Summers (1990), Shleifer and Vishny (1997).
2See Black (1986).
3For example, Coval and Stafford (2007), Hvidkjaer (2008), Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2008), Barber et al.
(2009), Lou (2012), Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012), Han and Kumar (2013), Lou and Wang (2018),
Aboody et al. (2018), Dessaint et al. (2019), Henderson, Pearson, and Wang (2023).
4We discuss the two approaches in detail in Section 2.1.
5See, e.g., Odean (1999), Barber and Odean (2000), Barber and Odean (2008), Barber et al. (2009),
Stambaugh (2014).
1

relies on using transaction size to proxy for noise trading (we refer to this approach as
the volume-based approach), such as small trades (e.g., Han and Kumar, 2013). However,
without observing investors’ information sets, neither approach performs well in capturing
noise traders’ activity, which raises concerns about effects attributed to noise trading possibly
being driven by informed trading.6
We overcome this diﬀiculty by exploring noise traders’ superstitious behavior to construct
a novel noise trading measure. The direct observation of investors’ information sets is challenging. However, psychological literature has long recognized that individuals tend to rely
on superstition as a shield against a lack of information, whereas informed individuals do not
(Malinowski, 1948; Tsang, 2004; Torgler, 2007). As such, noise trading can be inferred from
superstitious behavior in the stock market because noise traders—investors who lack access
to information—tend to rely on superstition to compensate for information disadvantages.7
Building on this notion, we link noise trading to one of the most prevalent superstitious behaviors in financial research—Chinese numerological superstition, which considers
the number 8 lucky and the number 4 unlucky.8 We begin with the hypothesis that noise
traders’ equity orders tend to favor prices containing the lucky number. A vivid example is
that noise traders may place orders at ¥3.8 instead of ¥3.7. As such, when noise traders
dominate the market, there is a high occurrence of the lucky number in stock prices (Consistent with this premise, we find that our measure yields quantitatively similar results when
6For example, numerous studies suggest that retail investors’ trading flows contain valuable information
(Kaniel et al., 2012; Kaniel, Saar, and Titman, 2008; Barrot, Kaniel, and Sraer, 2016; Kelley and Tetlock,
2013, 2017; Boehmer et al., 2021). Similarly, it is becoming increasingly diﬀicult for small trades to serve as
a proxy for noise trading because of the spread of computer algorithms (Boehmer et al., 2021).
7One potential concern is that our approach may not fully capture instances of rational noise trading. For
example, an investor might sell stocks to finance a real estate purchase—a decision that appears rational.
However, we argue that even such ostensibly rational trades can be influenced by superstitious beliefs.
Specifically, the inherent uncertainty surrounding real estate investments may lead some individuals to rely
on superstition in their stock selling as a means of compensating for perceived informational disadvantages
in the real estate market. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that our measure may not comprehensively capture
the entire spectrum of rational noise trading.
8Chinese numerological superstition considers the number 8 lucky and the number 4 unlucky due to their
pronunciations in Chinese, which sound like “prosper” and “death”, respectively.
2

constructed using limit order (level 2) data. In fact, the price-based noise trading measure
and the limit order-based measure exhibit a correlation of over 96%.). In contrast, informed
traders are more likely to initiate or accept equity orders with more unlucky numbers because
they rely on information rather than on superstition in making their investment decisions.
Accordingly, our noise trading measure (NT) is constructed as the difference between the
frequencies of the numbers 8 and 4 in the daily stock prices (daily opening, highest, lowest,
and closing prices) of all firms listed on China’s stock market.9 A higher NT value indicates
greater noise trading activity.
Using the daily stock price data from firms listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock
Exchanges, we estimate monthly NT over a 23-year period from 2000 to 2022.10 For the first
part of our empirical analyses, we provide a battery of validation tests for NT. First, we
show that NT is positively correlated with retail trader ownership and negatively correlated
with investor experience, the two important determinants of noise trading (Brunnermeier,
Sockin, and Xiong, 2022). Second, we use the Wind outage as an exogenous shock to noise
trading to validate our measure. Wind is the leading financial data provider in China. On
January 8, 2024, it experienced an unexpected outage that prevented users from retrieving
data. In the absence of reliable information, trading activities during this period were more
likely driven by noise. We document a high occurrence of the lucky number in stock prices
during the Wind outage.
Third, NT spikes near major events related to noise trading.
For example, China’s
national leadership has changed, triggering noise trading due to heightened political uncer9We use daily opening, high, low, and closing prices due to data availability. Ideally, an NT measure
constructed using high-frequency, tick-level transaction data should outperform our current NT measure
because high-frequency data contain more signals about noise traders than do low-frequency data.
To
address this, we reconstruct the NT measure using 60-minute interval data and limit order (Level 2) data
and find that our current measure exhibits a correlation with the 60-minute price-based measure and the limit
order-based measure of over 99% and 96%, respectively. Moreover, our robustness analyses suggest that both
alternative measures deliver similar predictive ability to our current measure. Despite the potential benefits
of using tick-level data, we note that the results presented in this paper are robust enough to demonstrate
that the current NT measure is suﬀicient for capturing market-wide noise trading activity.
10We use the value-weighted method to construct NT.
3

tainty (Addoum and Kumar, 2016); increases in the Tobin tax, implemented in response
to substantial noise trading (Cai et al., 2021); and notable noise trading events, such as
the speculative bubbles of 2007 and 2015 and the Wuhan lockdown. Fourth, we find that
changes in NT are positively related to changes in market liquidity, consistent with liquidity
provision by noise traders (Black, 1986). Finally, Hasbrouck (1988, 1991a,b) suggest that
one of the distinct features of noise trading is that its related changes should be transient.
As such, a properly constructed noise trading measure should be associated with stronger
future price reversals, which we indeed observe.
For the second part of our empirical analyses, we examine how noise trading affects
stock market returns. We interpret NT as a contrarian predictor of stock market index
returns. In the presence of valuation diﬀiculty, a high level of noise trading can lead to
both overpricing and underpricing (Keynes, 1936).11 However, underpricing is more easily
eliminated than is overpricing because short-sale constraints hinder arbitrage concerning
overpricing compared with underpricing. Therefore, we expect high-level noise trading to
result in market overvaluation and, consequently, the observable price correction to lead to
lower future stock returns (De Long et al., 1990).
After regressing future market returns on NT, we confirm a strong and negative relationship between noise trading and future monthly market index returns. A one-standarddeviation increase in NT leads to a lower monthly return of 1.135%. This pattern persists
over the next twelve months, with a one-standard-deviation increase in NT predicting a
decrease in annualized returns of 14.63%, indicating that the economic magnitude is substantial. Moreover, we obtain similar results through out-of-sample analysis, firm-level NT
analysis, and a battery of robustness checks. This evidence supports our notion that noise
trading causes systematic mispricing in the stock market.
To further support the noise-trading-induced systematic mispricing explanation, we discuss two mispricing channels through which noise trading can affect stock prices, namely, the
11Grinblatt and Han (2005) suggest that both buying and selling can induce underpricing and overpricing.
4

limits-to-arbitrage channel (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997) and the valuation diﬀiculty channel
(Baker and Wurgler, 2006). If the predictability of NT stems from mispricing, then the
price impact should prevail when arbitrage costs, such as short-sale constraints, restrict the
willingness of sophisticated investors to trade against mispricing or when stock valuation is
more subjective, making prices more vulnerable to noise trading. In other words, during
these times, compared to other times, noise trading can have a greater influence on stock
prices.
To access the limits-to-arbitrage channel, we examine how the predictability of NT varies
with short-sale constraints. We employ abnormal short interest as an inverse proxy for shortsale constraints, as the relaxation of short-sale constraints leads to more active short selling
activity, resulting in greater abnormal short interest. We show that NT predicts market
index returns most weakly when short-sale constraints are less binding, consistent with the
limits-to-arbitrage channel.
To explore the valuation diﬀiculty channel, we rely on Google’s withdrawal from China,
which led to a significant reduction in information transparency (Xu, Xuan, and Zheng, 2021;
Wang, Yu, and Zhang, 2023). After Google’s withdrawal in March 2010, investors’ ability
to search for information on the internet was hampered. As such, stock valuation became
more subjective, and the effect of noise trading on stock prices intensified. We confirm that
the predictability of NT is particularly strong after Google’s withdrawal, consistent with the
valuation diﬀiculty channel.
For the final part of our empirical analyses, we investigate several alternative explanations
for the predictability of NT to reinforce our findings. First, we find that the predictability
of NT cannot be explained by a range of commonly used market return predictors that aim
to capture fundamentals. Second, by utilizing China’s B-share market, which shares the
same fundamentals as our primary sample but features fewer noise traders,12 we conduct
12Unlike our primary sample, China’s A-share market, the B-share market is occupied predominantly by
foreign institutional investors, who are less likely to be noise traders than are other types of investors. While
5

natural experiments and find that NT loses its predictability in the B-share market. Hence,
our findings on return predictability are less likely to be driven by factors unrelated to noise
trading. Third, it is tempting to relate the predictability of NT to investor sentiment (Baker
and Wurgler, 2006). However, we find that the negative relation between NT and future
market returns remains significant even after controlling for investor sentiment. Fourth, we
show that the predictability of NT is not driven by retail investors’ round number heuristic
(Kuo, Lin, and Zhao, 2015).
Finally, an alternative explanation is that the presence of lucky (or unlucky) numbers in
stock prices makes stocks more salient and thus grabs investors’ attention rather than reflecting noise trading activity.13 To alleviate this concern, we construct alternative measures
of NT on the basis of the last several digits of stock prices (e.g., the last one to three digits).
These digits are less visible to investors and, therefore, less likely to draw their attention
than are other digits, yet they still capture noise trading activity. We find that these measures still negatively and significantly predict future stock market index returns. Moreover,
a pseudo NT measure constructed using stock returns, which cannot capture noise trading
but is likely to draw attention, cannot predict future stock market index returns.
The contributions of our paper can be understood as follows. First, our paper contributes
to the measurement of noise trading by extending previous trader- and volume-based approaches (Coval and Stafford, 2007; Hvidkjaer, 2008; Barber, Odean, and Zhu, 2008; Barber et al., 2009; Lou, 2012; Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang, 2012; Han and Kumar, 2013;
Lou and Wang, 2018; Aboody et al., 2018; Dessaint et al., 2019; Henderson, Pearson, and
Wang, 2023). We introduce a novel methodology based on transaction prices, specifically
superstition-driven price clustering, to capture the time series variation in market-wide noise
traders’ activities. We do not claim that this methodology is a universal measure of all forms
A- and B-share markets cater to different investor clientele, they are exposed to identical fundamental factors
(Chui, Subrahmanyam, and Titman, 2022).
13For instance, investors may buy a stock after observing multiple instances of lucky numbers in stock
prices (Hirshleifer, Jian, and Zhang, 2018).
6

of noise trading; rather, we present a measure to identify investors’ noise trading that can
be adapted to other cultural or market contexts, given that superstition exists around the
world.
Second, our paper contributes to the growing literature on the effects of noise trading on
asset prices. Earlier studies focused primarily on analyzing the cross-sectional relationship
between noise trading and stock returns.14 Our study complements these efforts by exploring
the straightforward impact of noise trading on market-wide stock returns. More importantly,
our evidence supports the long-standing theoretical prediction that noise trading contributes
to systematic mispricing in the stock market.
Finally, our study contributes to recent literature documenting superstitions in the financial market. He et al. (2020) show that buyers pay more for homes with lucky addresses,
resulting in a lucky premium. Hirshleifer, Jian, and Zhang (2018) find that Chinese initial
public offering (IPO) stocks with lucky codes deliver lower future returns due to numerological superstition beliefs than do other Chinese stocks. Bhattacharya et al. (2018) find
that superstitious investors tend to lose money in their trading. Zhang and Du (2022) find
that numerological superstition has a profound impact across China’s stock, bond, foreign
exchange, and commodities markets. Furthermore, Fisman et al. (2023) show that during
the Chinese “zodiac year”, widely held beliefs in terms of bad luck make individuals less
likely to make risky decisions. Our study complements these studies by investigating the
effect of superstitions on aggregate stock market performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes how we measure noise
trading. Section 3 presents how we validate our noise trading measure. Section 4 reports
our main empirical results. Section 5 provides analyses of alternative explanations. Finally,
Section 6 concludes the paper.
14For example, Coval and Stafford (2007), Hvidkjaer (2008), Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2008), Barber et al.
(2009), Lou (2012), Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012), Han and Kumar (2013), Lou and Wang (2018),
Aboody et al. (2018), Dessaint et al. (2019), Henderson, Pearson, and Wang (2023).
7

2
Measuring noise trading
2.1
Trader- and volume-based approaches
2.1.1
Trader-based approach
The trader-based approach categorizes two main types of investors—retail investors
and mutual funds—as noise traders.
Retail investors: Many studies categorize retail investors as noise traders (e.g., Stambaugh, 2014). The idea behind this definition is straightforward—retail investors often lack
information and exhibit psychological biases. Previous research in the literature broadly
supports the noise trader hypothesis. These studies link retail investors to noise traders by
showing that retail investors lose money from their trading due to frequent trading on the
basis of nonfundamental information (Odean, 1999; Barber and Odean, 2000, 2008; Barber
et al., 2009). Furthermore, retail investors’ trading contains a common directional component, which can lead to nonfundamental price movements (Kumar and Lee, 2006; Dorn,
Huberman, and Sengmueller, 2008; Henderson, Pearson, and Wang, 2023) and increase price
volatility (Foucault, Sraer, and Thesmar, 2011).
Recent empirical studies seem to challenge the notion that retail investors are noise
traders by showing that retail investors’ trading flow can correctly predict future firm-level
price movements (Kaniel, Saar, and Titman, 2008; Barber, Odean, and Zhu, 2008; Kaniel
et al., 2012; Kelley and Tetlock, 2013; Barrot, Kaniel, and Sraer, 2016; Kelley and Tetlock,
2017; Boehmer et al., 2021). Their trading can provide liquidity and meet the demands
of institutional investors who face higher liquidity constraints (Kelley and Tetlock, 2013;
Barrot, Kaniel, and Sraer, 2016). Additionally, some studies find that retail investors’ trading
flow contains relevant information about future returns, suggesting that at least some retail
investors are informed traders (Kaniel, Saar, and Titman, 2008; Kaniel et al., 2012; Boehmer
et al., 2021).
8

To reconcile these conflicting findings, more recent studies have analyzed the heterogeneity of retail investors. These studies find that larger retail investors’ trading flow can
correctly predict future cross-sectional stock returns, whereas the trading flow of smaller
retail investors tends to be a contrarian predictor of future cross-sectional stock returns
(Jones et al., 2023). However, the trading flow of neither larger nor smaller retail investors
can predict stock market returns (Boehmer et al., 2021; Jones et al., 2023). In addition,
some studies shift interest in understanding the new generation of retail investors who trade
on Robinhood and find that while Robinhood investors perform well, they engage in more
attention-induced trading than do other retail investors. (Welch, 2022; Barber et al., 2022).
Mutual funds: A rapidly expanding stream of literature has attempted to use mutual
funds as a proxy for noise traders. The economic mechanism is that large retail investor
outflow from mutual funds can create price pressure on fund managers, which, in turn, forces
mutual funds to sell their stocks at prices below fundamental values (Coval and Stafford,
2007; Lou, 2012). Building on this assumption, many studies use mutual fund fire sales
to capture such flow-induced noise trading and test how noise trading affects corporate
performance (e.g., Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang, 2012; Derrien, Kecskés, and Thesmar,
2013; Phillips and Zhdanov, 2013; Lou and Wang, 2018; Dessaint et al., 2019).
Clearly, a shortcoming of this method is the challenge of distinguishing noise trading
from information trading because mutual funds’ buying and selling actions can be driven by
both information and noise simultaneously. As documented by (Wardlaw, 2020), existing
fund fire sale flow measures fail to capture noise trading; instead, they may reflect variations
in fundamentals.
2.1.2
Volume-based approach
Rather than identifying specific traders, the volume-based approach focuses on tracking
noise trading on the basis of trade size and often uses the terms “noise trader” and “retail
9

trader” interchangeably. The most common method separates trades by dollar size, identifying orders below a certain cutoff as noise trading. For example, Lee and Radhakrishna
(2000) adopt a $20,000 cutoff to identify noise (retail) trading. More recent studies construct
noise trading measures on the basis of small trades and find that noise trading can have a
significant effect on cross-sectional stock returns (Hvidkjaer, 2008; Han and Kumar, 2013).
However, with the ever-growing spread of computer algorithms allowing institutional
orders to be broken into smaller pieces, small trades are becoming increasingly less likely to be
executed by noise investors (Cready, Kumas, and Subasi, 2014). For example, Boehmer et al.
(2021) show that the retail orders are slightly larger than are other orders. Li et al. (2023)
suggest that small retail investors tend to submit small and medium-sized orders, whereas
large retail investors are more likely to submit medium-sized and large orders. In contrast,
institutional investors submit a greater proportion of small orders, especially after 2018, as
algorithmic trading has become prevalent among institutional investors (Li et al., 2023). As
a result, the traditional association between small trades and noise trading no longer holds,
which, in turn, has made the volume-based approach less effective at distinguishing whether
trades reflect noise trading or informed trading.
In summary, because of the diﬀiculty in directly observing investors’ information sets,
identifying noise trading remains a significant challenge. Although considerable effort has
been made to examine noise trading’s impact on cross-sectional stock returns, most studies
on the outcomes of noise trading are limited to theoretical or experimental research.15 More
importantly, the role of noise trading in affecting market-wide stock returns remains unclear.
With a few exceptions, ideal settings that enable researchers to identify noise traders or noise
trading activity are diﬀicult to find. In the following subsection, we discuss how we overcome
this challenge by utilizing noise traders’ superstitious beliefs to isolate and measure noise
trading activity.
15For example, Arnott et al. (2015) predict that noise trading can create size and value effects. Bloomfield,
O’hara, and Saar (2009) conduct laboratory experiments to analyze how noise trading affects liquidity.
10

2.2
Empirical measure of noise trading
We begin with the well-documented concept that noise traders, or uninformed traders, are
investors who, lacking access to information, trade on noise as if it were genuine information
(Black, 1986).
Of course, the information sets of investors cannot be directly observed.
However, much psychological literature suggests that when there is a shortage of information
or individuals face uncertain environments, they tend to rely on superstition to exert control
over uncertainty (Malinowski, 1948; Skinner, 1992; Tsang, 2004; Torgler, 2007). For example,
Malinowski (1948) suggests that deep-sea fishermen participate in superstitious rituals to
manage the uncertainty of their work because fishing in the open sea is dangerous and
unpredictable.
Conversely, fishermen who work in calm and safe waters do not rely on
superstition. Similarly, Tsang (2004) find that superstition plays a crucial role for Chinese
businesspeople in mitigating the anxiety stirred up by volatile and unpredictable businesses.
On the basis of these studies, it is natural to relate noise trading activity to superstitious
behavior in the stock market. In our paper, we rely on the superstitious behavior of stock
prices to track noise trading activity.
More precisely, we exploit Chinese numerological
superstition, one of the most prevalent superstitious behaviors in financial research (e.g.,
Hirshleifer, Jian, and Zhang, 2018; Bhattacharya et al., 2018; He et al., 2020; Zhang and
Du, 2022), and use the frequency of lucky and unlucky numbers in stock prices to infer
noise trading. One distinct advantage of this form of superstition is that it offers a clear,
observable pattern in stock prices that can be easily quantified.
To seek protection from superstition and improve luck, equity orders initiated by noise
traders are likely to exhibit a preference for lucky numbers. This preference manifests in their
order placement, particularly in their chosen price points. As a result, at the market level,
the dominance of noise traders can lead to a disproportionately high-level occurrence of lucky
numbers in individual stock prices. Conversely, experienced, rational, informed traders who
rely on information rather than on superstition in their trading decisions are likely to initiate
11

or accept equity orders with more unlucky numbers. Therefore, the high-level occurrence of
unlucky numbers in stock prices can be viewed as substantial trading by informed traders.
In our empirical study, we use the difference between the frequencies of lucky and unlucky numbers in stock prices to mitigate the impact of informed trading on noise trading.16
According to Chinese numerological superstition, the number 8 is considered lucky because
its pronunciation is similar to the word for “wealth” or “prosper.” In contrast, the number
4 is deemed unlucky because its pronunciation resembles the word for “death.”
Monthly noise trading activity is measured as the difference between the frequencies of
the numbers 8 and 4 in the daily stock prices of all firms listed on China’s stock market.17
Specifically, we first compute the occurrence of each digit in each stock’s price in month
t using the daily stock prices. To comprehensively track noise traders’ activity, we use all
available types of daily stock prices, namely, the opening price, highest price, lowest price,
and closing price.
Ideally, high-frequency intraday transaction prices provide richer signals of trading activity, and a noise trading measure based on high-frequency prices can offer a more precise
representation of noise trading behavior. However, constructing such a measure is challenging due to the complexities and diﬀiculties involved in handling high-frequency data. In
contrast, daily prices offer two key advantages—simplicity and reduced computational requirements. More importantly, as shown in the following sections, daily data prove suﬀicient
for identifying noise trading activity. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that high-frequency data
may improve the precision of noise trading detection; however, the marginal contribution
they offer is limited relative to the objectives of this paper.
16Our robustness analysis shows that the choosing of stock prices or limit order do not change our baseline
findings.
17Our main findings remain qualitatively the same when using only the frequencies of the number 8 or the
number 4 in stock prices to capture noise trading activity.
12

We then define a stock’s noise trading using the following equation:
NT p
i,t = # of Num 8p
i,t −# of Num 4p
i,t
# of total Nump
i,t
,
(1)
where a stock’s noise trading, NT p
i,t, represents NT O
i,t, NT H
i,t, NT L
i,t, or NT C
i,t for stock i in
month t, estimated using daily opening, highest, lowest, and closing prices, respectively. #
of Num 8p
i,t is the number of times that the digit 8 is included in daily prices for stock i in
month t, # of Num 4p
i,t is the number of times that the digit 4 is included in daily prices for
stock i in each month t, and # of total Nump
i,t is the total number of digits in daily prices
for stock i in each month t. The market-level individual noise trading (NT p
t ) measure is
defined as the market-capitalization-weighted cross-sectional average of stock-specific NT p
i,t.
Our monthly noise trading (NT) measure is finally defined as an arithmetic average of
the four types of NT p
t. More precisely, NT is defined as follows:
NT t = NT O
t + NT H
t + NT L
t + NT C
t
4
,
(2)
where NT O
t , NT H
t , NT L
t , and NT C
t are calculated using the opening, highest, lowest, and
closing daily prices in each month, respectively. Following Baker and Wurgler (2006), we
standardize each NT p
t to have a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation. Ideally, NT
can reduce potential measurement errors in each NT p
t and capture the level of market-wide
noise trading activity in each month. To help account for any potential nonsynchronicity
effects that may cause NT to reflect a leading shift in noise trading activity (Aboody et al.,
2018), all components of NT are introduced with a one-month lag following the procedures
of Baker and Wurgler (2006) and Cassella and Gulen (2019). A high NT value indicates a
high level of noise trading activity in the stock market.
13

2.3
Data and sample
Our sample includes all Chinese A-share stocks listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange
and Shenzhen Stock Exchange, spanning from January 2000 to December 2022. We begin
our sample in January 2000 following Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan (2019). We construct our
variables using the daily and monthly stock-level and balance sheet data obtained from the
China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database. Our market index return
and risk-free rate data are also obtained from the CSMAR database.
[Insert Table 1 about here]
Panel A of Table 1 presents the summary statistics for the key variables used in our
analysis over the period from January 2000 to December 2022. NT is our key measure of
interest for noise trading. Summary statistics for other control variables are also reported in
Panel A. Control variables include the dividend-to-price ratio (DP), dividend yield (DY ),
earnings-to-price ratio (EP), dividend-to-payout ratio (DE), book-to-market ratio (BM),
turnover (TO), return volatility (RV OL), economic policy uncertainty (EPU), money supply (MS), and inflation (INFL). For comparison, all variables are also standardized to have
a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation. For space conservation, detailed descriptions
of how we constructed the market- and firm-level variables used in this paper are provided
in Appendix A.
Panel B of Table 1 presents the correlations between NT and other variables. It appears
that NT shows a relatively low-level correlation with other variables, indicating that NT
captures different information than do the variables constructed to capture fundamentals.
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
To better understand NT, we plot the evolution of NT during our sample period in
Figure 1. As shown, NT fluctuates over time and decreases throughout the sample period.
14

The red dotted linear trend line fitted to the data indicates that the slope of NT is −0.55%,
thus confirming the downward trend in noise trading activity over time. This decline is
partially consistent with the well-known hypothesis that noise trading arises from retail
investors, given the substantial downward trend in the fraction of retail investors in China’s
stock market. As shown in Figure 1, the fraction of retail investors, represented by the
green dashed line, also exhibits a downward trend. Furthermore, Figure 1 reveals a clear
relationship between NT and the fraction of retail investors, validating our claim that NT
reflects noise trading. We further discuss the details in Section 3.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]
We also show the evolution of each NT p over the period from January 2000 to December
2022 in Figure 2. As shown, all NT p values clearly capture similar fluctuations over time,
despite being constructed on the basis of different types of stock prices. More importantly, as
expected, all NT p values are highly correlated with each other, implying that they capture
a similar pattern of investors’ trading behavior,18 which we suggest denotes noise trading
activity.
3
Validation of NT
3.1
Retail investors and investor experience
Given the diﬀiculty in measuring noise trading, we begin our empirical analysis by validating our noise trading measure using variables that existing studies have shown to be
associated with noise trading. The literature attributes noise trading to retail investors and
inexperienced investors (Stambaugh, 2014; Brunnermeier, Sockin, and Xiong, 2022) because
they often cannot obtain and analyze information. We therefore expect our noise trading
18Nontabulated results suggest that the median values are relatively close, ranging from −0.196 to −0.145.
In addition, all individual NT measures are persistent with large first-order autocorrelations.
15

measure to be positively correlated with retail investor ownership and negatively correlated
with investor experience.
We construct market-level retail investor ownership (RIO) as the value-weighted average
of firm-level retail investor ownership, defined as one minus institutional ownership, following
Gao, Ren, and Zhang (2020).19 To mitigate reporting-induced seasonality, where full holdings
are disclosed only semi-annually,20 we smooth RIO using a six-month moving average to filter
out artificial fluctuations and idiosyncratic noise. To proxy for market experience, we use
the variable Time, which equals one for the first month of our sample and increases by one
with each subsequent month. Motivated by Engelberg, McLean, and Pontiff (2020), Time
captures the cumulative experience (e.g., market knowledge and adaptation) that investors
gain through their past trading activity over time (Lo, 2004).
[Insert Table 2 about here]
We validate our noise trading measure by conducting simple time series regressions of
NT on RIO and Time with control variables. The results are presented in Panel A of Table
2. Columns (1) and (2) in Panel A of Table 2 show the results of the regressions of NT on
RIO with and without control variables. In the univariate regression, NT is significantly
positively correlated with RIO. After controlling for various market and macroeconomic
factors in column (2), this result remains significant; a one-standard-deviation increase in
RIO is associated with a 0.027% increase in NT, suggesting that retail investors are robust
determinants of NT.
Columns (3) and (4) reveal a negative time trend in NT, as the
coeﬀicient on this Time is negative and significant in every specification. This declining
19Institutional ownership is defined as holdings by mutual funds, insurance companies, Qualified Foreign
Institutional Investors, commercial banks, and investment banks, following Xu, Xuan, and Zheng (2021).
We obtain these data from CSMAR.
20This seasonality arises from the disclosure regulations in China. Listed firms are mandated to disclose
their full institutional holdings only in semi-annual and annual reports. In contrast, quarterly reports only
require the disclosure of the top ten largest shareholders.
16

trend in NT over time indicates that improvements in market experience lead to less noise
trading.
3.2
A quasi-natural experiment: the Wind outage
We further validate our measure by taking advantage of a quasi-natural experiment.
Specifically, the quasi-natural experiment exploits the abrupt outage of Wind.
Wind is
the leading financial data provider in China and is widely used by institutional investors
for comprehensive, real-time market data to make trading decisions. On January 8, 2024,
the platform experienced a significant system failure that prevented users from logging into
terminals or retrieving data. The outage persisted for over eight hours, spanning the entire
trading session, before services partially recovered in the evening.
Intuitively, we expect noise trading activity to increase during the Wind outage, as the
participation of informed institutional investors is hindered, thereby increasing the relative
influence of noise traders. To test this hypothesis, we examine the dynamics of NT around
the event using the following regression specification:
NT i,d,p = α + β1Windd,p + Controls + αi + αdow + αw + αm + ϵi,d,p,
(3)
where i, d, and p indicate firm, date, and 60-minute interval, respectively. NT i,d,p is defined
as the difference in frequency of digits 8 and 4 in prices in interval p of day d. Windd,p is
an indicator variable equal to one during the Wind outage on January 8, 2024, and zero
otherwise.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
The sample period is from December 24, 2023 to January 23, 2024 (15 days before and after
January 8, 2024). The coeﬀicient of interest, β1, captures the difference in NT during the
Wind outage relative to normal periods. If NT effectively captures noise trading, we expect
to observe an increase in NT during the outage, corresponding to a positive and significant
β1. As shown in Panel B of Table 2, we find that β1 is consistently positive and statistically
17

significant, which supports the validity of NT in capturing noise trading.
3.3
Noise trading events
We next validate our noise trading measure by examining the dynamics of NT around
major noise trading events. Motivated by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016), we focus on
spikes in NT. Figure 1 clearly displays spikes around some noise trading events in China’s
stock market.
The first spike aligns with the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) 16th
Party Congress in late 2002, during which Hu Jintao became the leader of China. This
result is consistent with Addoum and Kumar (2016)’s argument that national leadership
changes trigger uncertainty about future policy directions, thereby boosting noise trading in
the stock market. This argument is further supported by a similar spike around the CCP’s
18th Party Congress in late 2012, when Xi Jinping became the leader of China.
We also explore the dynamics of NT around adjustments in the Tobin tax, a popular
policy tool that regulators use to mitigate noise trading in financial markets (Cai et al., 2021).
Intuitively, an increase in the Tobin tax should discourage noise traders, thereby reducing
noise trading activity. Consistently, Figure 1 shows a notable spike in NT around May 2007,
when the Tobin tax was increased by the Chinese government from 0.2% to 0.6%. This
increase in the Tobin tax is consistent with observations of a substantial increase in noise
trading during that period, which prompted the Chinese government to triple the Tobin tax
(Cai et al., 2021). More importantly, the time variation in NT aligns with the modest effect
of the Tobin tax on mitigating noise trading, as NT experiences a sharp drop following the
tax increase. Conversely, NT shows a sharp rise following the reduction in the Tobin tax
from 0.6% to 0.1% in early 2008.
Additionally, NT surges around the notable speculative bubbles of 2007 and 2015, during
which stock prices soared before crashing, suggesting heightened noise trading activity. This
pattern is quite intuitive, as noise trading tends to increase during these speculative bubbles.
18

Conversely, NT experienced a sharp drop around the Split-Share Structure Reform of 2005,
which unlocked nontradable shares and led to an improvement in price informativeness and
a reduction in noise trading (Carpenter, Lu, and Whitelaw, 2021).
Finally, NT clearly spikes around 2018, when U.S.–China trade tensions began, and again
during the lockdown of Wuhan in early 2020. Casual observations suggest that China’s stock
market experienced heightened uncertainty during these periods, fostering an environment
in which noise trading flourished. Overall, our findings suggest that NT effectively captures
noise trading events.21
3.4
Liquidity provision
Black (1986) suggests that noise trading can affect liquidity as well as the level of asset
prices. By trading on signals that are uncorrelated with a firm’s fundamentals, noise traders
can provide liquidity to the market and thus make financial markets possible. Accordingly,
an increase in noise trading should be associated with higher liquidity. To validate our noise
trading measure, we study the relationship between changes in stock market liquidity and
contemporaneous changes in NT. We compute ∆NTt as the difference between NTt and
NTt−1 and use the aggregate bid–ask spread to measure liquidity. The aggregate bid–ask
spread (Spread) is the value-weighted average of firm-level bid–ask spreads; a higher value
of Spread indicates lower market liquidity. For robustness, we also use the relative quoted
bid–ask spread (SpreadQ) and the relative effective spread (SpreadE).
To test our conjecture, we estimate the following time-series regression:
∆Spreadt = α + β1∆NTt + ϵt,
(4)
21Importantly, we do not use information events such as earnings announcements or major macro announcements to validate our noise trading measure. The reason for this is that the disclosure of public
news can have ambiguous effects on noise trading, potentially either providing information or increasing
information asymmetry among investors (Kim and Verrecchia, 1994; Bogousslavsky, Fos, and Muravyev,
2024).
19

where ∆Spreadt is the change in the bid–ask spread and ∆NTt is the change in our noise
trading measure. Building on Black (1986), we expect β1 < 0 if NT captures noise trading,
as prior literature suggests that noise trading is often associated with higher liquidity. Hence,
if our noise trading measure accurately captures noise trading, ∆NTt should be negatively
related to ∆Spreadt.
Table B2 presents the estimation results. We document a negative contemporaneous relation between ∆NTt and ∆Spreadt, consistent with NT capturing variation in noise trading
that is associated with market liquidity. We acknowledge that the theoretical relationship
between noise trading and liquidity is multifaceted, as recent literature offers a more nuanced view regarding the impact of noise trading on market quality. For instance, Dalvi
et al. (2023) note that while noise trading can mitigate adverse selection and thus improve
liquidity, it can simultaneously exacerbate inventory risk for market makers, leading to wider
bid-ask spreads and reduced liquidity (Grossman and Miller, 1988). This theoretical ambiguity implies that a definitive, monotonic relationship between noise trading and liquidity
is not guaranteed. Consistent with this argument, recent empirical studies, such as Peress
and Schmidt (2020) and Eaton et al. (2022) show that noise trading can either enhance or
impair market liquidity. Despite this theoretical ambiguity, our finding provides supporting
evidence for the construct validity of our noise trading measure.
3.5
Return reversal
Finally, motivated by Bogousslavsky, Fos, and Muravyev (2024), we validate our noise
trading measure by testing how NT affects the short-term return reversal effect.
Prior
studies suggest that price movements caused by noise trading tend to be transient, whereas
those caused by informed trading tend to be permanent (Hasbrouck, 1988, 1991a,b). Hence,
if our noise trading measure indeed captures noise traders’ trading activity, then we should
observe a stronger return reversal effect following high-NT months. We test this conjecture
20

by conducting the following time series regression:
rt+1 = α + β1NTt × rother
t
+ β2NTt × rpersistence
t
+ β3NTt
+ β4rother
t
+ β5rpersistence
t
+ Controls + ϵt+1,
(5)
where rt+1 is the monthly stock market excess return in month t + 1. The monthly stock
market excess return is the return on the value-weighted market portfolios in excess of the
risk-free rate. NTt is our noise trading measure.
Before continuing, however, there is an important issue worth clarifying. Note that the
price limit rule imposed by the Chinese government can induce artificial autocorrelation in
stock returns.22 To address this microstructure issue, we decompose rt into two components
by regressing rt on rt−1. rpersistence
t
is the fitted component, which is related to the artificial
autocorrelation in stock returns caused by the price limit rule. rother
t
is the residual component. We expect a high level of noise trading to lead to a stronger return reversal for rother
t
;
hence, the coeﬀicient of the interaction term NTt × rother
t
, β1, is expected to be negative.
[Insert Table 3 about here]
Table 3 presents the regression results. Column (1) shows that β1 is significantly negative,
indicating that NT is associated with a stronger short-term return reversal effect. This effect
persists and strengthens slightly in columns (2) and (3) when we include the interaction
between NT and rpersistence
t
and the control variables. In addition, β2, which captures the
interaction between NT and the persistent component of returns, is not significant across
regressions. This contrast between β1 and β2 supports our hypothesis that NT captures
primarily temporary price movements rather than persistent return patterns, aligning with
theoretical predictions regarding the nature of noise trading.
Taken together, these validation results suggest that NT effectively captures noise trading
22See, e.g., Chen et al. (2019).
21

activity, which is consistent with our conjecture.23
4
NT and market returns
4.1
In-sample analysis
In the in-sample analysis, we examine the forecast power of NT for stock market index
returns by estimating the following univariate regression equation:
rt:t+h = α + βNTt + ϵt:t+h,
(6)
where rt:t+h = (rt+1+…+rt+h/h) is the average monthly stock market excess return over
horizon h. The monthly stock market excess return is the return on the value-weighted
market portfolios in excess of the risk-free rate, and NTt is the noise trading measure.
Forecasting horizon h spans from one to twelve months. We hypothesize that high-level noise
trading activity is associated with market overvaluation, with observable price corrections
leading to lower future returns. Hence, β, the coeﬀicient of interest in Eq. (6), is expected
to be negative because it captures the subsequent correction of mispricing.
[Insert Table 4 about here]
Table 4 reports the in-sample univariate regression results, tracking the relationship
between NTt and future stock market returns over different horizons. For all forecasting
horizons, the coeﬀicients on NTt, denoted as β, are consistently negative and significant,
indicating a negative relationship between noise trading intensity and future stock market
returns. Taking a one-month horizon (h = 1) as an example, β is −1.135% (Newey and West
23In Table B1, we also show that NT has no predictive power for future aggregate earnings or earnings
surprises, measured by ROA and SUE. These results are consistent with Black (1986), which emphasizes
that “noise is contrasted with information.”
22

(1987) t statistic = −2.33), suggesting that a one-standard-deviation increase in NT leads
to 1.135% decrease in excess market return in the subsequent month.
Similarly, when extended to longer forecasting horizons, such as the twelve-month horizon, the corresponding annualized excess market return decreases to −14.63% (t statistic =
−2.85), which suggests that the economic magnitude is substantial. Moreover, the adjusted
R2 value increases over time, increasing from 1.81% to 17.36%. This pattern is consistent
with recent studies indicating that noise trading plays an important role in China’s stock
market (Allen et al., 2024).
Overall, the results from in-sample regressions show that NT is a strong contrarian predictor of future market returns across different forecasting horizons. Hence, in the following
analysis, we report only the one-month-ahead results for brevity.
4.2
Out-of-sample analysis
In this subsection, we examine the forecasting power of NT for the stock market index
returns using an alternative approach—out-of-sample analysis. Specifically, we conduct the
following regression using a subsample that incorporates the information available up through
month t:
rt = α + βNTt−1 + εt,
(7)
where rt is the monthly stock market return of month t. NTt−1 is the lagged noise trading
intensity. On the basis of the regression coeﬀicient from Eq. (7), we estimate the forecast
value of the monthly stock market return for month t + 1.
We use the sample period from January 2000 to December 2005 as our first subsample;
therefore, the assessment of out-of-sample forecasts extends over the period from January
2006 to December 2022. For robustness, we adopt two methodologies for expanding our
subsample—the first involves progressively extending it by one month at each iteration (expanding approach), and the second employs a 10-year rolling window (rolling approach)
23

following Chen, Da, and Huang (2022).24
Following the literature (see, e.g., Chen, Da, and Huang, 2022; Dong et al., 2022; Jiang
et al., 2019), we assess the out-of-sample predictive accuracy using the R2
OS statistic introduced by Campbell and Thompson (2008) and Welch and Goyal (2008) and the mean
squared forecast error (MSFE)-adjusted statistic introduced by Clark and West (2007). The
latter metric gauges the proportional reduction in the MSFE for the predictive regression
forecast compared with the historical average benchmark. The R2
OS statistic is defined as
follows:
R2
OS = 1 −
∑T
τ=t+1(rτ −ˆrτ)2
∑T
τ=t+1(rτ −¯rτ)2,
(8)
where rτ represents the monthly excess market returns and ˆrτ represents the forecast value
of the excess market returns from Eq. (7). ¯rτ is the historical average of excess market
returns up to month τ −1, and T is the number of months over our sample period. R2
OS falls
within the range (−∞, 1]. A positive R2
OS value indicates that the forecast ˆrτ outperforms
the historical average ¯rτ in terms of the MSFE.
[Insert Table 5 about here]
Table 5 presents the out-of-sample test results. Over the one-month horizon, the R2
OS
statistic is positively significant at the 5% level (Expanding). Likewise, when a 10-year window rolling approach (rolling) is employed, the R2
OS is qualitatively similar to its expanding
approach.
In summary, the out-of-sample analysis results suggest that NT shows strong out-ofsample forecasting power for future stock market index returns. Thus, our out-of-sample
analysis results reinforce the in-sample analysis results, confirming the important role of
noise trading in affecting stock prices.
24We also assess the robustness of our results by conducting out-of-sample analyses using different rolling
windows, for example, 4- and 5-year rolling windows.
24

4.3
Testing channels
4.3.1
Channel 1: Limits-to-arbitrage channel
We interpret the predictability of NT as stemming from the limits-to-arbitrage channel
and the valuation diﬀiculty channel. We begin by testing the limits-to-arbitrage channel. The
behavioral literature posits that limits to arbitrage can amplify the effect of noise trading on
stock prices (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997), as the willingness of rational arbitrageurs to offset
the effects of noise trading is lower when arbitrage costs are high. Therefore, we expect the
impact of NT on stock prices to be stronger when arbitrageurs face high arbitrage costs.
Leading studies suggest that short-sale constraints are among the most important sources
of arbitrage costs, as they can impede the correction of mispricing (see, e.g., Jones and
Lamont, 2002; Lamont and Thaler, 2003; Nagel, 2005; Chu, Hirshleifer, and Ma, 2020).
China’s stock market has consistently faced tight short-sale constraints. However, in March
2010, these constraints were partially relaxed through the introduction of a pilot program for
margin trading and short selling (MTSS) launched by the Chinese government. The MTSS
program allowed short selling for a specific set of stocks included in a designated list, and the
scope of this pilot program was gradually expanded over time (Leippold, Wang, and Zhou,
2022).
We expect the relaxation of short-sale constraints to weaken the predictability of NT.
We rely on abnormal short interest (ASI) to proxy for short-sale constraints, as high ASI
reflects increased short selling activity due to low short-sale constraints.25 ASI is measured
by the difference between the market-level short interest (SI) in month t and its mean over
the past three months. Market-level SI is defined as the value-weighted average of firm-level
SI, which is the ratio of shorted shares to total tradable shares in month t. We compare
the predictability of NT during high- and low-ASI periods using the following time series
25We do not employ short interest (SI) because high SI can reflect either high or low short-sale constraints
(see, e.g., Boehme, Danielsen, and Sorescu, 2006; Bali et al., 2023).
25

regression:
rt+1 = α + β1NTt × HighASI
t
+ β2NTt + β3HighASI
t
+ Controls + ϵt+1,
(9)
where rt+1 is the monthly stock market excess return in month t + 1. NTt is our noise
trading measure. HighASI
t
is a dummy variable that equals one if ASI is above its time
series median value. The sample period is from June 2010 to December 2022 due to ASI
data constraints. Controls include various market and economic variables, as detailed in
Table 3. Our key variable of interest is the coeﬀicient of the interaction term, β1, which is
expected to be positive because short selling can correct mispricing, thereby weakening the
impact of NT on stock prices.
[Insert Table 6 about here]
The results from Table 6 are consistent with our conjecture. We observe a significant
positive β1 with t statistics larger than two, both with and without control variables. Specifically, in the full model (column (2)), β1 is 2.724 (t statistic = 2.42), indicating that the
predictive power of NT is significantly weaker following periods of high-level ASI. This finding suggests that increased arbitrage activity, as proxied by higher short selling, attenuates
the impact of noise trading on stock prices.26
Overall, in line with our hypothesis that the predictability of NT reflects mispricing, its
predictability appears to stem from the high arbitrage costs faced by arbitrageurs.
26Drawing on the MTSS, we also test how the relaxation of short-sale constraints affects the impact of NT
on stock prices by conducting the following panel data regression with firm and year-month fixed effects:
ri,t+1 = α + β1NTt × Shorti,t + β2Shorti,t + Controls + αi + αt + ϵi,t+1,
(10)
where ri,t+1 is stock i’s excess return in month t + 1. Shorti,t is a dummy variable that equals one if stock i
has been allowed to short in month t. Our key variable of interest is the coeﬀicient of the interaction term,
β1, which is expected to be positive because the allowance of short selling makes it easier for arbitragers to
correct mispricing, thereby weakening the impact of NT on stock prices. In Table B4, we observe a strongly
significant positive β1, with a t statistic larger than 9, indicating that the allowance of short selling weakens
the impact of NT on stock prices.
26

4.3.2
Channel 2: Valuation diﬀiculty
We next relate the predictability of NT to the valuation diﬀiculty channel. Kahneman
and Tversky (1973) and Kahneman (2003) suggest that there are systematic deviations
from rationality under uncertainty, which can amplify the impact of investor irrationality in
uncertain environments. This argument is empirically advanced by Birru and Young (2022),
who suggest that during times of valuation diﬀiculty, investors are more prone to rely on
subjective valuations. Consequently, we expect greater valuation diﬀiculty to lead to stronger
effects of noise trading on stock prices.
We consider Google’s withdrawal from China as a shock to valuation diﬀiculty. Google’s
exit from its search business in China in March 2010 resulted in a decreased capacity for
investors to gather and process information (Xu, Xuan, and Zheng, 2021; Wang, Yu, and
Zhang, 2023). This unique event provides an opportunity to assess how the reduction in
the amount of internet searching and the subsequent decrease in the degree of information
transparency of financial markets affect the predictability of NT. We test the valuation
diﬀiculty channel by conducting the following time series regression:
rt+1 = α + β1NTt × Googlet + β2NTt + β3Googlet + Controls + ϵt+1,
(11)
where rt+1 is the monthly stock market excess return in month t+1. NTt is our noise trading
measure. Googlet is a dummy variable that equals one after March 2010. We restrict our
sample to the period from January 2000 to February 2012, covering two years after Google’s
withdrawal, as Google’s existence had a more significant short-term effect, compared to longterm effect, on the information environment (Xu, Xuan, and Zheng, 2021). Controls include
various market and economic variables, as detailed in Table 3.
[Insert Table 7 about here]
We present the results in Table 7. In column (1), the coeﬀicient of the interaction term
27

NTt×Googlet, β1 is negatively significant at the 1% level, suggesting that Google’s exit from
China exacerbates the effect of NT on stock prices. This result holds when control variables
are included in column (2), with β1 remaining significantly negative.
Our analysis relies on the time variation in the changing information environment, which
overlaps with the time variation in the allowance of short selling. We address this problem
by examining the cross-sectional differences in information transparency across stocks. We
test the valuation diﬀiculty hypothesis by conducting the following difference-in-differences
panel regression with year-month fixed effects:
ri,t+1 = α + β1NTt × Googlet × Treati + β2Googlet × Treati
+ β3NTt × Treati + β4NTt × Googlet + β5NTt
+ β6Googlet + Controls + αi + ϵi,t+1,
(12)
where ri,t+1 is stock i’s excess return in month t + 1. Googlet is a dummy variable that
equals one after March 2010. Treati is a dummy variable that equals one for treatment firms.
Motivated by Xu, Xuan, and Zheng (2021), we define treatment firms as those whose stock
tickers have a higher search volume index than the sample median in February 2010.27 β1, as
the coeﬀicient of interest, captures the decrease in the amount of available information due
to Google’s existence and is expected to be negative. Consistent with the time series results
from Table 7, Table B5 shows that β1 is significantly negative.28 This finding suggests that
the reduction in information availability significantly amplifies the impact of noise trading
on stock prices.
Overall, our time series and cross-sectional evidence collectively support the notion that
low-level information availability amplifies the impact of noise trading on stock prices, con27The search volume indices from Google are downloaded using web crawler technology. We retain the
monthly search volume index values for a stock ticker exclusively after its adoption by a listed firm. Search
volume index data are available at [Google Trends] (http://www.google.com/trends).
28The results are similar if we define treatment firms as those whose stock tickers have a higher search
volume index than the sample median in 2009, following Xu, Xuan, and Zheng (2021).
28

firming the valuation diﬀiculty channel.
4.4
Robustness tests
4.4.1
Alternative market returns
In this subsection, we perform battery robustness tests for our main results. We first consider several alternative market index returns. Hirshleifer, Jian, and Zhang (2018) find that
stocks listed for less than 36 months with lucky listing codes tend to deliver lower returns.
Such a pattern arises due to the susceptibility of IPO stocks to numerological superstitions
associated with their listing codes. To rule out the possibility that numerological superstitions in stock listing codes may influence our findings, we exclude stocks listed for less than
36 months from our main analysis sample. Subsequently, we calculate the return on the
value-weighted portfolio comprising the remaining stocks as a new measure of market index
returns. Column (1) of Panel A in Table 8 shows that our results remain largely consistent
with the main result (column (0) of Table 8).
[Insert Table 8 about here]
As previously mentioned, our main analysis uses the value-weighted method to calculate
market index returns. However, the value-weighted method tends to overweight larger stocks.
To address this concern, we construct alternative market index returns using the equalweighted method and find that our results hold well (column (2) of Panel A in Table 8).
Moreover, another potential concern regarding our market index returns adopted in our main
analysis is the inclusion of the bottom 30% of small stocks, whose prices may be influenced by
shell-value contamination caused by IPO constraints (see, e.g., Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan,
2019). To address this concern, we calculate market index returns based on the largest 70%
of stocks using the value-weighted method and find that the results are also quantitatively
similar (column (3) of Panel A in Table 8).
29

4.4.2
Alternative measures of NT
We next construct NT using various alternative methods. First, as shown in Figure 1
and Table 2, NT displays a slight downward trend, implying a reduction in noise trading
activity. To remove the downward trend from NT, we follow Rapach, Ringgenberg, and
Zhou (2016) and Chen, Da, and Huang (2022) by regressing NT on the time index and
retaining the residual as the detrend NT. The first column of Panel B in Table 8 shows
that the coeﬀicients of the detrended NT are slightly larger than those in our main results,
indicating that the detrended NT performs better.
Second, we employ the equal-weighting method instead of the value-weighting method to
construct NT. As shown in column (2) of Panel B in Table 8, the equal-weighted construction
of NT can also negatively predict future market returns across various horizons.
More
importantly, the coeﬀicients of NT and R2 exhibit qualitative increases compared with their
counterparts in the baseline results presented in column (0) in Table 8. This observation
is consistent with noise-trading-induced mispricing theory, as mispricing is more prevalent
among small stocks than among large stocks (Baker and Wurgler, 2006). Hence, through
the equal-weighting method, we assign higher weights to small stocks than does the valueweighting method, enabling the better capturing of noise trading.
Third, Hirshleifer, Jian, and Zhang (2018) suggests that the numbers 6 and 9 are also
considered lucky because they sound similar to words with positive meanings, such as “prosper” and “longevity.” We therefore define the numbers 6, 8, and 9 as lucky numbers and
reconstruct NT using the same methodology as our original NT. Column (3) of Panel B
in Table 8 shows that the alternative lucky-number-based NT can also negatively predict
future market returns, although the coeﬀicient is relatively small.
Fourth, the forecasting power of NT may be influenced by price limit rules imposed by
the government. Specifically, the price limit rule sets a 10% maximum limit on a normal
stock’s daily return. For special treatment (ST) stocks, the rule imposes a 5% price limit
30

on their returns. Intuitively, these strict price limits can influence the frequency of certain
numbers and thus may affect our results. To evaluate whether the price limit rule affects our
results, we reduce our sample size by excluding ST stocks, which face severe price limits, and
use the remaining stocks to construct NT. In column (4) of Panel B in Table 8, we repeat
our main analysis using the NT constructed excluding ST stocks. The economic magnitudes
are similar to our main results in column (0) in Table 8.
Fifth, we assess the robustness of our findings by using 60-minute interval prices instead
of daily prices to construct NT. The data are obtained from RESSET. As reported in column
(5) of Panel B in Table 8, the coeﬀicient on NT is negative and significant at the 5% level.
Finally, we address the concern that transaction prices might differ from the prices intended by noise traders. We reconstruct NT using limit order prices derived from 60-minute
intraday data.29 As reported in column (6) of Panel B in Table 8, the results remain qualitatively similar.
4.4.3
Cross-sectional evidence
Thus far, our evidence suggests that owing to the presence of valuation diﬀiculty, intensive
noise trading causes transitory market overvaluation that subsequently reverts, resulting in
a negative relationship between NT and future market index returns. To reinforce this interpretation, we extend our analysis to the cross-section, examining whether the predictability
of NT is robust at this level. Specifically, we investigate whether overpriced stocks, which
typically constitute the short leg of anomalies, are more sensitive to NT than are other
stocks.
We consider 10 prominent anomalies identified in prior studies (Gu, Kang, and Xu,
2018; Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan, 2019). These include idiosyncratic volatility (IV OL),
volatility (V OL), the maximum daily return (MAX), the minimum daily return (MIN),
29RESSET provides the top five bid and ask prices.
31

the idiosyncratic maximum daily return (IMAX), the idiosyncratic minimum daily return
(IMIN), the earnings-to-price ratio (EP), the book-to-market-equity ratio (BM), twelvemonth turnover (TO12), and one-month turnover (TO). The detailed list and definitions of
these anomaly variables are reported in the Appendix A.
We first form monthly decile portfolios on the basis of these anomaly variables over the
past month. We then conduct the following time series regression to test how well NT can
predict anomaly returns:
ra
t+1 = αa + βaNTt + ϵa
t+1,
(13)
where ra
t+1 is the value-weighted excess return for each of the portfolios sorted by anomaly
variables in month t + 1. NTt is our noise trading measure. Table 9 reports the regression
coeﬀicients βa.
Consistent with our time series findings, βa for all decile portfolios are
significantly negative, especially for short legs. More importantly, βa values for the return
spread of all 10 anomalies are positive, suggesting that noise trading causes a stronger return
reversal pattern for the short leg of anomalies than for the long leg.
[Insert Table 9 about here]
[Insert Figure 3 about here]
To ensure the robustness of the abovementioned prediction, we also compare the performance of anomalies during high and low NT periods. Given that a high level of NT
indicates the relative prevalence of overpricing, we expect anomalies to be stronger when
NT is high than when it is low. We equally divide our sample into two subperiods depending on whether NT in each month is above or below its median. Figure 3 corroborates our
findings from Table 9, demonstrating that anomalies become stronger following high-NT
periods, as evidenced by a monotonically increasing relationship between anomaly variables
and stock returns.
In conclusion, our empirical results show that the negative predictability of NT is stronger
for overpriced stocks than for other stocks, reinforcing our interpretations that NT captures
32

the activity of noise traders and that this noise trading contributes to systematic mispricing
in the stock market.
4.4.4
Firm-level evidence
Finally, we examine the relationship between the firm-level noise trading measure and
the cross-section of stock returns. To the extent that NT negatively predicts stock market
index returns, it is plausible that firm-level NT may also exhibit similar predictive ability for
the cross-section of stock returns. We calculate firm-level NT (FNT) as the cross-sectional
average of NT p
i from Eq. (1), where NT p
i represents NT O
i , NT H
i , NT L
i , or NT C
i
for stock
i in month t, estimated using daily opening, high, low, and closing prices, respectively. All
components are introduced with a one-month lag, consistent with the construction of NT.
A higher FNT value indicates a greater degree of noise trading for a given stock.
As discussed earlier, noise trading is associated with systematic mispricing in stock markets.
Accordingly, the relationship between noise trading and stock returns at both the
aggregate and firm levels can be interpreted as evidence of such mispricing. We therefore
posit that the predictability of FNT arises from the commonality of noise trading across
stocks. Specifically, the systematic component of firm-level NT, driven by market-wide noise
trading, should exhibit negative predictive power for cross-sectional stock returns, whereas
the residual component is expected to have negligible forecasting ability.30
To test this hypothesis, we decompose FNT into systematic and residual components by
estimating the following regression:
FNT i,t = α + β1NTt + β2NTt−1 + ϵt,
(14)
where FNT i,t is the firm-level noise trading measure for stock i in month t. NTt is our
30In fact, we find no evidence that FNT can predict cross-sectional stock returns, largely because the
residual component dominates the measure and obscures the influence of the systematic component.
33

noise trading measure, and NTt−1 is included to account for nonsynchronous trading, following Dimson (1979). The regression is estimated using a 48-month rolling window, with a
minimum of 24 observations. FNT S is defined as the fitted or systematic component, and
FNT R is defined as the residual component, both obtained from the most recent month of
the regression.
We first test our hypothesis by conducting Fama-Macbeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions. Following the recommendation of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2020), we use market capitalization as weights for the regressions. The regression is specified as follows:
ri,t+1 = α + β1FNT S
t + β2FNT R
t + Controls + ϵi,t+1,
(15)
where ri,t+1 is stock i’s excess return in month t+1. FNT S
t is systematic component of FNT.
FNT R
t is residual component of FNT. Controls is a vector of firm-level characteristics for
stock i in month t. We run the model across all stocks for every month and then average the
coeﬀicients on FNT S
t over time to calculate the final estimate of β1. The standard deviation
of the coeﬀicients is adjusted using the Newey–West estimator with twelve lags. Under our
maintained hypothesis, the coeﬀicient on FNT S, β1, is expected to be negative, whereas the
coeﬀicient on FNT R, β2, should be close to zero (exhibit little forecasting power).
[Insert Table 10 about here]
The results are presented in Table 10. As conjectured, we observe that the coeﬀicients
on FNT S are consistently negative and statistically significant at the 5% or 1% level across
all specifications. In contrast, FNT R exhibits no statistically significant association with
future stock returns.
For robustness, we supplement the analysis with portfolio sorts evidence. In particular,
at the beginning of each month, we sort stocks into three groups based on their FNT S or
FNT R. We partition the stocks based on the top and bottom deciles to form low, medium,
34

and high portfolios, respectively. The low portfolio corresponds to the bottom decile, the high
portfolio corresponds to the top decile, and the medium portfolio consists of the remaining
80% of stocks. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly. We compute excess returns as the valueweighted returns minus the risk-free rate. Panel A of Table B6 shows that excess returns
decline monotonically from the low to high FNT S portfolios. The average value-weighted
low-minus-high (L −H) spread is 0.342% per month (t statistic = 2.27). By contrast, the L
−H spread based on FNT R is statistically insignificant. Panel B reports the L −H alphas
from the CAPM, CH3, and CH4 factor models (Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan, 2019),31 which
confirm the robustness of the results.
Overall, the combined evidence from both Fama-MacBeth regressions and portfolio sorts
suggests that the systematic component of firm-level NT provides economically and statistically significant forecasting power for the cross-section of stock returns, consistent with our
hypothesis.
5
Alternative explanations
5.1
Fundamentals
In this section, we investigate a range of alternative explanations for our main findings
and demonstrate that none of them can account for the predictability of our noise trading
measure. As an initial check, we examine whether our findings can be explained by commonly
used market return predictors by conducting bivariate regressions and adding these control
variables one at a time.
[Insert Table 11 about here]
Table 11 presents the in-sample bivariate regression results, comparing the predictability
31The factor model data are obtained from https://en.mingshiim.com/database.
35

of NT with that of each control variable. The set of control variables includes the dividendto-price ratio (DP), dividend yield (DY ), the earnings-to-price ratio (EP), the dividendto-payout ratio (DE), the book-to-market ratio (BM), turnover (TO), return volatility
(RV OL), economic policy uncertainty (EPU), money supply (MS), and inflation (INFL).
These variables are specifically designed to capture fundamental factors influencing stock
performance.
As evident from Table 11, none of the control variables demonstrate significant forecasting
power for a one-month horizon. The coeﬀicients for the control variables are nonsignificant
across all specifications, with t statistics ranging from −1.58 to 1.56.
In contrast, NT
consistently exhibits a negative and significant relationship with future market returns, even
after control variables are included. The coeﬀicients for NT range from −0.938 to −1.366,
with t statistics between −2.00 and −2.66, indicating significance at the 5% and 1% levels,
respectively .
These results strongly support the unique predictive ability of our noise trading measure,
demonstrating that its forecasting power cannot be attributed to or subsumed by these wellestablished predictors of market returns. In untabulated analysis, we also include all control
variables in the regressions over different forecasting horizons and confirm that our results
hold well, further reinforcing the robustness of our findings.32
5.2
Placebo tests using the B-share market
Our conjecture is that the negative relationship between NT and future stock market
index returns reflects the systematic mispricing caused by noise trading. However, since
noise trading can be endogenous, one may conjecture that there are confounding effects
32The untabulated results suggest that the predictability of NT is robust when we include retail investor
activity, proxied by RIO, or existing noise trading measures, such as market-level mutual fund holdings and
market-level small trades. Market-level small trades are measured as the value-weighted average of firm-level
small trading, which is defined as the ratio of small buy and sell orders (those less than RMB 50,000) to
total stock trading volume. The data are obtained from CSMAR.
36

from other factors that can affect stock returns for reasons unrelated to noise trading. We
aim to mitigate this concern by exploiting a unique feature of China’s stock market—the
coexistence of the A- and B-share markets, which share the same fundamentals but feature
different noise trader compositions. Consequently, their return predictability is driven by
distinct mechanisms. Specifically, return predictability in the A-share market is more likely
to arise from noise trading, whereas that in the B-share market is more likely attributable to
informed trading (see, e.g., Mei, Scheinkman, and Xiong, 2009; Chui, Subrahmanyam, and
Titman, 2022; Allen et al., 2024).
Our natural experiments are motivated by Chui, Subrahmanyam, and Titman (2022),
who find variations in price momentum and short-term return reversal between China’s
A- and B-share markets. Their work suggests that these patterns are driven primarily by
distinct investor clienteles, with a greater prevalence of noise traders in the A-share market
and a lower presence of noise traders in the B-share market. Such patterns exist because
institutional constraints prevent A-share (B-share) traders from investing in the B-share (Ashare) market. In this sense, the B-share market provides a unique setting to assess how the
exogenous variation in the prevalence of noise traders affects the predictability of NT.
We conduct two placebo tests to assess the predictability of NT using the B-share market.
First, we evaluate whether NT can predict future B-share market returns. For clarity, in this
subsection, we refer to NT as A-share NT because it measures noise trading activity within
the A-share market. Given that A-share NT identifies noise trading activity in the A-share
market and that noise traders from the A-share market are prohibited from investing in
the B-share market, we postulate that there should be no significant association between Ashare NT and future B-share market returns if our mechanism is responsible for the observed
findings. However, if the predictability of NT is driven by other factors unrelated to noise
trading, then A-share NT should also be a significant predictor of B-share market returns.
To test this hypothesis, we conduct univariate regression to assess the predictability of
A-share NT on B-share market returns and present the results in the first column of Table 12
37

(labeled A-share NT). The regression results indicate that A-share NT loses its predictive
power for B-share market returns.
[Insert Table 12 about here]
Second, we conduct another placebo test by constructing a placebo, NT, by replacing the
A-share sample with the B-share sample and examining its relationship with future B-share
market index returns. We refer to this placebo NT as B-share NT, as it measures noise
trading activity within the B-share market. As the predictability of NT originates from
noise trading, our noise trading measure is expected to have marginal predictability in the
market with a small fraction of noise traders.33 In other words, there should be a weak or
even nonsignificant negative relationship between the B-share-constructed NT and future
B-share market returns.
We assess the predictability of B-share NT on B-share market returns by replicating our
main univariate analysis using the B-share market. The results of this analysis are reported
in the second column of Table 12 (labeled B-share NT). As expected, the coeﬀicient for
B-share NT is nonsignificant, confirming that NT has no effect on the B-share market.
Collectively, these findings from the B-share market lend further support to the notion that
the predictability of NT reflects the systematic mispricing caused by noise trading.
In
untabulated results, we also construct a pseudo NT measure based on the frequency of the
number 7, which is unrelated to superstition. We find that this pseudo NT measure does
not predict future market returns.
5.3
Investor sentiment
The negative relationship between NT and future market index returns is robust even
after controlling for the effect of investor sentiment (Baker and Wurgler, 2006). Since NT
33Notably, because short selling is restricted in the B-share market, eﬀicient arbitrage against mispricing
is impeded.
38

is constructed on the basis of the frequency of lucky numbers 8 and 4, and because the
sentiment associated with the number 8 is positive while that associated with the number 4
is negative in Chinese culture, it is tempting to interpret NT as a sentiment measure. To
address this concern, we investigate whether the predictability of NT can be attributed to
sentiment by comparing the forecasting power of NT for stock market returns against the
standard investor sentiment measures used in the literature.
Following Yi and Ning (2009) and Chen et al. (2022), we adopt six popular investor
sentiment measures in China’s stock market. Specifically, we use the consumer confidence
index (CCI), the discount rate of closed-end funds (CEFD), the number of IPO stocks
(IPON), the return on IPO stocks (IPOR), the number of new investors (NIA), and the
China version sentiment index of Baker and Wurgler (2006) BW, calculated as a composite
of all five variables plus turnover.34
All sentiment measures are standardized to have a
mean of zero and unit standard deviation, thereby allowing their regression coeﬀicients to be
directly compared. We conduct the same bivariate regression analysis to determine whether
NT remains significant after sentiment measures are considered.
[Insert Table 13 about here]
We present the results in Table 13. Consistent with the results presented in Table 4,
the coeﬀicients of NT are significantly negative across all specifications. In sharp contrast,
although most coeﬀicients of the sentiment measures are negative, they are largely nonsignificant, with the exception of IPON. This finding suggests that these sentiment measures
have limited predictive power for future market returns in China’s stock market. More importantly, the coeﬀicients of NT maintain a magnitude similar to its univariate regression
results when other sentiment measures are included. This finding indicates that NT is a
robust contrarian predictor of market index returns and that its predictive power cannot be
explained by investor sentiment.35
34We exclude turnover because we already control for it in Table 11.
35We also find that NT is not significantly related to sentiment measures.
39

5.4
The round number effect
The finding that NT can negatively predicts market index returns may be due to the
round number effect, which arises from retail investors’ preference for round numbers when
submitting limit orders. For example, Kuo, Lin, and Zhao (2015) show that retail investors
with more limit orders submitted at round numbers tend to lose money. In this context, the
round number heuristic, rather than numerological superstition, could drive the predictive
power of NT.
To alleviate this concern, we investigate whether the predictability of NT stems from the
round number effect by comparing the predictive power of NT against the round number
ratio (RNR). In particular, we construct RNR in a manner similar to NT, but we calculate
the frequency of round-number prices rather than the difference between the frequencies of
lucky and unlucky numbers. That is, the proportion of transaction prices ending in the digit
0. We then employ the same bivariate regression analysis to compare the predictability of
NT and RNR.
The results are presented in Table B8. As an initial check, we test the predictability of
RNR using a univariate regression of future stock market returns on RNR. We observe a
negative relationship between RNR and future market returns, confirming the existence of
a round number effect. However, this relationship becomes statistically insignificant once
NT is included in the regression. In sharp contrast, NT remains a significant predictor. We
further investigate the determinants of RNR by decomposing it into two components via
a regression of RNR on NT. RNRF is the fitted component and RNRR is the residual
component. We find that the coeﬀicient on RNRF is significant, whereas the coeﬀicient on
RNRR is insignificant. Overall, these results suggest that the predictive power of NT is
unlikely to be explained by the round number effect.
40

5.5
Investor attention
One may question our mechanism as follows: Does the presence of lucky (or unlucky)
numbers in stock prices influence investors’ behavior toward stocks rather than reflecting
genuine noise trading activity? For instance, Hirshleifer, Jian, and Zhang (2018) suggest
that investors tend to be attracted to stocks with more lucky numbers in their listing codes
than to those with fewer lucky numbers. Consequently, one alternative mechanism is that
the presence of lucky numbers in stock prices makes these stocks more salient to investors;
thus, NT is a measure of noise traders’ attention rather than of their activity.
To address this concern, we construct alternative NT measures by focusing on the last
several digits of stock prices. Specifically, we focus on the last one to three digits. According
to the psychology literature (see, e.g., Tang, 2020), these digits are less visible to investors
and are therefore less likely to attract their attention, but they still reflect noise trading
activity.
Table B7 presents the results of univariate regressions using these alternative NT measures to predict future stock market returns. Across all specifications, we observe a consistent
negative relationship between these alternative NT measures and future market returns. The
coeﬀicient on NT remains significant, ranging from −1.340% (t statistic = −2.43) when the
last three digits are used to −0.973% (t statistic = −1.73) when only the last digit is used.
This pattern suggests that while the predictive power is strongest when more digits are incorporated, the effect persists even when the model focuses on the least significant digit of
stock prices. Hence, these findings reinforce our interpretation of the predictability of NT,
suggesting that it captures noise trading activity instead of attracting investor attention.
Finally, to rule out the investor attention explanation, we also construct a pseudo NT
measure by substituting stock prices with stock returns. This measure is likely to capture
investor attention but is not necessarily related to noise trading, as investors cannot control
the numbers in stock returns. As reported in the last column of Table B7, this pseudo NT
41

measure loses its predictability, thereby ruling out the investor attention explanation.
6
Conclusions
In this study, we explore how noise trading affects market-wide stock returns. Theoretical
studies in the literature conjecture that noise trading can push asset prices away from their
fundamental values, thus leading to mispricing; however, most empirical studies are limited
to the stock level.
Additionally, identifying such effects remains an empirical challenge
because of the diﬀiculty inherent in directly observing noise trading.
Drawing on the observation that individuals lacking information tend to rely on superstition as a shield against a lack of information, we exploit Chinese numerological superstition
to propose a novel transaction-price-based noise trading (NT) measure, defined as the difference between the frequencies of occurrence of the numbers 8 and 4 in stock prices, which
are considered lucky and unlucky, respectively, in Chinese culture.
We validate NT through various tests, demonstrating its effectiveness in capturing noise
trading activity. We also show that NT is a strong contrarian predictor of China’s stock
market index returns.
The predictability of NT persists for at least one year before it
diminishes and is robust to out-of-sample analysis, firm-level NT analysis, and a battery
of robustness checks.
Furthermore, we find that the negative relationship between NT
and future market index returns is stronger when the market faces high arbitrage costs
and low-level information availability, which is consistent with the limits-to-arbitrage and
valuation diﬀiculty channels. In addition, the predictability of NT is unlikely to be driven
by fundamentals, sentiment, or investor attention to lucky numbers.
Overall, our findings support the long-standing theoretical prediction that noise trading
leads to systematic mispricing.
42

References
Aboody, D., O. Even-Tov, R. Lehavy, and B. Trueman. 2018. Overnight returns and firmspecific investor sentiment. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53:485–505.
Addoum, J. M., and A. Kumar. 2016. Political sentiment and predictable returns. The
Review of Financial Studies 29:3471–518.
Allen, F., J. Qian, C. Shan, and J. L. Zhu. 2024. Dissecting the long-term performance of
the chinese stock market. The Journal of Finance 79:993–1054.
Arnott, R. D., J. C. Hsu, J. Liu, and H. Markowitz. 2015. Can noise create the size and
value effects? Management Science 61:2569–79.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler. 2006. Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns.
The Journal of Finance 61:1645–80.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis. 2016. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131:1593–636.
Bali, T. G., N. Cakici, and R. F. Whitelaw. 2011. Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the
cross-section of expected returns. Journal of Financial Economics 99:427–46.
Bali, T. G., B. T. Kelly, M. Mörke, and J. Rahman. 2023. Machine forecast disagreement .
Barber, B. M., X. Huang, T. Odean, and C. Schwarz. 2022. Attention-induced trading and
returns: Evidence from robinhood users. The Journal of Finance 77:3141–90.
Barber, B. M., Y.-T. Lee, Y.-J. Liu, and T. Odean. 2009. Just how much do individual
investors lose by trading? The Review of Financial Studies 22:609–32.
Barber, B. M., and T. Odean. 2000. Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
stock investment performance of individual investors. The Journal of Finance 55:773–806.
43

———. 2008. All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying behavior of
individual and institutional investors. The Review of Financial Studies 21:785–818.
Barber, B. M., T. Odean, and N. Zhu. 2008. Do retail trades move markets? The Review of
Financial Studies 22:151–86.
Barrot, J.-N., R. Kaniel, and D. Sraer. 2016. Are retail traders compensated for providing
liquidity? Journal of Financial Economics 120:146–68.
Bhattacharya, U., W.-Y. Kuo, T.-C. Lin, and J. Zhao. 2018. Do superstitious traders lose
money? Management Science 64:3772–91.
Birru, J., and T. Young. 2022. Sentiment and uncertainty. Journal of Financial Economics
146:1148–69.
Black, F. 1986. Noise. The Journal of Finance 41.
Bloomfield, R., M. O’hara, and G. Saar. 2009.
How noise trading affects markets: An
experimental analysis. The Review of Financial Studies 22:2275–302.
Boehme, R. D., B. R. Danielsen, and S. M. Sorescu. 2006. Short-sale constraints, differences
of opinion, and overvaluation. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 41:455–87.
Boehmer, E., C. M. Jones, X. Zhang, and X. Zhang. 2021. Tracking retail investor activity.
The Journal of Finance 76:2249–305.
Bogousslavsky, V., V. Fos, and D. Muravyev. 2024. Informed trading intensity. The Journal
of Finance 79:903–48.
Brunnermeier, M. K., M. Sockin, and W. Xiong. 2022.
China’s model of managing the
financial system. The Review of Economic Studies 89:3115–53.
44

Cai, J., J. He, W. Jiang, and W. Xiong. 2021. The whack-a-mole game: Tobin taxes and
trading frenzy. The Review of Financial Studies 34:5723–55.
Campbell, J. Y., and S. B. Thompson. 2008. Predicting excess stock returns out of sample:
Can anything beat the historical average? The Review of Financial Studies 21:1509–31.
Carpenter, J. N., F. Lu, and R. F. Whitelaw. 2021. The real value of china’s stock market.
Journal of Financial Economics 139:679–96.
Cassella, S., and H. Gulen. 2019. Belief-based equity market sentiment. Available at SSRN
3123083 .
Chen, T., Z. Gao, J. He, W. Jiang, and W. Xiong. 2019. Daily price limits and destructive
market behavior. Journal of Econometrics 208:249–64.
Chen, X., L. An, J. Yu, and Z. Wang. 2022. Attention spillover in asset pricing. Available
at SSRN 3716918 .
Chen, Y., Z. Da, and D. Huang. 2022. Short selling eﬀiciency. Journal of Financial Economics
145:387–408.
Chu, Y., D. Hirshleifer, and L. Ma. 2020. The causal effect of limits to arbitrage on asset
pricing anomalies. The Journal of Finance 75:2631–72.
Chui, A. C., A. Subrahmanyam, and S. Titman. 2022. Momentum, reversals, and investor
clientele. Review of Finance 26:217–55.
Clark, T. E., and K. D. West. 2007. Approximately normal tests for equal predictive accuracy
in nested models. Journal of Econometrics 138:291–311.
Cochrane, J. H. 2008. The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability. The
Review of Financial Studies 21:1533–75.
45

Coval, J., and E. Stafford. 2007. Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets. Journal
of Financial Economics 86:479–512.
Cready, W., A. Kumas, and M. Subasi. 2014. Are trade size-based inferences about traders
reliable?
evidence from institutional earnings-related trading.
Journal of Accounting
Research 52:877–909.
Dalvi, M., P. Deuskar, L. R. Glosten, and R. Jagannathan. 2023. Day traders, noise, and
cost of immediacy. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
De Long, J., and A. Shleifer. 1991. The survival of noise traders in financial markets. Journal
of Business 64:1–19.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann. 1989.
The size and
incidence of the losses from noise trading. The Journal of Finance 44:681–96.
———. 1990. Noise trader risk in financial markets. Journal of Political Economy 98:703–38.
Derrien, F., A. Kecskés, and D. Thesmar. 2013. Investor horizons and corporate policies.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48:1755–80.
Dessaint, O., T. Foucault, L. Frésard, and A. Matray. 2019. Noisy stock prices and corporate
investment. The Review of Financial Studies 32:2625–72.
Dimson, E. 1979. Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading. Journal
of Financial Economics 7:197–226.
Dong, X., Y. Li, D. E. Rapach, and G. Zhou. 2022. Anomalies and the expected market
return. The Journal of Finance 77:639–81.
Dorn, D., G. Huberman, and P. Sengmueller. 2008. Correlated trading and returns. The
Journal of Finance 63:885–920.
46

Eaton, G. W., T. C. Green, B. S. Roseman, and Y. Wu. 2022. Retail trader sophistication and
stock market quality: Evidence from brokerage outages. Journal of Financial Economics
146:502–28.
Edmans, A., I. Goldstein, and W. Jiang. 2012. The real effects of financial markets: The
impact of prices on takeovers. The Journal of Finance 67:933–71.
Engelberg, J., R. D. McLean, and J. Pontiff. 2020. Analysts and anomalies. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 69:101249–.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French. 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33:3–56.
Fama, E. F., and J. D. MacBeth. 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests.
Journal of Political Economy 81:607–36.
Fisman, R., W. Huang, B. Ning, Y. Pan, J. Qiu, and Y. Wang. 2023. Superstition and risk
taking: Evidence from “zodiac year” beliefs in china. Management Science 69:5174–88.
Foucault, T., D. Sraer, and D. J. Thesmar. 2011. Individual investors and volatility. The
Journal of Finance 66:1369–406.
Gao, Z., H. Ren, and B. Zhang. 2020. Googling investor sentiment around the world. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 55:549–80.
Grinblatt, M., and B. Han. 2005.
Prospect theory, mental accounting, and momentum.
Journal of Financial Economics 78:311–39.
Grossman, S. J., and M. H. Miller. 1988. Liquidity and market structure. the Journal of
Finance 43:617–33.
Gu, M., W. Kang, and B. Xu. 2018. Limits of arbitrage and idiosyncratic volatility: Evidence
from china stock market. Journal of Banking & Finance 86:240–58.
47

Han, B., and A. Kumar. 2013.
Speculative retail trading and asset prices.
Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48:377–404.
Hasbrouck, J. 1988.
Trades, quotes, inventories, and information.
Journal of Financial
Economics 22:229–52.
———. 1991a. Measuring the information content of stock trades. The Journal of Finance
46:179–207.
———. 1991b. The summary informativeness of stock trades: An econometric analysis. The
Review of Financial Studies 4:571–95.
He, J., H. Liu, T. F. Sing, C. Song, and W.-K. Wong. 2020.
Superstition, conspicuous
spending, and housing market: Evidence from singapore. Management Science 66:783–
804.
Henderson, B. J., N. D. Pearson, and L. Wang. 2023. Retail derivatives and sentiment: A
sentiment measure constructed from issuances of retail structured equity products. The
Journal of Finance 78:2365–407.
Hirshleifer, D., M. Jian, and H. Zhang. 2018. Superstition and financial decision making.
Management Science 64:235–52.
Hou, K., C. Xue, and L. Zhang. 2020. Replicating anomalies. Review of Financial Studies
33.
Hvidkjaer, S. 2008.
Small trades and the cross-section of stock returns.
The Review of
Financial Studies 21:1123–51.
Jiang, F., J. Lee, X. Martin, and G. Zhou. 2019. Manager sentiment and stock returns.
Journal of Financial Economics 132:126–49.
48

Jones, C. M., and O. A. Lamont. 2002. Short-sale constraints and stock returns. Journal of
Financial Economics 66:207–39.
Jones, C. M., D. Shi, X. Zhang, and X. Zhang. 2023. Understanding retail investors: evidence
from china. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis .
Kahneman, D. 2003. Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology for behavioral economics.
American Economic Review 93:1449–75.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1973. On the psychology of prediction. Psychological Review
80:237–.
Kaniel, R., S. Liu, G. Saar, and S. Titman. 2012. Individual investor trading and return
patterns around earnings announcements. The Journal of Finance 67:639–80.
Kaniel, R., G. Saar, and S. Titman. 2008. Individual investor trading and stock returns.
The Journal of Finance 63:273–310.
Kelley, E. K., and P. C. Tetlock. 2013. How wise are crowds? insights from retail orders and
stock returns. The Journal of Finance 68:1229–65.
———. 2017. Retail short selling and stock prices. The Review of Financial Studies 30:801–
34.
Keynes, J. M. 1936. The general theory of employment terest and money. Macmillan and
Company.
Kim, O., and R. E. Verrecchia. 1994. Market liquidity and volume around earnings announcements. Journal of Accounting and Economics 17:41–67.
Kumar, A., and C. M. Lee. 2006. Retail investor sentiment and return comovements. The
Journal of Finance 61:2451–86.
49

Kuo, W.-Y., T.-C. Lin, and J. Zhao. 2015. Cognitive limitation and investment performance:
Evidence from limit order clustering. The Review of Financial Studies 28:838–75.
Kyle, A. S. 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society 1315–35.
Lamont, O. A., and R. H. Thaler. 2003. Can the market add and subtract? mispricing in
tech stock carve-outs. Journal of Political Economy 111:227–68.
Lee, C. M., and B. Radhakrishna. 2000. Inferring investor behavior: Evidence from torq
data. Journal of Financial Markets 3:83–111.
Leippold, M., Q. Wang, and W. Zhou. 2022. Machine learning in the chinese stock market.
Journal of Financial Economics 145:64–82.
Li, S., J. Wu, X. Zhang, and X. Zhang. 2023. Tracking retail and institutional investors
activity in china. PBCSF-NIFR Research Paper .
Liu, J., R. F. Stambaugh, and Y. Yuan. 2019. Size and value in china. Journal of Financial
Economics 134:48–69.
Lo, A. W. 2004. The adaptive markets hypothesis. The Journal of Portfolio Management
30:15–29.
Lou, D. 2012. A flow-based explanation for return predictability. The Review of Financial
Studies 25:3457–89.
Lou, X., and A. Y. Wang. 2018. Flow-induced trading pressure and corporate investment.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53:171–201.
Malinowski, B. 1948. Magic, science and religion: And other essays, by bronislaw malinowski.
selected, and with an introduction by robert redfield. Beacon Press.
50

Mei, J., J. A. Scheinkman, and W. Xiong. 2009.
Speculative trading and stock prices:
Evidence from chinese ab share premia. Annals of Economics and Finance 10:225–55.
Nagel, S. 2005. Short sales, institutional investors and the cross-section of stock returns.
Journal of Financial Economics 78:277–309.
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West. 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55:703–.
Odean, T. 1999. Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89:1279–98.
Peress, J., and D. Schmidt. 2020. Glued to the tv: Distracted noise traders and stock market
liquidity. The Journal of Finance 75:1083–133.
Phillips, G. M., and A. Zhdanov. 2013. R&d and the incentives from merger and acquisition
activity. The Review of Financial Studies 26:34–78.
Rapach, D. E., M. C. Ringgenberg, and G. Zhou. 2016. Short interest and aggregate stock
returns. Journal of Financial Economics 121:46–65.
Shleifer, A., and L. H. Summers. 1990. The noise trader approach to finance. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 4:19–33.
Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny. 1997. The limits of arbitrage. The Journal of Finance
52:35–55.
Skinner, B. F. 1992. ” superstition” in the pigeon. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 121:273–.
Stambaugh, R. F. 2014. Presidential address: Investment noise and trends. The Journal of
Finance 69:1415–53.
51

Tang, J. 2020. The left-digit effect in price and date perception. Human Behavior and Brain
1:64–6.
Torgler, B. 2007. Determinants of superstition. The Journal of Socio-Economics 36:713–33.
Tsang, E. W. 2004. Toward a scientific inquiry into superstitious business decision-making.
Organization Studies 25:923–46.
Wang, K., X. Yu, and B. Zhang. 2023. Panda games: corporate disclosure in the eclipse of
search. Management Science 69:3263–84.
Wardlaw, M. 2020. Measuring mutual fund flow pressure as shock to stock returns. The
Journal of Finance 75:3221–43.
Welch, I. 2022. The wisdom of the robinhood crowd. The Journal of Finance 77:1489–527.
Welch, I., and A. Goyal. 2008. A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity
premium prediction. The Review of Financial Studies 21:1455–508.
Xu, Y., Y. Xuan, and G. Zheng. 2021. Internet searching and stock price crash risk: Evidence
from a quasi-natural experiment. Journal of Financial Economics 141:255–75.
Yi, Z., and M. Ning. 2009.
Measuring investor sentiment in china’s stock market: The
construction of cicsi. Journal of Financial Research (in Chinese) 174–84.
Zhang, J., and H. Du. 2022. Superstition everywhere. Available at SSRN 4051934 .
52

Figure 1. Noise trading measure
In this figure, we plot our noise trading measure (NT) over time, represented by the black solid line using
the scale on the left vertical axis. The red dotted line represents the trend of NT. The green dashed line,
which uses the scale on the right vertical axis, represents retail investor ownership. The sample period
spans from January 2000 to December 2022.
53

2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2
1
0
1
2
NT O
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2
1
0
1
2
NT H
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2
1
0
1
2
NT L
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2
1
0
1
2
NT C
Figure 2. Time series of individual noise trading measures
In this figure, we plot individual noise trading measures over time. We first define a stock’s noise trading
(NT p
i ) as the difference between the frequencies of occurrence of the numbers 8 and 4 in the stock’s
daily opening, highest, lowest, and closing prices. The market-level individual noise trading measure
(NT p) is then defined as the value-weighted average of stock-specific NT p
i . NT O, NT H, NT L, and NT C
correspond to the daily opening, highest, lowest, and closing prices, respectively. We then standardize
all NT measures to have a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation. The sample period spans from
January 2000 to December 2022.
54

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
2
0
2
IVOL
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
2
0
2
VOL
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
0
2
MAX
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
0
2
MIN
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
2
0
2
IMAX
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
2
0
2
IMIN
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
0
2
EP
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
0
2
BM
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
0
2
TO12
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
2
0
2
TO
Figure 3. Anomalies during high- and low-NT periods
In this figure, we plot the returns of decile portfolios sorted by the value of each anomaly variable.
Detailed descriptions of these anomalies are provided in the Appendix A. Each month, we sort stocks
by each anomaly variable into decile portfolios and calculate the value-weighted excess return.
We
then calculate the time series average returns for each portfolio following high- and low-NT periods,
respectively. The sample period spans from January 2000 to December 2022.
55

Table 1. Summary statistics
This table presents NT and other variables in time series. NT is our noise trading measure. The set of control variables
includes the dividend-to-price ratio (DP), dividend yield (DY ), earnings-to-price ratio (EP), dividend-to-payout ratio
(DE), book-to-market ratio (BM), turnover (TO), return volatility (RV OL), economic policy uncertainty (EPU),
money supply (MS), and inflation (INFL). Detailed definitions and lists of these control variables are reported in
the Appendix A. All variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and unit standard deviation. Panel A presents
the summary statistics, and Panel B presents the correlations of all variables. The sample period spans from January
2000 to December 2022.
Median
Min.
25th
75th
Max.
Skew
Kurt
AR1
Panel A: Summary statistics
NT
−0.171
−2.159
−0.742
0.727
2.326
0.390
−0.647
0.872
DP
−0.357
−1.168
−0.652
0.239
3.650
1.815
2.983
0.983
DY
−0.366
−1.152
−0.658
0.234
3.648
1.815
2.969
0.983
EP
−0.317
−1.086
−0.637
0.192
4.101
1.983
4.192
0.976
DE
−0.152
−2.025
−0.458
0.421
3.279
0.736
0.696
0.980
BM
−0.253
−1.310
−0.620
0.161
3.405
1.622
2.194
0.974
TO
−0.215
−1.388
−0.729
0.477
4.227
1.434
3.053
0.805
RV OL
−0.288
−1.412
−0.647
0.353
3.861
1.549
2.204
0.661
EPU
−0.461
−1.013
−0.686
0.271
2.915
1.347
0.650
0.924
MS
−0.271
−1.141
−0.921
0.817
2.233
0.584
−0.944
0.988
INFL
−0.102
−1.772
−0.610
0.444
2.236
0.450
−0.004
0.927
Panel B: Correlation matrix
NT
DP
DY
EP
DE
BM
TO
RV OL
EPU
MS
INFL
NT
1.000
DP
−0.192
1.000
DY
−0.197
0.984
1.000
EP
−0.127
0.886
0.861
1.000
DE
−0.011
0.167
0.187
−0.279
1.000
BM
−0.170
0.969
0.940
0.874
0.132
1.000
TO
−0.255
−0.347
−0.294
−0.366
0.020
−0.367
1.000
RV OL
0.068
0.010
0.001
0.113
−0.232
0.059
0.285
1.000
EPU
−0.189
−0.298
−0.309
−0.261
−0.090
−0.196
0.253
−0.181
1.000
MS
−0.353
−0.420
−0.426
−0.392
−0.099
−0.353
0.457
−0.236
0.830
1.000
INFL
−0.206
−0.102
−0.125
−0.056
−0.222
0.006
−0.038
0.243
0.023
0.013
1.000
56

Table 2. Validation of NT
This table presents validation tests of NT.
Panel A presents time-series regressions of NT on RIO and Time with control variables. NT is our noise
trading measure. RIO is the six-month moving average of the value-weighted average of firm-level retail
investor ownership, defined as one minus institutional ownership. Time is the time variable that is equal
to one for the first month of our sample and increases by one each subsequent month. Control variables
include the dividend-to-price ratio (DP), dividend yield (DY ), earnings-to-price ratio (EP), dividendto-payout ratio (DE), book-to-market ratio (BM), turnover (TO), return volatility (RV OL), economic
policy uncertainty (EPU), money supply (MS), and inflation (INFL). All regression coeﬀicients are
reported in percentages. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
The sample period is from January 2000 to December 2022.
Panel B presents the effect of the Wind outage on NT using the following regression:
NT i,d,p = α + β1Windd,p + Controls + αi + αdow + αw + αm + ϵi,d,p,
where i, d, and p indicate firm, date, and 60-minute interval, respectively. NT i,d,p is defined as the
difference in the frequency of digits 8 and 4 in prices during interval p of day d. Windd,p is an indicator
variable equal to one during the Wind outage on January 8, 2024, and zero otherwise. Controls include
the 60-minute interval stock price (Price), the number of shares traded during the 60-minute interval
(V olume), and the bid-ask spread across all quotes during the 60-minute interval (Spread).
∗, ∗∗, and
∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from December
24, 2023 to January 23, 2024 (15 days before and after January 8, 2024). The data are obtained from
the RESSET database.
Panel A: Relation with retail ownership and investor experience
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
RIO
0.031∗∗∗
0.027∗∗
(5.31)
(3.32)
Time
−0.006∗∗∗
−0.017∗∗∗
(−2.97)
(−3.10)
Controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
276
276
276
276
R2 (%)
32.75
50.05
19.12
48.33
Panel B: Evidence from the Wind outage
(1)
(2)
Wind
0.004∗∗∗
0.004∗∗∗
(2.15)
(2.15)
Controls
No
Yes
Firm fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Day of week fixed effect
Yes
Yes
Week fixed effect
Yes
Yes
Month fixed effect
Yes
Yes
Observations
488,945
488,945
R2 (%)
22.43
22.43
57

Table 3.
Validation of NT: Return reversal
This table presents the impact of NT on the short-term return reversal effect using the following regressions:
rt+1 = α + β1NTt × rother
t
+ β2NTt × rpersistence
t
+ β3NTt
+ β4rother
t
+ β5rpersistence
t
+ Controls + ϵt+1,
where rt+1 is monthly stock market excess return in month t + 1. The monthly stock market excess
return is the return on the value-weighted market portfolios in excess of the risk-free rate.
NT t is
our noise trading measure. rother
t
is the residual component, and rpersistence
t
is the fitted component
from the regression of ri,t on ri,t−1. Controls include the dividend-to-price ratio (DP), dividend yield
(DY ), earnings-to-price ratio (EP), dividend-to-payout ratio (DE), book-to-market ratio (BM), turnover
(TO), return volatility (RV OL), economic policy uncertainty (EPU), money supply (MS), and inflation
(INFL). All regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with
twelve lags are reported in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively. The sample period is from January 2000 to December 2022.
(1)
(2)
(3)
NT × rother
−0.122∗
−0.126∗∗
−0.133∗∗
(−1.96)
(−2.11)
(−2.02)
NT × rpersistence
−0.102
−0.059
(−0.24)
(−0.13)
NT
−1.230∗∗∗
−1.162∗∗
−1.419∗
(−2.73)
(−2.33)
(−1.82)
rother
0.132
0.132∗
0.166
(1.61)
(1.82)
(1.17)
rpersistence
0.774
0.913∗
(1.35)
(1.76)
Controls
No
No
Yes
Observations
274
274
274
R2 (%)
4.15
5.02
5.39
58

Table 4.
No predictability of fundamentals: NT and ROA/SUE
This table presents the results from the following univariate regression at the one-, three-, six- and twelvemonth horizons:
rt:t+h = α + βNTt + ϵt:t+h,
where rt:t+h = (rt+1 + + rt+h/h) is the average monthly stock market excess return over horizon h. The
monthly stock market excess return is the return on the value-weighted market portfolios in excess of the
risk-free rate. NT t is our noise trading measure. The regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages.
Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from January 2000 to
December 2022.
h = 1
h = 3
h = 6
h = 12
β
−1.135∗∗
−0.984∗∗
−1.116∗∗
−1.315∗∗∗
(−2.33)
(−2.22)
(−2.52)
(−2.85)
α
0.635
0.603
0.605
0.630
(1.01)
(0.99)
(1.05)
(1.28)
Observations
275
273
270
264
R2 (%)
1.81
3.48
7.38
17.36
59

Table 5.
Out-of-sample test
This table presents the results of the out-of-sample test in forecasting the one-month horizons monthly
stock market index returns. R2
OS is the out-of-sample R2 measuring the reduction in the MSFE for the
competing predictive regression forecast relative to the historical average benchmark forecast. CW stat
denotes the Clark and West (2007) statistics. Expanding denotes expanding the subsample by one month
each time (expanding approach). Rolling denotes a 10-year rolling window (rolling approach). ∗, ∗∗, and
∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from January
2000 to December 2022.
Expanding
Rolling
R2
OS (%)
2.106∗∗
2.129∗∗
CWstat
[1.98]
[1.98]
60

Table 6.
Effects of short-sale constraints
This table presents the effects of short-sale constraints on the predictive power of NT using the following
regressions:
rt+1 = α + β1NTt × HighASI
t
+ β2NTt + β3HighASI
t
+ Controls + ϵt+1,
where rt+1 is the stock market excess return in month t + 1. The monthly stock market excess return is
the return on the value-weighted market portfolios in excess of the risk-free rate. NTt is our noise trading
measure. HighASI
t
is a dummy variable that equals one if abnormal short interest (ASI) is above its time
series median value. Controls are the control variables used in Table 2. The regression coeﬀicients are
reported in percentages. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from
June 2010 to December 2022 due to ASI data constraints.
(1)
(2)
NT × HighASI
3.050∗∗
2.724∗∗
(2.25)
(2.42)
NT
−2.971∗∗∗
−3.145∗∗∗
(−2.63)
(−3.65)
HighASI
0.304
−0.515
(0.35)
(−0.68)
Controls
No
Yes
Observations
150
150
R2 (%)
3.72
9.19
61

Table 7.
Effects of information environments
This table presents the effects of Google’s exit on the predict power of NT using the following regressions:
rt+1 = α + β1NTt × Googlet + β2NTt + β3Googlet + Controls + ϵt+1,
where rt+1 is the stock market excess return in month t + 1. The monthly stock market excess return
is the return on the value-weighted market portfolios in excess of the risk-free rate. NTt is our noise
trading measure. Googlet is a dummy variable that equals one after March 2010. Controls are the
control variables used in Table 2. The regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages. Newey and
West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from January 2000 to February 2012.
(1)
(2)
NT × Google
−6.407∗∗∗
−6.924∗∗∗
(−3.52)
(−2.63)
NT
−1.772∗∗
0.123
(−2.15)
(0.07)
Google
−8.433∗∗∗
−4.952
(−3.79)
(−1.25)
Controls
No
Yes
Observations
146
146
R2 (%)
5.15
9.92
62

Table 8.
Robustness tests
This table presents robustness test results from the following univariate regression:
rk
t+1 = α + βNT j
t + ϵt+1,
where rk
t+1 is the stock market excess return in month t + 1, with k denoting the different market return
measures described in Panel A. NT j
t is our noise trading measure, with j denoting the different measures
of NT described in Panel B. Panel A reports the regression results using alternative market returns:
“Exclude IPO” denotes the excess return on the value-weighted portfolio of stocks listed for more than 36
months, “Equal weight” denotes the excess return on the equal-weighted market portfolios, and “Largest
70%” denotes the excess return on the value-weighted portfolio of the largest 70% of stocks.
Panel
B reports regression results using alternative measures of NT: “Detrended” denotes detrended NT;
“Equal weight” denotes the equal-weighted construction of NT; “Alternative lucky number” denotes NT
constructed based on numbers 6, 8, and 9 as lucky numbers; “Exclude ST” denotes NT constructed based
on the sample excluding ST stocks; “60-minute interval prices” denotes NT constructed using 60-minute
interval prices; and “limit order prices” denotes NT constructed using limit order prices. The regression
coeﬀicients are reported in percentages. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported
in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample
period spans from January 2000 to December 2022.
Panel A: Alternative market returns
(0)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Baseline
Exclude IPO
Equal weight
Largest 70%
β
−1.135∗∗
−1.130∗∗
−1.284∗∗
−1.130∗∗
(−2.33)
(−2.29)
(−2.39)
(−2.35)
α
0.635
0.652
1.243∗
0.567
(1.01)
(1.02)
(1.75)
(0.91)
Observations
275
275
275
275
R2 (%)
1.81
1.75
1.57
1.83
Panel B: Alternative NT measures
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Detrended
Equal
weight
Alternative
lucky
number
Exclude ST
60-minute
interval
prices
limit order
prices
β
−1.286∗∗
−1.276∗∗
−1.110∗
−1.268∗∗
−1.175∗∗
−1.179∗∗
(−2.23)
(−2.08)
(−1.86)
(−2.09)
(−2.30)
(−2.07)
α
0.632
0.634
0.633
0.664
0.636
0.635
(1.02)
(1.01)
(1.02)
(1.05)
(1.01)
(1.02)
Observations
275
275
275
275
275
275
R2 (%)
2.44
2.39
1.72
2.44
1.97
1.99
63

Table 9.
Cross-sectional evidence
This table presents the regression coeﬀicients β and t-statistic from the following regressions:
ra
t+1 = αa + βaNTt + ϵa
t+1,
where ra
t+1 is the value-weighted excess return for each of the portfolios sorted by anomaly variables in
month t + 1. Detailed descriptions of these anomalies are provided in the Appendix A. NTt is the noise
trading measure. L −S represents the return spread between the long and short legs of the portfolios.
The regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve
lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively. The sample period spans from January 2000 to December 2022.
Long
5
Short
L −S
IV OL
−0.772∗
−1.085∗∗
−1.366∗∗
0.594∗∗
(−1.88)
(−2.06)
(−2.42)
(2.01)
V OL
−0.758∗
−1.105∗∗
−1.514∗∗
0.755∗∗
(−1.78)
(−2.17)
(−2.46)
(2.13)
MAX
−0.789∗
−1.220∗∗
−1.472∗∗
0.683∗∗
(−1.89)
(−2.26)
(−2.30)
(2.04)
MIN
−0.808∗
−1.250∗∗∗
−1.216∗∗
0.408
(−1.72)
(−2.61)
(−2.35)
(1.48)
IMAX
−0.877∗
−1.144∗∗
−1.437∗∗∗
0.559∗∗
(−1.94)
(−2.33)
(−2.52)
(2.14)
IMIN
−0.687
−1.115∗∗
−1.292∗∗
0.605∗∗
(−1.61)
(−2.14)
(−2.27)
(2.37)
EP
−0.783
−1.129∗∗
−1.165∗
0.382
(−1.62)
(−2.26)
(−1.88)
(1.14)
BM
−0.681
−1.099∗∗
−1.469∗∗∗
0.788∗∗∗
(−1.40)
(−2.28)
(−2.91)
(2.55)
TO12
−0.898∗∗
−1.140∗∗
−1.039∗∗
0.141
(−1.96)
(−2.12)
(−2.22)
(0.58)
TO
−0.939∗∗
−1.167∗∗
−1.177∗∗
0.238
(−2.06)
(−2.14)
(−2.19)
(0.92)
64

Table 10.
Fama-MacBeth analysis
This table presents the results from Fama-MacBeth regressions of monthly excess returns on lagged
independent variables. We use market capitalization as weights in the regressions. FNT S and FNT R
are the fitted and residual components of FNT obtained from a 48-month rolling-window regression
of FNT on current and lagged values of NT. FNT is the firm-level noise trading measure. Detailed
descriptions of control variables are provided in the Appendix A. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with
twelve lags are reported in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively. The sample period from is January 2000 to December 2022.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
FNT S
−0.017**
−0.018**
−0.022***
(−2.56)
(−2.48)
(−3.91)
FNT R
−0.000
−0.000
-0.002
(−0.06)
(−0.05)
(-0.72)
ME
−0.003***
(−3.08)
EP
0.178***
(4.00)
BM
−0.025***
(−3.43)
TO
0.077***
(10.86)
Observations
396,829
396,829
396,829
396,829
R2 (%)
0.86
0.53
1.36
15.91
65

Table 11.
In-sample bivariate regression
This table presents the regression results of one-month ahead market excess return on NT and other control variables. NT is our noise trading measure. The set of control variables includes the dividend-to-price
ratio (DP), dividend yield (DY ), earnings-to-price ratio (EP), dividend-to-payout ratio (DE), book-tomarket ratio (BM), turnover (TO), return volatility (RV OL), economic policy uncertainty (EPU),
money supply (MS), and inflation (INFL).
The regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages.
Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from January 2000 to
December 2022.
DP
DY
EP
DE
BM
NT
−0.985∗∗
−0.938∗∗
−1.084∗∗
−1.126∗∗
−1.043∗∗
(−2.08)
(−2.00)
(−2.24)
(−2.34)
(−2.17)
Control
0.777
0.989
0.394
1.020
0.539
(1.22)
(1.50)
(0.81)
(1.56)
(0.90)
α
0.634
0.634
0.635
0.638
0.635
(1.00)
(1.01)
(1.00)
(1.08)
(1.00)
Obs
275
275
275
275
275
R2 (%)
2.44
3.05
1.71
3.22
1.93
TO
RV OL
EPU
MS
INFL
NT
−1.069∗∗
−1.132∗∗
−1.200∗∗
−1.360∗∗
−1.366∗∗∗
(−2.04)
(−2.38)
(−2.32)
(−2.28)
(−2.66)
Control
0.258
−0.037
−0.354
−0.649
−1.114
(0.35)
(−0.05)
(−0.71)
(−1.07)
(−1.58)
α
0.636
0.636
0.633
0.631
0.637
(1.03)
(1.01)
(1.02)
(1.02)
(1.04)
Observations
275
275
275
275
275
R2 (%)
1.56
1.45
1.66
2.07
3.48
66

Table 12.
Evidence from the B-share market
This table presents univariate regression results from the B-share stock market at the one-month horizon.
A share, NT, denotes forecasting B-share market returns using A-share NT, and B-share NT denotes
forecasting B-share market returns using B-share NT. The regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗
denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period spans from January
2000 to December 2022.
A share NT
B share NT
β
−0.359
−1.398
(−0.51)
(−1.07)
α
1.166
1.164
(1.52)
(1.45)
Observations
275
275
R2 (%)
−0.24
1.54
67

Table 13.
In-sample bivariate regression: Effect of sentiment
This table presents the regression results of one-month market excess return on NT along with investor
sentiment measures at the one-month horizon. NT is the noise trading measure. The sentiment measures
include the consumer confidence index (CCI), the discount rate of closed-end fund (CEFD), the number
of IPO stocks (IPON), the return of IPO stocks (IPOR), the number of new investors (NIA) and
the China version sentiment index of Baker and Wurgler (2006) (BW). The regression coeﬀicients are
reported in percentages. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from
February 2003 to December 2022 due to sentiment data constraints.
DCEF
IPON
IPOR
NIA
CCI
BW
NT
−1.453∗∗
−1.638∗∗
−1.460∗∗
−1.483∗∗
−1.482∗∗
−1.488∗∗
(−2.15)
(−2.38)
(−2.28)
(−2.26)
(−2.21)
(−2.19)
Sent
−0.521
−1.027∗∗
−0.137
−0.006
−0.294
−0.724
(−0.69)
(−2.07)
(−0.27)
(−0.01)
(−0.47)
(−1.26)
α
0.440
0.389
0.440
0.435
0.437
0.431
(0.62)
(0.56)
(0.62)
(0.61)
(0.61)
(0.61)
Observations
238
238
238
238
238
238
R2 (%)
2.19
3.37
1.78
1.75
1.89
2.60
68

Appendix A
Variable definitions
This table describes the construction of the market- and firm-level variables used in this
paper.
Variable
Description
Market-level variables
Dividend-to-price ratio (DP)
The ratio of a 12-month moving sum of dividend payments
to total market capitalization
Dividend yield (DY )
The ratio of a 12-month moving sum of dividend payments
to lagged total market capitalization
Earnings-to-price ratio (EP)
The ratio of a 12-month moving sum of earnings to total
market capitalization
Book-to-market ratio (BM)
The ratio of book value to total market capitalization.
Turnover (TO)
The ratio of the sum of shares traded divided by the sum of
shares outstanding
Return volatility (RV OL)
The standard deviation of daily returns on the valueweighted market return in a month
Economic policy uncertainty (EPU)
Acquired from the Economic Policy Uncertainty website
www.policyuncertainty.com
Money supply (MS)
M2, acquired from CSMAR
Inflation (INFL)
Inflation, acquired from CSMAR
CCI
The consumer confidence index
CEFD
The discount rate of closed-end funds
IPON
The number of IPO stocks
IPOR
The return of IPO stocks
NIA
The number of new investors
69

Variable
Description
BW
The Chinese version of the sentiment index of Baker and
Wurgler (2006), calculated as a composite of six variables—
the consumer confidence index (CCI), the discount rate
of closed-end funds (CEFD), the number of IPO stocks
(IPON), the return of IPO stocks (IPOR), the number of
new investors (NIA), and turnover (TURN)
Retail investor ownership (RIO)
The six-month moving average of the value-weighted average
of firm-level retail investor ownership, defined as one minus
institutional ownership
Abnormal short interest (ASI)
The change between the market-level short interest (SI) in
month t and its mean over the past three months (excluding
the most recent month), with market-level SI being defined
as the value-weighted average of firm-level SI and firm-level
SI being the ratio of shorted shares to shares outstanding
in a month
Firm-level variables
Idiosyncratic return volatility (IV OL)
The standard deviation of daily idiosyncratic returns from
Fama and French (1993) three factors in a month
Total return volatility (V OL)
The standard deviation of daily returns in a month
Maximum daily return (MAX)
A stock’s highest daily return in a month (Bali, Cakici, and
Whitelaw, 2011)
Minimum daily return (MIN)
A stock’s lowest daily return in a month (Bali, Cakici, and
Whitelaw, 2011)
Idiosyncratic
maximum
daily
return
(IMAX)
The highest daily idiosyncratic return from Fama and
French (1993) three factors in a month
Idiosyncratic
minimum
daily
return
(IMIN)
The lowest daily idiosyncratic return from Fama and French
(1993) three factors in a month
70

Variable
Description
Earnings-to-price ratio (EP)
The ratio of earnings to market capitalization using recent
net profit (excluding nonrecurrent gains/losses)
Book-to-market equity ratio (BM)
The ratio of book equity value to market equity value, with
the book equity value being the difference between the book
value of total shareholder equity and the book value of preferred stocks reported in the most recent financial statement
and the market equity value being the market capitalization
Twelve-month turnover (TO12)
The ratio of a 12-month average of shares traded divided by
a 12-month average of shares outstanding
One-month turnover (TO)
The ratio of shares traded divided by shares outstanding in
a month
ME
The logarithm of market capitalization
71

Appendix B
Additional Tables and Figures
Table B1.
NT and aggregate earnings and earnings surprises
This table presents the results from the following univariate regression:
ROA/SUEt+1 = α + βNTt + ϵt+1,
where ROA/SUEt+1 is aggregate earnings (ROA) or aggregate earnings surprises (SUE) in month t+1,
computed as value-weighted averages of firm-level ROA and SUE, respectively.
Firm-level ROA is
defined as the net profit divided by total assets. Firm-level SUE is defined as the year-over-year change
in quarterly earnings per share, standardized by the rolling eight-quarter standard deviation of these
changes to account for firm-specific earnings volatility. NTt is our noise trading measure. Newey and
West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from January 2000 to December 2022.
ROA
SUE
β
−0.068
−0.0004
(−1.09)
(−0.23)
α
0.289∗∗∗
0.030∗∗∗
(4.50)
(9.91)
Observations
275
275
R2 (%)
2.24
−0.35
72

Table B2.
NT and liquidity
This table presents the results from the following univariate regression:
∆Spreadt = α + β1∆NTt + ϵt,
where ∆Spreadt is the change in bid-ask spread and ∆NTt is the change in our noise trading measure.
Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels for one-tailed tests, evaluating whether the coeﬀicient is
significantly smaller than 0, respectively. The sample period is from February 2003 to December 2022
due to Spread data constraints.
SpreadQ
SpreadE
β
−0.003∗∗
−0.003∗∗
(−1.67)
(−1.68)
α
−0.0005
−0.0005
(−0.60)
(−0.60)
Observations
239
239
R2 (%)
0.40
−0.41
73

Table B3.
Individual noise trading measures
This table presents the results from the following univariate regression:
rt+1 = α + βNT p
t + ϵt+1,
where rt+1 is the monthly stock market excess return in month t + 1. The monthly stock market excess
return is the return on the value-weighted market portfolios in excess of the risk-free rate. NT p
t is one
of four individual noise trading measures. All NT p
t values are standardized to have a mean of zero and
unit standard deviation. The regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages. Newey and West (1987)
t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from January 2000 to December 2022.
NT O
NT H
NT L
NT E
β
−1.130∗∗
−1.093∗∗
−1.011∗∗
−1.216∗∗
(−2.34)
(−2.23)
(−2.13)
(−2.39)
α
0.636
0.634
0.635
0.635
(1.01)
(1.00)
(1.01)
(1.02)
Observations
275
275
275
275
R2 (%)
1.79
1.66
1.36
2.14
74

Table B4.
Effects of short-sale constraints: Cross-sectional evidence
This table presents the effects of short-sale constraints on the predict power of NT using the following
regressions:
ri,t+1 = α + β1NTt × Shorti,t + β2Shorti,t + Controls + αi + αt + ϵi,t+1,
where ri,t+1 is stock i’s excess return in month t + 1. NTt is our noise trading measure. Shorti,t is
a dummy variable that equals one if stock i has been allowed to short in month t and 0 otherwise.
Controls are the control variables used in Table 2. We include firm and year-month fixed effects in all
the regressions and cluster standard errors at the firm level. The regression coeﬀicients are reported in
percentages. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample
period is from January 2000 to December 2022.
(1)
NT × Short
0.677∗∗∗
(11.65)
Short
−1.043∗∗∗
(−15.58)
Fixed effects
Firm & Year-month
Controls
Yes
Observations
625,996
R2 (%)
27.83
75

Table B5.
Effects of information environments: Cross-sectional evidence
This table presents the effects of Google’s exit on the predict power of NT using the following regressions:
ri,t+1 = α + β1NTt × Googlet × Treati + β2Googlet × Treati
+ β3NTt × Treati + β4NTt × Googlet + β5NTt
+ β6Googlet + Controls + αi + ϵi,t+1,
where ri,t+1 is stock i’s excess return in month t+1. NTt is our noise trading measure. Googlet is a
dummy variable that equals one after March 2010.
Treati is a dummy variable that equals one for
treatment firms. Motivated by Xu, Xuan, and Zheng (2021), we define treatment firms as those whose
stock tickers have a higher search volume index than the sample median in February 2010. Controls are
the control variables used in Table 2. We include firm-level fixed effects in all the regressions and cluster
standard errors at the firm level. The regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗
denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from January 2000
to February 2012.
(1)
(2)
NT × Google × Treat
−1.666∗∗∗
−1.644∗∗∗
(−5.29)
(−5.22)
NT × Google
−6.446∗∗∗
−5.509∗∗∗
(−25.88)
(−21.64)
NT × Treat
−0.037
−0.054
(−0.57)
(−0.89)
Google × Treat
−1.725∗∗∗
−1.910∗∗∗
(−5.74)
(−6.24)
NT
−1.874∗∗∗
1.344∗∗∗
(−37.20)
(17.94)
Google
−8.133∗∗∗
−7.857∗∗∗
(−31.28)
(−23.95)
Fixed effects
Firm
Firm
Controls
No
Yes
Observations
149,344
149,344
R2 (%)
1.86
6.68
76

Table B6.
Portfolio analysis
This table presents the portfolio analysis results.
Panel A reports value-weighted excess returns for
portfolios sorted by FNT S and FNT R, respectively. FNT S and FNT R are the fitted and residual
components of FNT obtained from a rolling-window regression of FNT on current and lagged values of
NT. FNT is the firm-level noise trading measure. Detailed descriptions of control variables are provided
in the Appendix A. Portfolios are formed based on the bottom decile, middle 80%, and top decile. Low
denotes the portfolio with the lowest FNT S or FNT R, high denotes the portfolio with the highest FNT S
or FNT R, and medium denotes the portfolio with the remaining stocks. L −H represents the return
spread of low-minus-high portfolios. Panel B presents the results of regressing the monthly excess returns
of decile portfolios formed by FNT S and FNT R on the factor returns of the CAPM, CH3, and CH4
factor models (Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan, 2019). The regression coeﬀicients are reported as percentages.
Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period spans from January 2000 to
December 2022.
Panel A:
Value-weighted portfolio returns
FNT S
FNT R
Low
Medium
High
L −H
Low
Medium
High
L −H
Raw
1.130
0.985
0.789
0.342∗∗
1.033
0.979
0.979
0.055
(2.27)
(0.33)
Panel B:
Factor model regressions for portfolio return spreads
FNT S
FNT R
α
0.342∗∗
0.345∗∗
0.434∗∗
0.534∗∗
0.055
0.088
−0.052
−0.091
(2.27)
(2.32)
(2.54)
(2.33)
(0.33)
(0.52)
(−0.26)
(−0.45)
MKT
−0.591
−1.225
−2.406
−5.260
−4.200
−3.741
(−0.14)
(−0.36)
(−0.82)
(−1.57)
(−1.15)
(−0.94)
SMB
−2.833
−3.703
4.128
4.739
(−0.35)
(−0.42)
(0.47)
(0.51)
V MG
−5.669
−6.994
9.149
10.163
(−0.62)
(−0.76)
(0.87)
(0.92)
PMO
−8.895
3.232
(−0.86)
(0.34)
Observations
239
239
239
239
239
239
239
239
R2 (%)
0.00
-0.40
-0.89
0.04
0.00
1.17
1.16
1.00
77

Table B7.
Alternative noise trading measures
This table presents results from the following univariate regression:
rt+1 = α + βNT k
t + ϵt+1,
where rt+1 is the stock market excess return in month t + 1. The monthly stock market excess return
is the return on the value-weighted market portfolio in excess of the risk-free rate. NT k
t is one of the
alternative noise trading measures constructed based on the last one to three digits in stock prices or
derived from stock returns. The regression coeﬀicients are reported in percentages. Newey and West
(1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗denote significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is from January 2000 to December 2022.
Last three digits
Last two digits
Last one digit
Return
β
−1.340∗∗
−1.151∗∗
−0.973∗
−0.427
(−2.43)
(−2.32)
(−1.73)
(−0.69)
α
0.634
0.631
0.632
0.632
(1.01)
(0.99)
(0.97)
(0.98)
Observations
275
275
275
275
R2 (%)
2.68
1.88
1.24
−0.06
78

Table B8.
The round number effect
This table presents univariate regression results at the one-month horizon. RNR denotes the proportion
of transaction prices ending in the digit 0. RNRF and RNRR are the fitted and residual components
of RNR obtained from the regression of RNR on NT.
The regression coeﬀicients are reported in
percentages. Newey and West (1987) t-statistics with twelve lags are reported in parentheses.
∗, ∗∗,
and ∗∗∗denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period spans from
January 2000 to December 2022.
(1)
(2)
(3)
RNR
−1.058∗∗
−0.761
(−2.15)
(−1.60)
NT
−0.875∗∗
(−2.00)
RNRF
−3.335∗∗
(−2.51)
RNRR
−0.761
(−1.60)
Observations
275
275
275
R2 (%)
1.54
2.33
2.33
79
